Natural  History  Museum  Library 


0001638t5 


PHILOSOPHICAI. 


TRANSACTIONS 

OF  THE 


ROYAL  SOCIETY 

OF 


L O N D O N. 


FOR  THE  YEAR  MDCCCLVI. 


VOL.  146. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BY  RICHARD  TAYLOR  AND  WILLIAM  FRANCIS,  RED  LION  COURT,  FLEET  STREET. 


MDCCCLVI. 


J 


CONTENTS 


OF  VOL.  146. 


I.  On  the  Constitution  and  Properties  of  Ozone,  By-Tnouxs  Andrews,  M.D.,  F.R.S., 

M.R.I.A.,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  Queens  College,  Belfast  . . . page  1 

II.  On  the  Formation  and  some  of  the  Properties  of  Cymidine,  the  Organic  Base  of 

the  Cymole  Series.  By  the  Rev.  John  Barlow,  Chaplain-in- Or  dinary  to  Her 
Majesty's  Household  at  Kensington  Palace,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Kice- President  and 
Secretary  of  the  Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britain,  8fc.  ......  15 

III.  Some  Observations  on  the  Ova  of  the  Salmon,  in  relation  to  the  distribution  of 

Species ; in  a letter  addressed  to  Charles  Darwin,  Esq.,  M.A.,  V.P.R.S.  8^c. 
By  John  Davy,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Inspector- General  of  Army  Hospitals  . . 21 

IV.  On  the  Effect  of  Local  Attraction  upon  the  Plumb-line  at  Stations  on  the  English 

Arc  of  the  Meridian,  between  Dunnose  and  Burleigh  Moor ; and  a Method  of 
computing  its  Amount.  By  the  Venerable  John  Henry  Pratt,  M.A.,  Arch- 
deacon of  Calcutta.  Communicated  by  the  Rev,  J.  Challis,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  8^c.  3 1 

V.  Discussion  of  the  Observed  Deviations  of  the  Compass  in  several  Ships,  Wood-built 

and  Iron-built : with  a General  Table  for  facilitating  the  examination  of  Com- 
pass-Deviations. By  G.  B.  Airy,  Esq.,  F.R.S. , Astronomer  Royal  . . 53 

VI.  A Second  Memoir  upon  Quantics.  By  Arthur  Cayley,  Esq.,  F.R.S.  . . 101 

VII.  Researches  on  the  Partition  of  Numbers.  By  Arthur  Cayley,  Esq.,  F.R.S.  127 

VIII.  Examination  of  select  Vegetable  Products  from  India.  By  John  Stenhouse, 

LL.D.,F.R.S 141 

IX.  Experimental  Researches  in  Electricity. — Thirtieth  Series.  By  Michael 

Faraday,  Esq.,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Fullerian  Prof.  Chem.  Royal  Institution, 
Foreign  Associate  of  the  Acad.  Sciences,  Paris,  Ord.  Boruss.  Pour  le  Mdrite, 
Eq.,  Memb.  Royal  and  Imp.  Acadd.  of  Sciences,  Petersburgh,  Florence,  Copen- 
hagen, Berlin,  Gottingen,  Modena,  Stockholm,  Munich,  Bruxelles,  Vienna,  Bo- 
logna, Commander  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  8fc.  8fc.  159 

X.  Researches  on  the  Foraminifera. — Part  I.  By  William  B.  Carpenter,  M.D., 

F.R.S.,  F.G.S.  S^c 181 


[ iv  ] 

XI.  Further  Researches  on  the  Polarity  of  the  Diamagnetic  Force.  By  John  Tyndall, 

Esq.,  F.R.S.,  Membre  de  la  Socidtd  Hollandaise  des  Sciences ; Foreign  Member 
of  the  Physical  Society  of  Berlin,  and  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the 
Royal  Institution page  237 

XII.  On  Axes  of  Elasticity  and  Crystalline  Forms.  By  William  John  Macquorn 

Esq.,  C.E.,  F.R.SS.  Lond.  and  Edin 261 

XIII.  Introductory  Research  on  the  Induction  of  Magnetism  by  Electrical  Currents. 

By  J.  P.  Joule,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  Corr.  Mem.  R.A.,  Twin,  Hon.  Mem.  of  the 
Philosophical  Society,  Cambridge,  S^c 287 

XIV.  Account  of  Pendulum  Experiments  undertaken  in  the  Horton  Colliery,  for  the- 

purpose  of  determining  the  Mean  Density  of  the  Earth.  By  G.  B.  Airy,  Esq., 
F.R.S.,  Astronomer  Royal 297 

Supplement  to  the  “ Account  of  Pendulum  Experiments  undertaken  in  the  Horton 
Colliery  T''  being  an  Account  of  Experiments  undertaken  to  determine  the  Cor- 
rection for  the  Temperature  of  the  Pendulum.  By  G.  B.  Airy,  Esq.,  F.R.S., 
Astronomer  Royal 343 

XV.  On  Periodical  Laws  discoverable  in  the  Mean  Effects  of  the  larger  Magnetic 

Disturbances. — No.  III.  By  Colonel  Edward  Sabine,  R.A.,  D.C.L.,  Treas. 
and  H.P.R.S. 357 

XVI.  On  the  ultimate  arrangement  of  the  Biliary  Ducts,  and  on  some  other  points  in 

the  Anatomy  of  the  Liver  of  Vertebrate  Animals.  By  Lionel  S.  Beale,  M.B., 
Professor  of  Physiology  in  Kings  College,  London ; Physician  to  Kings  Col- 
lege Hospital.  Communicated  by  F.  Kiernan,  Esq.,  F.R.S 375 

XVII.  On  the  Enumeration  of  yi-edra  having  Triedral  Summits,  and  an  {yi—\)-gonal 

Base.  By  the  Rev.  Thomas  P.  Kirkman,  M.A.  Communicated  by  A.  Cayley, 
Esq.,  F.R.S 399 

XVIII.  On  the  Representation  of  Poly edr a.  By  the  Rev.  Thomas  P.  Kirkman,  M.A. 
Communicated  by  A.  Cayley,  Esq.,  F.R.S 413 

XIX.  On  the  Structure,  Functions,  and  Homologies  of  the  Manducatory  Organs  in 

the  Class  Rotifera.  By  Philip  Henry  Gosse,  Esq.  Communicated  by 
Thomas  Bell,  Esq.,  V.P.R.S.,  Pres.  L.S ...419 

XX.  Researches  on  the  Action  of  Sulphuric  Acid  upon  the  Amides  and  Nitriles, 

together  with  Remarks  upon  the  Conjugate  Sulpho-acids.  By  George  B.  Buck- 
ton,  Esq.,  F.L.S.,  F.C.S.,  and  A.  W.  Hofmann,  LL.D.,Ph.D.,  F.R.S.  8^c.  453 

XXI.  Elements  of  a Mathematical  Theory  of  Elasticity.  By  Professor  William 

Thomson,  M.A.,  F.R.S 481 


[ V ] 


XXII.  On  the  Lunar- Diurnal  Magnetic  Variation  at  Toronto.  By  Major-General 
Edward  Sabine,  R.A.,  D.C.L.,  Treas.  ^ V.P.R.S. page  499 

XXIII.  Account  of  the  Construction  of  a Standard  Barometer,  and  Description  of  the 
Apparatus  and  Processes  employed  in  the  Verification  of  Barometers  at  the  Kew 
Observatory.  By  John  Welsh,  Esq.  Communicated  by  J.  P.  Gassiot,  Esq., 
F.R.S.,  Chairman  of  the  Kew  Observatory  Committee  of  the  British  Associa- 


tion   507 

XXIV.  On  the  Presence  of  Fibrils  of  Soft  Tissue  in  the  Dentinal  Tubes.  By  John 
Tomes,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  Surgeon-Dentist  to  the  Middlesex  Hospital.  . . .515 


XXV.  On  the  Problem  of  Three  Bodies.  By  the  Rev.  J.  Challis,  M.A.,  F.R.S., 

F.R.A.S.,  Plumian  Professor  of  Astronomy  and  Experimental  Philosophy  in  the 
University  of  Cambridge 523 

XXVI.  Researches  on  the  Foraminif era. — Part  II.  Bi/ William  B.  Carpenter,  J/.7)., 

F.R.S.,  F.G.S.  ^c.  547 

XXVII.  On  the  Megatherium  (Megatherium  Americanum,  Cuvier  and  Blumenbach). 
Part  III. — The  Skull.  By  Professor  Owen,  F.R.S.  &;c 571 

XXVIII.  On  the  Deflection  of  the  Plumb-lime  at  Arthur's  Seat,  and  the  Mean  Specific 
Gravity  of  the  Earth.  Communicated  by  Lieutenant- Colonel  James,  R.E., 
F.R.S. , M.R.I.A.  8^c.,  Superintendent  of  the  Ordnance  Survey  . . . .591 

XXIX.  On  the  Figure,  Dimensions,  and  Mean  Specific  Gravity  of  the  Earth,  as 
derived  from  the  Ordnance  Trigonometrical  Survey  of  Great  Britain  and  Ire- 
land. Communicated  by  Lieut. -Colonel 3 am¥.^,  R.E.,  F.R.S.  8^c.,  Superintendent 


of  the  Ordnance  Survey 607 

XXX.  A Third  Memoir  upon  Quantics.  By  Arthur  Cayley,  Esq.,  F.R.S.  . . 627 

XXXI.  The  Bakerian  Lecture. — On  the  Electro-dynamic  Qualities  of  Metals.  By 

Professor  William  Thomson,  M.A.,  F.R.S . 649 


XXXII.  On  the  Construction  of  the  New  Imperial  Standard  Pound,  and  its  Copies  of 
Platinum ; and  on  the  Comparison  of  the  Imperial  Standard  Pound  with  the 
Kilogramme  des  Archives.  By  W.  H.  Miller,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of 


Mineralogy  in  the  University  of  Cambridge 753 

Index 947 


Presents 


Appendix. 


[ I ] 


ERRATA. 


Page  618,  line  19, /or  Makerstown  read  Brisbane. 

644,  Table  67.  The  bracket  should  have  the  arrowhead  ). 

775,  line  18, /or  inch  read  inches. 

805,  after  line  15,  insert  Gib.  No.  9.  (M)  7'376. 

805,  line  4 from  below,/or  8'512  read  8'515. 

861,  line  3 from  below, /or  0’38035  read  0'39644. 

861,  line  3 from  below, /or  0‘38019  read  0'39628. 

862,  line  5, /or  0-01303  read  0-01304. 

886,  line  17  from  below, /or  30  read  34. 

888,  line  16  from  below, /or  28  read  22. 

903,  line  7 from  below, /or  comparisons  read  weighings. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


The  Committee  appointed  by  the  Royal  Society  to  direct  the  publication  of  the 
Philosophical  Transactions,  take  this  opportunity  to  acquaint  the  Public,  that  it  fully 
appears,  as  well  from  the  Council-books  and  Journals  of  the  Society,  as  from  repeated 
declarations  which  have  been  made  in  several  former  Transactions,  that  the  printing 
of  them  was  always,  from  time  to  time,  the  single  act  of  the  respective  Secretaries 
till  the  Forty-seventh  Volume ; the  Society,  as  a Body,  never  interesting  themselves 
any  further  in  their  publication,  than  by  occasionally  recommending  the  revival  of 
them  to  some  of  their  Secretaries,  when,  from  the  particular  circumstances  of  their 
affairs,  the  Transactions  had  happened  for  any  length  of  time  to  be  intermitted.  And 
this  seems  principally  to  have  been  done  with  a view  to  satisfy  the  Public,  that  their 
usual  meetings  were  then  continued,  for  the  improvement  of  knowledge,  and  benefit 
of  mankind,  the  great  ends  of  their  first  institution  by  the  Royal  Charters,  and  which 
they  have  ever  since  steadily  pursued. 

But  the  Society  being  of  late  years  greatly  enlarged,  and  their  communications 
more  numerous,  it  was  thought  advisable  that  a Committee  of  their  members  should 
be  appointed,  to  reconsider  the  papers  read  before  them,  and  select  out  of  them  such 
as  they  should  judge  most  proper  for  publication  in  the  future  Transactions which 
was  accordingly  done  upon  the  26th  of  March  1752.  And  the  grounds  of  their 
choice  are,  and  will  continue  to  be,  the  importance  and  singularity  of  the  subjects,  or 
the  advantageous  manner  of  treating  them ; without  pretending  to  answer  for  the 
certainty  of  the  facts,  or  propriety  of  the  reasonings,  contained  in  the  several  papers 
so  published,  which  must  still  rest  on  the  credit  or  judgement  of  their  respective 
authors. 

It  is  likewise  necessary  on  this  occasion  to  remark,  that  it  is  an  established  rule  of 
the  Society,  to  which  they  will  always  adhere,  never  to  give  their  opinion,  as  a Body, 

a 2 


[ iv  ] 

upon  any  subject,  either  of  Nature  or  Art,  that  comes  before  them.  And  therefore 
the  thanks,  which  are  frequently  proposed  from  the  Chair,  to  be  given  to  the  authors 
of  such  papers  as  are  read  at  their  accustomed  meetings,  or  to  the  persons  through 
whose  hands  they  received  them,  are  to  be  considered  in  no  other  light  than  as  a 
matter  of  civility,  in  return  for  the  respect  shown  to  the  Society  by  those  communi- 
cations. The  like  also  is  to  be  said  with  regard  to  the  several  projects,  inventions, 
and  curiosities  of  various  kinds,  which  are  often  exhibited  to  the  Society  ; the  authors 
whereof,  or  those  who  exhibit  them,  frequently  take  the  liberty  to  report  and  even  to 
certify  in  the  public  newspapers,  that  they  have  met  with  the  highest  applause  and 
approbation.  And  therefore  it  is  hoped  that  no  regard  will  hereafter  be  paid  to  such 
reports  and  public  notices ; which  in  some  instances  have  been  too  lightly  credited; 
to  the  dishonour  of  the  Society. 


The  Meteorological  Journal  hitherto  kept  by  the  Assistant  Secretary  at  the  Apart- 
ments of  the  Royal  Society,  by  order  of  the  President  and  Council,  and  published  in 
the  Philosophical  Transactions,  has  been  discontinued.  The  Government,  on  the 
recommendation  of  the  President  and  Council,  has  established  at  the  Royal  Obser- 
vatory at  Greenwich,  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Astronomer  Royal,  a Magnet- 
ical  and  Meteorological  Observatory,  where  observations  are  made  on  an  extended 
scale,  which  are  regularly  published.  These,  which  correspond  with  the  grand 
scheme  of  observations  now  carrying  out  in  different  parts  of  the  globe,  supersede 
the  necessity  of  a continuance  of  tlie  observations  made  at  the  Apartments  of  the 
Royal  Society,  which  could  not  be  rendered  so  perfect  as  was  desirable,  on  account 
of  the  imperfections  of  the  locality  and  the  multiplied  duties  of  the  observer. 


A List  of  Public  Institutions  and  Individuals,  entitled  to  receive  a copy  of  the 
Philosophical  Transactions  of  each  year,  on  making  application  for  the  same 
directly  or  through  their  respective  agents,  within  five  years  of  the  date  of  pub- 
lication. 


Observatories. 

Armagh. 

Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

Dublin. 

Edinburgh. 

Greenwich. 

Madras. 

Oxford  (Radcliffe). 

Institutions. 


Barbadoes  Library  and  Museum. 

Calcutta  Asiatic  Society. 

Cambridge  Philosophical  Society. 

Dublin Royal  Dublin  Society. 

Royal  Irish  Academy. 

Edinburgh  Royal  Society. 

London  Admiralty  Library. 


Chemical  Society. 

Entomological  Society. 
Geological  Society. 

Geological  Survey  of  Great  Bri- 
tain. 

Horticultural  Society. 

Institute  of  British  Architects. 
Institution  of  Civil  Engineers. 
Linnean  Society. 

London  Institution. 

Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society. 
Queen’s  Library. 

Royal  Asiatic  Society. 

Royal  Astronomical  Society. 
Royal  College  of  Physicians. 
Tloyal  Geographical  Society. 
Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britain. 
Royal  Society  of  Literature. 
Society  of  Antiquaries. 

Society  of  Arts. 

The  Treasury  Library. 

United  Service  Museum. 
Zoological  Society. 


Malta  Public  Library. 

Manchester Literary  and  Philosophical  So' 

ciety. 

Oxford Ashmolean  Society. 

RadcliiFe  Library. 

Swansea  Royal  Institution. 

Woolwich  Royal  Artillery  Library. 

Belgium. 

Brussels  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Denmark. 

Altona Royal  Observatory. 

Copenhagen Royal  Society  of  Sciences. 

France. 

Paris  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Depot  de  la  Marine. 

Ecole  des  Mines. 

Entomological  Society. 
Geographical  Society. 


Paris  Geological  Society. 

Jardin  des  Plantes. 

Toulouse Academy  of  Sciences. 

Germany. 

Berlin  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Society  of  Experimental  Philo- 
sophy. 

Bonn  Caesarean  Acad,  of  Naturalists. 

Frankfort Natural  History  Society. 

Giessen  University. 

Gottingen  University. 

Leipzig  Royal  Saxon  Society  of  Sciences. 

Mannheim  Observatory. 

Munich  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Vienna Imperial  Academy  of  Sciences. 

W’urzburg  Physico-Medical  Society. 

Italy. 

Milan  Institute  of  Sciences,  Letters  and 

Arts. 

Modena  Italian  Society  of  Sciences. 

Naples Institute  of  Sciences. 

Rome  The  Academy  de’  Nuovi  Lincei. 

The  Collegio  Romano. 

Turin  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Netherlands. 

Amsterdam Royal  Institute. 

Haarlem  Dutch  Society  of  Sciences. 

Rotterdam  Batavian  Society  of  Experimental 

Philosophy. 

Portugal. 

Lisbon Royal  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Russia. 

Moscow  Imperial  Society  of  Naturalists. 

Pulkowa  Observatory. 

St.  Petersburg!!  Imperial  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Spain. 

Cadiz  Observatory. 

Madrid Royal  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Sweden  and  Norway. 

Drontheim  Royal  Society  of  Sciences. 

Stockholm  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Switzerland. 

Geneva  Societe  de  Phys.  et  d’Hist.  Na- 

turelle. 

United  States. 

Boston American  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Cambridge  Harvard  University. 

Philadelphia  American  Philosophical  Society. 

Washington Smithsonian  Institution. 

Observatorj\ 


The  fifty  Foreign  Members  of  the  Royal  Society. 


A List  of  Public  Institutions  and  Individuals,  entitled  to  receive  a copy  of  the 
Astronomical  Observations  (including  Magnetism  and  Meteorology)  made  at  the 
Royal  Observatory  at  Greenwich,  on  making  application  for  the  same  directly  or 
through  their  respective  agents,  within  two  years  of  the  date  of  publication. 


Observatories. 

Altona. 

Armagh. 

Berlin. 

Breslau. 

Brussels. 

Cadiz. 

Cambridge. 

Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

Coimbra. 

Copenhagen. 

Dorpat. 

Dublin. 

Edinburgh. 

Helsingfors. 

Kdnigsberg. 

Madras. 

Mannheim. 

Marseilles. 

Milan. 

Munich. 

Oxford. 

Palermo. 

Paris, 

Seeberg. 

Trevandrum. 

Tubingen. 

Turin. 

Vienna. 

Wilna. 


histitutions. 

Aberdeen University. 

Berlin  Academy. 

Bologna  Academy. 

Boston American  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Brunswick,  U.S.  ...Bowdoin  College. 

Cambridge  Trinity  College  Library. 

Cambridge,  U.S.  ...Harvard  University. 

Dublin  University. 

Edinburgh  University. 

Royal  Society. 

lasgow  University. 

Gottingen  University. 

Leyden  University. 

London  Board  of  Ordnance. 


Queen’s  Library. 
Royal  Institution. 
Royal  Society. 


Oxford Savilian  Library. 

Paris  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Board  of  Longitude. 

Depot  de  la  Marine. 

Philadelphia  American  Philosophical  Society. 

St.  Andrews  University. 

St.  Petersburg!!  ...Imperial  Academy. 

Stockholm  Royal  Academy  of  Sciences. 

Upsal  Royal  Society. 


Waterville  (U.S.). . . College. 

Individuals. 

Christie,  S.  H.,  Esq Woolwich. 

Lubbock,  Sir  John  William,  Bart.  ...  London. 
Lowndes  Professor  of  Astronomy  ...  Cambridge. 

Plumian  Professor  of  Astronomy 

President  of  the  Royal  Society London. 

Smyth,  Rear-Admiral  W.  H Aylesbury. 

South,  Sir  James  Kensington. 

The  Earl  of  Rosse Parsonstown. 


A List  of  Observatories,  Institutions  and  Individuals,  entitled  to  receive  a Copy  of  th^ 
Magnetical  and  Meteorological  Observations  made  at  the  Royal  Observatory,  Gree 
vvich. 


Observatories. 

Bombay 

Cairo 

Cambridge,  United  States  . Prof.  J.  Lovering. 


Christiania C.  Hansteen. 

Gotha 

Heidelberg M.  Tiedemann. 

Kew J.  Welsh. 

Kremsmiinster P.  A.  Reslhuber. 

Leipsic Professor  Mobius. 

Marburg Professor  Gerling. 

Prague K.  Jelinek. 

Stockholm Professor  H.  Selander. 

Toronto Professor  Kingston. 

Upsal Professor  Svanberg. 

Washington Lt.  Maury,  U.S.  Navy. 


Institutions. 

Geographical  Society. 
University. 

United  States. 
Philosophical  Society. 
University. 

Royal  Cornwall  Poly- 
technic Society. 
House  of  Lords,  Library. 
House  of  Commons,  Li- 
brary. 

King’s  College. 

Royal  Society. 
University  College,  Li- 
brary. 

RadclifFe  Observatory. 
Convent. 

Smithsonian  Institution. 
Office  of  Mag.  and  Met. 
Publication. 


Individuals. 


Bache,  Dr.  A.  D 

Washington. 

Barlow,  P.  W.,  Esq.  . . 

Woolwich. 

Ballot,  Dr.  Bu3’^s  .... 

Utrecht. 

Demidoffi  Prince  Anatole  de 

Florence. 

Dovh,  Prof.  H.  W 

Berlin. 

Erman,  Dr.  Adolph  . . . 

Berlin. 

Fox,  R.  W.,  Esq 

Falmouth. 

Gilliss,  Lt.  J.  M.,  U.S.  Navy 

Washington. 

Harris,  Sir  W.  Snow  . . . 

Plymouth. 

Howard,  Luke,  Esq.  . . . 

Tottenham. 

Humboldt,  Baron  von  . . . 

Berlin. 

Kaemtz,  Prof.  L.  F.  . . . 

Dorpat. 

Kreil,  Prof.  K 

Vienna. 

Kuplfer,  A.  T 

(Twelve  copies  for  distribution  to  the  Russian  Mag, 
and  Met.  Obs.) 


Lloyd,  Rev.  Dr 

Dublin. 

Loomis,  Professor  .... 

New  York  University. 

Lovering,  Professor  . . 

Cambridge,  U.S. 

Melvill,  Sir  J.  C 

East  India  House. 

Pegado,  Dr 

Lisbon. 

Phillips,  John,  Esq.  . . . 

Oxford. 

Quetelet,  A 

Brussels. 

Redfield,  W.  C.,  Esq.  . . . 

New  York. 

Reid,  Col.  Sir  W.,  R.E.  . . 

Malta. 

Riddell,  Lieut. -Colonel,  R.A. 

Woolwich. 

Sabine,  Colonel,  R.A.  . . . 

Woolwich. 

Senftenberg,  Baron  von  . • 

Prague. 

Vernon,  G.  V.,  Esq.  . . . 

Manchester. 

Wartmann,  Professor  Elie  . 

Geneva. 

Younghusband,  Capt.,  R.A.  . 

Woolwich. 

Bombay 

Bonn 

Bowditch  Library  . . 

Cambridge  . . . . 

Cherkow 

Falmouth 

London  . . . . . 


Oxford . . . 

St.  Bernard  . 
Washington  . 
Woolwich . . 


,yvry^  -■ 


.■'.,.vi..\ii'*''j:Ai(4\f 


v • ■' ''' ' ' ' ^ 

.' ■ ■ . ' • . . ' ■ 4-j;i4;fA  ;.%?.l  '..;:?>/ 'ii  •' ;1  ■ ■ijSi'i 

• y it  ^ ■-  ' -k;/;,'.’^'’^-/  ■ '-., 

■;  '■  ■ *■,;- U’^--^.  ■»'  ’ 

ri-j  I M ' ■■'.^■.■?.’';k**''^  K';.  ■■,  ■■'.  ^ 

'rr-r-'Kl.  V \ J- .'.f 

.-.iA . -‘  , ■;  ^•■"'■'"^ . -t-:v:. ' '■ . ,•  ;■  ? < •'■■■  ■■>•  ■ . ' \ '■  . 

.....  ..'.  .':. . yi,.;?  . . Y ••■  ..niA:’*;:;:'?-.  - • '■•.^r;! ;.'>  . .'  . 

K-V  .'  . '■,  . .'. 

"'.'v';..  ' . ; ' ' ' y' ’ * '%yy;A?  ' 

»' 'iV  j.'m,.-  , ..  . -■  .A."  v I '.&Vi’VV.l'\; 

.'  K' Iv'U/;:^ 


: I 


'■  ■\-:^'!  ' ' 


• ' ‘ .-■•I  ■'••'>.  i;''i'jV'5l'  P ' , ' '■  ■ y '■  '■•t' ' ■' 

. ^ y .y.  V •'  y-  r 

■'  ' '■  » ;«  • :v  yi)'"  ,.:  sfeiy,-,'.'  ■.'■■•  ' '■ ' 

.7.  : . y ■.,, 

. . . ,.£iyay',',yv' ■■  ■ ; 


iH'>.  y. 

>-■<.  ;>'' ; '’■'l-j 


A 


/' 


• ’ , ' ,.  y..,;  ' 

•'•  ■ ' ■ ,.  •• 

'■..:.y.'.  . 'y  ^-■7" 


Adjudication  of  the  Medals  of  the  Royal  Society  for  the  year  1856  by 

the  President  and  Council. 


The  Copley  Medal  to  M.  Henri  Milne-Edwards,  for  his  Researches  in  Com- 
parative Anatomy  and  Zoology. 

The  Rumford  Medal  to  M.  Louis  Pasteur,  for  his  Discovery  of  the  Nature  of 
Racemic  Acid  and  its  relations  to  Polarized  Light,  and  for  the  Researches  to  which 
he  was  led  by  that  discovery. 

A Royal  Medal  to  Sir  John  Richardson,  for  his  Contributions  to  Natural  History 
and  Physical  Geography. 

A Royal  Medal  to  Professor  William  Thomson,  for  his  various  Physical  Re- 
searches, relating  to  Electricity,  to  the  Motive  Power  of  Heat,  and  to  other  subjects. 


TheBAKERiAN  Lecture  was  delivered  by  Professor  William  Thomson,  F.R.S.,  and 
entitled  “On  the  Electro-dynamic  Qualities  of  Metals.” 


I 


TJ-aL.  TraMj>.  iyU^CCCLVI  PMx 


J.Ba/srre  li'^- 


ruk  Tr.in,.  MDCCCI.VI.  riak  m 


PmTra.-n&.MDCC(:lV£  Plavt  IV 


Ai.l.-.  ■ -> 


litL 


1 


Fldl.Tran:.  y-' 


/ 


.-►u'S'm-er  * - 


(?*<>  yfeit  del  et  Ivch, 


/V  .V 


Pfal.  Trms.  MdCCCLTL.  Flafjt  W . 


0(‘<'ri/c  West,  (3x1. i‘„  U.iA 


■‘ay/c  •r/n..' uJt  , "hi.  •rxn 


.•♦A« 

V*  ^ • % 2:  • • •'•  •'*  %'^fi^  ■ 

' *•«•  S • # 4 ^ i "1 


^S^n'W  %'l 


~K  ■ 

:%s^'.v.!^V/^;^^*( 

i*«  «?2  •••  •\»i>**^».  *I 


Ss  » <»«*%»!<«  -94  ■fl'  IB 

»w.?  ^ »*  %!< 


a»»\ 


gga# 


faJalagi^ai’a 

SSiSSifO^ 

} 

^ j 

: f 

HpIH 

fU.  Trans. MDCCCLYI.  PlaJx  IK. 


'TZ;*  *i*  * * %*^‘*’*^*- ' - '*¥ 

•••> •'.*5^  • V« f.»I'»t*'''»t •!»  I* 

?' '*.J''»  ”’•%*•' • *•**  \* •/-'% • * *»  *m 

••?£■•■»  • • • ^r*'  • #•  t* #•*>♦*#  t* 

V»'/#5^^^  •>»“*****'*■• 


♦*  J»iS ?■  fj»««  e»/^< 


• .'•;¥•«?•  •'\**  •%*  vZ*'%a\»V»  • !•' 

i 4*^Vi'^'%  k#  *♦  •'i 


I rfk  ; 


V\‘>a#/ir////A<^ 


kJ*  V 


Da.yk&aril'U}C'''a}^-’'  ■■- 


L&nsMdPiijS , TzOi 


i 


V 


T}iiL1tcoibJ£DCCQJM.  Fleece  IX.. 


( 


! 


li 

< 


i 

I 

i 


WWM0. 

petite 

pmmi 

* a*  * * « ^ 


MUUA 

^ t * • 1 1 i •5§ 

•iO%  i V AVi 


A«  '*'A  s*/*  '■ 

o^>. 


C ►^''/.5'.  I 1. 


Trans.  Flats 


\ 


i 

i 

i 


J 


jPhil.  TrajLs.  i4DCCCT\Ti^^^  XT. 


J.3a^'e  sc. 


mi.  Tirais.  ^i£>ZZCXNl.nite  XE. 


Tynemouth 


J'iq . 4 . 

. Map  of  the  Counhy 
about  tho 

HARTOX  COLLIERY. 


RortL 

Sliields 


_Soiith. 


lUita  Colliery 


Westoe 


Ja  T ro  iv 

i'Si;CC.k^ 


JaiTow  • 
Collitiy. 


^MehbuTTi 

CoUiery 


Jaj'row 


Jlai'ton 


HARTOIT 

COLLIERY 


CLeadon 


/ West  ^ 
‘Boldon, 


Tulwell 


jro7ih'  IVccainouth 


Jalj.  2 . 


Scale,  of  Depths . 


XScLsire  sc. 


mi.  linns.  IVIDCCCLVL  Mate  Jill. 


Bia.  Trans.  MDCCCLYE.  ThteUV. 


fC 


Scale.  2l>o 
^ni'bs  rrf  an  J,,?' 
£?wlish  Inch  . 2000' 


ale.  ad.  nat.  del 


Oj 


U 


'Phil.  Trans.  MD  CCCLVI,  TLaU  XT. 


X a2>oia:j4o 


o o , 

-(0T 


^:niSiiS 


I 


‘.ad/uit.  del. 


Scale, . 

I^tXl'CS  cf  Oil,  2l>o‘^‘^'  X ^9  ' 

Tnchjooo^'^ X.  2iSt  \ l 


c 


T/ul.  Ircuns.  MD  CCCLA/I.  ML. 


IM.  Trans.  MDCCCLTr,  TinteJM.. 


E.&asse  ad  viv.  rkl. 


J.Sasrre  sc. 


3 


I 


Phjl.  Trcu-Lc.  IffiCCCLYE,  fLaie  XVITJ . 


1 

i 


P.  U-Gossc.  del . etc), 


J.Basire,  ov. 


> 

\ 

I 


P/ul.  Trans.  ILDCCCLri.  J'l.o/r  XK . 


Zii/Ki/'-diii/'iKt/  Va/'idtio/is  of  //le  Jlcic/netic  JLlemo/tTs- . 


.»v. 


Ihil.  Tranj.  MDCCCIVI.  Fl/de  ZX. 


S.Bi.u<u'e  o-.'. 


Phil-  Trans 


.1 

J 


P/ul  rmzu,.  MXiCCCiVL/&Ze^XXl 


-£  M}rrea/Ji£l//a/ne^  dtl/et^so'. 


Prviati  J.A'istTT- 


Fhzl.  TTans.lM)CZa'!iiTLa±e..JM 


dtU' 


Pnrtf^d-  h'  ■ * . 


Fig.  I. 


PUL.  ‘P-an^i-.imcCCimPUiU.yXS-i 


I'ly.  1. 


h'.’iK"  ,,‘ri'. 


fy  t'  Af. 


'I 


1 


nil.  y;vui!.Mi)fcr.i,i'i  nait  xxiv. 


Tra^MDCCCiVl.Plae^XXV 


Fig.  I . 


iJ'J.!''’'  OiriJi-f/;  ,/t'M 


Pru.ftU  b}-,'  i 


rhib  7™«<.MDCCCJ,Vl.^(<ifeXXVI 


r 


'L'r-aji.,  T]£D(.^'C'^SZA/I Fhm  Z,  i Vi" 


1 


4 


I 


ThilTravs.mCCGXYZ  FlaU.  IXX 


pmi 


■'<!6^v*  j.'.i«  A'*"'?!.**-'. 


vjsvt 


■ 

1^ 

P^B'I 

‘ ■ •'’  ■St  dPA-.ot  Ul''! 


FM.  TTa;ns.  MDCCCm.  Plate,  IXXL 


W0^ 


y/j'-'ic 


i 


/nil 

k ' 

^ - 

1 . 

I 

n- 


.Vfrilf  . Si.r  hu'iuw'  to  (hiv  Mi  to 


% 

i 

i 


I 


< 

1 

1 


i 


4 


.m/f  ‘ 


Ihxl.Irans.  ¥DCCClXl.mic  JXKIK 


Si’dion  on  the  Zine  E.F. 

Tdble  of  the  Specific  (irotilic.v  of  the  Iiocirs  i/t  Arthurs  Scat 


Trap  tuff' 2.  677  6 l^orplpiy  77.(770 

2 Trap  rouploinrratc  o.((0()  7 Of'cen.stont‘  (S'ah'slAivv  ('rni^s  2.(7S0 

6i  Am\y<laIoidal  tt'op  2.(703  . 8 D?  very  ('omptttt  2.83(7 

4 BastOf  S.^Afit/to/i  Vis'i  2.  83(( . O Stnuls^tont'  2.  (77(7 

oBfl.vtilt  ii/tfBr  /tpf.r  2.  (iOS  . 2(7  27?  2.  4S*2 

2[etm  2.  710 

2.  /3  to  he  uml  //.»•  Hie  Afeaii  in  Hie  Computations 


EngVnr^  «t  dir  •-'Tri-M'*-  SouihaispToii- 


I Sandi'to  n c 


1 


?hil.  I'rari^.  Ml^cca  yi.  tkxw. 


Delamere 


Secto!'  Stations 


■ dtfternu/uJ.  (v^'coZ^a 


leRVATORr 


OMvNEY 


••/nonth 


iNiLit.SUl'lilljj 


BenHe^TiIqh. 


xllttliiie Mo.' 


'^M^ei'Usi  CmvBn^ 

C3iri\ii]^eacoiV 


nockxuu 


.’TCdlcy 


X 'radlf 


WaJtoiiT^ 


Diui*>tal>h- 


Ai^ihitin 


'^/SrtMsbmy 


fUvt'ttn-  Jim 


«>d  sr  ilie  OrcLilap  Oificei coiiiliajnprQii.. 


(jcoptxipliical  J/i/es 


\ Jy 

//\y^ ^ 

1 1 

1/ 

■ 

J.Bnsu'e  sc 


# . 


( 


PHILOSOPHICAL  TRANSACTIONS. 


I.  On  the  Constitution  and  Properties  of  Ozone.  By  Thomas  Andrews,  M.D., 
F.R.S.,  M.R.I.A.,  Professor  of  Chemistry  in  Queens  College,  Belfast. 


Received  May  16, — Read  June  21,  1855. 


Among  the  many  interesting  bodies  which  the  researches  of  modern  chemists 
have  brought  to  light,  few  are  more  remarkable  than  the  substance  to  which  the 
name  of  ozone  has  been  given,  whether  we  consider  its  many  singular  and  anoma- 
lous properties,  or  its  intimate  relations  with  the  most  important  and  widely-diffused 
element  in  nature.  For  the  first  recognition  of  ozone  and  description  of  its  proper- 
ties, we  are  indebted  to  the  sagacity  of  Schonbein,  to  whom  the  entire  merit  of  the 
discovery  unquestionably  belongs.  His  earlier  experiments  were,  however,  chiefly 
directed  to  the  elucidation  of  its  properties,  and  of  the  conditions  under  which  it  is 
formed ; but  not  being  accompanied  by  quantitative  determinations,  they  did  not 
throw  any  clear  light  on  its  actual  constitution.  The  subject  has  also  attracted  of 
late  years  the  attention  of  several  very  distinguished  physical  and  chemical  inquirers, 
among  whom  I may  particularly  mention  Marignac,  De  la  Rive,  Berzelius,  Wil- 
liamson, Fremy  and  Becquerel,  and  Baumert. 

Schonbein  has  shown  that  a body  having  a peculiar  and  highly  characteristic 
odour  and  very  similar  properties  is  formed  under  the  three  following  conditions : — 

1.  When  electrical  sparks  are  pjissed  through  atmospheric  air. 

2.  When  pure  water,  or  water  holding  certain  acids  or  salts  in  solution,  is  decom- 
posed by  the  voltaic  current,  the  new  substance  appearing,  along  with  the  oxygen 
gas,  at  the  positive  pole. 

3.  When  certain  bodies,  and  particularly  phosphorus,  are  slowly  oxidized  at  com- 
mon temperatures  in  atmospheric  air. 

Two  distinct  questions  here  arise  for  consideration.  Is  the  same  substance  pro- 
duced under  these  different  conditions,  or  has  Schonbein  included  under  the  name 
of  ozone  substances  having  different  compositions,  although  agreeing  in  some  of  their 

MDCCCLVI.  B 


2 


DR.  ANDRE\yS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


properties  ? And  next,  what  is  the  composition  of  ozone,  or,  if  there  be  more  ozones 
than  one,  how  are  they  respectively  constituted  ? 

The  experiments  of  Williamson  * indicated  the  production  of  water,  when  ozone 
obtained  by  electrolysis  was  decomposed  by  being  passed  over  heated  copper,  and 
Baumert'I'  obtained  similar  results  when  he  passed  a stream  of  electrolytic  oxygen 
through  a tube  containing  anhydrous  phosphoric  acid,  which  was  heated  at  one  point 
to  redness.  These  experiments  were  not,  however,  adapted  to  yield  quantitative 
results,  but  they  led  to  the  general  conclusion  that  this  variety  of  ozone  is  an  oxide 
of  hydrogen  containing  more  oxygen  than  water.  But  from  another  and  very  im- 
portant experiment,  to  which  I shall  have  occasion  hereafter  very  fully  to  refer, 
Baumert  has  concluded  that  it  is  a teroxide  of  hydrogen,  HO3. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  experiments  of  De  la  Rive  and  of  Fremy  and  Becquerel:}: 
have  shown,  that  pure  and  dry  oxygen  gas  may  be  converted  by  the  electrical  spark 
into  ozone. 

I am  not  aware  of  any  experiments  on  ozone  obtained  by  the  action  of  phosphorus 
on  atmospheric  air,  which  throw  any  distinct  light  on  its  constitution.  Marignac 
passed  a stream  of  this  ozonized  air  through  a solution  of  iodide  of  potassium,  till 
the  whole  of  the  iodide  was  converted  into  iodate  of  potassa,  and  concluded  that 
ozone  produced  in  this  way  must  be  either  oxygen  in  a peculiar  state,  or  a peroxide 
of  hydrogen. 

According  to  the  results,  therefore,  of  the  most  recent  investigations,  it  would 
appear, — 

That  the  substances  comprehended  under  the  name  of  ozone  are  not  identical ; 

That  the  ozone  obtained  by  the  action  of  the  electrical  spark  on  oxygen  gas  is 
oxygen  itself  in  an  altered  or  allotropic  state  ; 

That  the  ozone  obtained  by  the  electrolytic  decomposition  of  water  is  an  oxide  of 
hydrogen,  having  the  formula  HO3 ; and 

That  the  ozone  obtained  by  the  action  of  phosphorus  on  oxygen  is  either  oxygen 
itself,  or  a compound  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen §. 

The  subject  of  ozone  has  at  intervals  engaged  my  attention  during  the  last  four  or 
five  years,  and  I w'as  actually  occupied  with  a series  of  experiments  on  the  production 
of  ozone  by  the  electrical  spark,  when  the  appearance  of  Fremy  and  Becquerel’s 
able  researches  induced  me  for  the  moment  to  lay  aside  the  inquiry.  The  publica- 
tion of  Baumert’s  memoir  led  me  subsequently  to  resume  it,  as  his  results  were  not 
in  accordance  with  those  which  I had  previously  arrived  at.  But  the  method  pro- 
posed by  that  physicist  to  determine  whether  ozone  is  an  oxide  of  hydrogen,  or 
oxygen  in  an  allotropic  condition,  appeared  to  be  so  well  suited  to  the  purpose,  that 

* Memoirs  of  the  Chemical  Society,  vol.  ii.  p.  395.  f Poggendorff’s  Annalen,  Band  Ixxxix.  S.  39. 

t Annales  de  Chimie,  3^“®  serie,  xxxv.  p.  62. 

§ For  a very  complete  account  of  all  that  is  known  on  this  subject,  see  the  Article  “ Ozon  ” in  the  Hand- 
worterbuch  der  Chemie,  Band  v.  S.  835  (Braunschweig,  1853). 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


3 


on  resuming  the  inquiry,  I considered  it  necessary  in  the  first  instance  carefully  to 
repeat  his  experiments.  The  results  which  I at  first  obtained  were  so  far  in  accord- 
ance with  those  of  Baumert, -that  they  showed  that  the  increase  in  weight  of  the 
apparatus  was  always  more  than  the  weight  of  the  ozone,  as  deduced  from  its  che- 
mical action,  but  the  relative  proportion  of  these  quantities  was  not  in  accordance 
with  his  results;  nor,  on  repeating  my  own  experiments,  did  they  agree  with  one 
another.  It  was  evident,  therefore,  that  some  disturbing  cause  existed  which  com- 
- plicated  the  reaction,  and,  on  further  investigation,  I not  only  found  that  such  a 
cause  did  really  exist,  but  succeeded  in  ascertaining  its  nature  and  the  means  of 
avoiding  it.  The  experiments,  on  being  now  repeated,  gave  results  very  consistent 
with  one  another,  and  altogether  at  variance  with  the  view  that  hydrogen  is  a con- 
stituent of  ozone. 

The  apparatus  which  I employed  was  arranged  as  follows : — A is  a vessel  (Plate  I. 
fig.  1)  of  about  two  litres  capacity,  containing  a mixture  of  one  measure  of  pure 
and  strong  sulphuric  acid,  and  seven  measures  of  distilled  water.  The  cylinder  B, 
which  is  filled  with  a similar  solution,  is  closed  below  with  a diaphragm  of  bladder, 
so  as  to  prevent  effectually  any  mixture  of  the  gases  evolved  at  the  two  poles.  A 
platina  wire,  pp,  traverses  and  is  fused  into  a short  glass  tube,  fitted  by  grinding  into 
the  tubulated  neck  h-.  this  wire  terminates  below  in  a bunch  of  fine  platina  wires, 
which  form  the  positive  pole  of  a voltaic  arrangement.  The  negative  pole  is  a pla- 
tina plate,  p' , immersed  in  the  liquid  of  the  outer  vessel.  The  vessel  A was  placed 
in  a larger  vessel  containing  cold  water,  to  which  ice  was  in  some  experiments 
added.  This  vessel  has  been  omitted  in  the  drawing  for  the  sake  of  distinctness. 
CC'C"  is  a continuous  tube,  united  by  fusion  v/ith  the  larger  neck  of  B,  and  filled 
from  C to  C"  with  fragments  of  pumice,  moistened  with  pure  sulphuric  acid.  The 
length  of  the  desiccating  column  was  nearly  one  metre.  D is  a Liebig’s  apparatus, 
to  the  ends  of  which  glass  tubes  were  fused,  which  had  previously  been  fitted  by 
grinding,  the  one  into  the  neck  c of  CC'C",  the  other  into  a tube,  which  was  in  like 
manner  fused  to  a second  Liebig’s  apparatus,  E.  The  connexions  c and  e were, 
therefore,  formed  by  glass  surfaces  carefully  ground.  In  my  earlier  experiments, 
these  connexions  were  made  by  means  of  small  and  dry  corks,  which,  on  the  whole, 
are  more  convenient  than  ground-glass  joints,  and  are  quite  unobjectionable,  as, 
when  the  surface  is  small  and  the  cork  dry,  the  amount  of  ozone  destroyed  by  con- 
tact with  the  cork  is  wholly  inappreciable.  Caoutchouc  connectors  of  any  kind  are 
altogether  inadmissible;  they  are  attacked  with  such  energy  by  ozone,  even  when 
diluted  with  1000  times  its  volume  of  other  gases,  tl)at  the  tube  becomes  perforated 
in  the  course  of  a few  minutes.  The  vessel  D contained  a solution  of  iodide  of 
potassium,  acidulated  with  a little  hydrochloric  acid,  and  the  vessel  E,  concentrated 
sulphuric  acid.  The  U-tube  F,  filled  with  pumice  moistened  with  sulphuric  acid, 
prevented  any  moisture  from  passing  backwards  into  E.  The  oxygen  evolved  was 
collected  in  the  graduated  glass  vessel  G,  inverted  over  water.  The  volume  of  the 

B 2 


4 DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 

oxygen  gas  was  determined  only  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  its  relation  to  the 
ozone  produced. 

The  mixture  of  oxygen  and  ozone,  having  been  perfectly  desiccated  in  its  passage 
through  the  long  tube  CC'C",  enters  the  vessel  D,  where  the  ozone  is  decomposed, 
iodine  being  set  free  and  caustic  potassa  formed,  which  latter,  combining  with  the 
free  hydrochloric  acid,  forms  chloride  of  potassium.  If  a neutral  solution  of  iodide 
of  potassium  is  employed,  the  reaction  is  more  complicated  ; for,  wdiile  the  greater  part 
of  the  iodine  is  set  free  as  before,  and  dissolves  in  the  excess  of  iodide  of  potassium, 
iodate  of  potassa  and  caustic  potassa  are  at  the  same  time  formed.  Whether  the 
solution  be  taken  in  an  acid  or  neutral  state,  the  final  result  is  in  this  respect  always 
the  same,  that  the  active  oxygen  enters  into  a chemical  combination  in  the  vessel  D, 
and  increases  the  weight  of  the  liquid  contained  in  that  vessel. 

The  increase  in  weight  of  the  vessels  D and  E will  give  the  entire  weight  of  the 
ozone,  whether  that  body  be  allotropic  oxygen,  or  an  oxide  of  hydrogen.  On  the 
former  supposition,  the  decomposition  of  the  iodide  of  potassium  will  result  in  the 
substitution  of  oxygen  for  iodine,  both  remaining  in  D,  while  the  sulphuric  acid  in  E 
will  retain  the  moisture  which  would  otherwise  be  swept  away  by  the  current  of  dry 
gas;  on  the  latter,  ozone  will  become  resolved  into  water  and  oxygen,  both  of  which 
will  be  retained  in  the  vessels  D and  E.  Now  by  determining  the  amount  of  free 
iodine  in  the  iodide  of  potassium  solution  at  the  end  of  the  experiment,  the  amount 
of  active  oxygen  by  which  it  has  been  displaced  may  be  easily  calculated ; and  on 
comparing  this  with  the  increase  in  weight  of  the  vessels  D and  E,  it  will  at  once  be 
seen  whether  ozone  be  a peroxide  of  hydrogen  yielding  water  in  its  decomposition. 

Two  experiments  of  this  kind  were  performed  by  Baumert  ; in  tlie  first,  the 
increase  in  weight  of  the  apparatus  amounted  to  0‘0133grm.,  and  the  weight  of  the 
oxygen,  as  calculated  from  the  iodine  set  free,  to  O’OOSl  grm. ; in  the  second,  the 
same  quantities  were  respectively  0'0149  grm.  and  0’00989  grm.  The  iodide  of 
potassium  was  employed  in  the  state  of  a neutral  solution,  and  the  iodate  of  potassa 
was  subsequently  decomposed  by  the  addition  of  a little  hydrochloric  acid. 

It  was  from  these  results  that  Baumert  inferred  that  the  ozone  which  accompanies 
oxygen  obtained  by  the  electrolysis  of  water,  is  an  oxide  of  hydrogen  having  the  for- 
mula HO3 ; and  this  conclusion,  deduced  from  experiments  which  were  devised  with 
great  skill  and  executed  with  care,  has,  in  Germany  at  least,  received  very  general 
assent. 

Having,  as  already  mentioned,  found,  on  a repetition  of  these  experiments,  that  a 
different  expression  resulted  for  the  composition  of  ozone  from  every  new  trial,  I 
instituted  a diligent  search  into  all  the  circumstances  of  the  experiment,  and  at  last 
succeeded  in  referring  the  irregularities  to  the  presence  of  a small,  but  appreciable 
quantity  of  carbonic  acid,  which,  unless  very  great  piecautions  be  taken,  is  always 
present  in  electrolytic  oxygen.  When  baryta  water  was  substituted  for  the  solution 
of  iodide  of  potassium  in  D,  a precipitate  of  carbonate  of  baryta  appeared  in  the 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OP  OZONE. 


5 


course  of  a few  minutes.  With  caustic  potassa  in  the  same  vessel,  the  increase  in 
weight,  for  the  same  volume  of  oxygen  gas,  was  considerably  greater  than  with  the 
solution  of  iodide  of  potassium,  and  at  the  end  of  the  experiment  it  was  found  that 
carbonate  of  potassa  had  been  formed.  Now  as  a small  quantity  of  free  potassa  is 
always  produced  during  the  action  of  ozone  on  a neutral  solution  of  iodide  of  potas- 
sium, it  appeared  not  improbable  that  this  would  seize  upon  a portion  of  the  car- 
bonic acid  just  referred  to,  and  thus  the  augmentation  in  the  weight  of  the  apparatus 
would  depend  upon  two  distinct  causes,— the  ozone  reaction,  and  the  absorption  of 
carbonic  acid.  To  prevent  the  occurrence  of  the  latter,  it  was  only  necessary  to 
acidulate  the  solution  of  iodide  of  potassium,  so  as  to  prevent  the  formation  of  free 
potassa,  or  to  boil  for  some  time  the  liquid  subjected  to  electrolysis.  The  acidu- 
lation  of  the  solution  alone  was  found  to  be  sufficient  to  prevent  the  carbonic  acid 
from  being  absorbed,  for  when  this  precaution  was  attended  to,  the  results  were  the 
same,  whether  the  electrolyte  was  boiled  immediately  before  the  commencement  of 
the  experiment  or  not.  With  this  modification,  the  irregularities  previously  observed 
in  different  trials  disappeared,  and  the  simple  and  interesting  result  was  obtained, 
that  the  increase  in  weight  of  the  apparatus  was  exactly  equal  to  the  amount  of  oxy- 
gen deduced  by  calculation  from  the  iodine  set  free. 

I will  now  describe  the  chief  precautions  which  I adopted  to  avoid,  as  far  as  pos- 
sible, all  sources  of  error  in  the  following  experiments,  the  delicacy  of  which  will  at 
once  be  apparent,  if  we  consider  that  not  more  than  40  milligrammes  of  ozone  are 
contained,  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  in  10  litres  of  electrolytic  oxy- 
gen; and  that  it  was  necessary  to  have  the  arrangements  so  perfect,  that  this  large 
quantity  of  gas  (supposed  to  be  free  from  ozone)  should  traverse  the  apparatus  with- 
out producing  any  appreciable  change  in  the  united  weight  of  the  vessels  D and  E. 

The  solution  of  iodide  of  potassium  employed  in  all  the  experiments  had  the  same 
composition,  although  the  quantity  of  ozone  obtained  in  some  cases  was  three  times 
greater  than  in  others.  It  consisted  of  2 grins,  of  iodide  of  potassium  dissolved  in 
22^  grms.  of  a weak  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid,  containing  2 per  cent,  of  pure 
acid.  As  it  is  difficult  to  procure  iodide  of  potassium  entirely  free  from  iodate  of 
potassa,  I always  prepared,  at  the  commencement  of  each  experiment,  two  similar 
solutions,  of  which  one  was  introduced  into  D,  and  the  other  preserved  in  a ground 
stoppered  vial,  till  the  experiment  was  finished.  The  amount  of  free  iodine  in  both 
was  determined  at  the  same  time,  and  the  difference  taken  to  represent  the  exact 
quantity  of  iodine  due  to  the  ozone  reaction.  The  correction  for  the  iodate  of 
potassa  in  the  original  solution,  when  reduced,  rarely  represented  more  than  O’OOl 
grm.  oxygen,  but  quantities  of  this  magnitude  must  not  be  neglected  in  these  experi- 
ments. 

Previous  to  weighing  the  vessels  D and  E,  one  litre  of  atmospheric  air,  deprived 
of  carbonic  acid  and  carefully  desiccated,  was  passed  through  the  apparatus.  The 
object  of  this  precaution  was  to  bring  every  part  of  the  apparatus  into  the  same  state 


6 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


at  the  beginning'  of  the  experiment,  in  which  it  would  be  at  the  end.  The  same 
volume  of  dry  air  was  passed  through  the  apparatus  at  the  conclusion  of  each  expe- 
riment. 

It  is  rarely  necessary  in  chemical  investigations  to  apply  a correction  to  the  direct 
indications  of  the  balance  for  changes  in  the  temperature  and  pressure  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, during  the  interval  between  two  successive  weighings.  By  preserving  the 
apartment  at  a pretty  uniform  temperature,  the  corrections  for  thermometric  changes 
may  be  confined  within  very  narrow  limits,  but  the  movements  of  the  barometer  are 
not  under  our  control ; and  when,  as  in  these  experiments,  a period  of  two  and  some- 
times of  three  days  elapsed  between  the  first  and  second  weighings,  it  occasionally 
happened  that  the  change  in  the  atmospheric  pressure  was  considerable,  and  an 
appreciable  error  (amounting  in  some  instances  to  nearly  0*002  grm.)  would  have 
occurred,  if  no  correction  had  been  applied^. 

To  ascertain  how  far  the  action  of  the  apparatus  might  be  relied  on,  one  or  two 
preliminary  experiments  were  made,  which  gave  very  satisfactory  results.  The  vessel 
D,  containing  pure  water,  E,  sulphuric  acid,  and  another  Liebig’s  condenser,  also 
containing  sulphuric  acid,  having  been  interposed  between  E and  F,  3*5  litres  of 
oxygen  gas  not  containing  ozone,  followed  by  1 litre  of  atmospheric  air,  were  passed 
through  the  apparatus.  The  time  occupied  in  the  passage  of  the  gas  was  about  five 
hours.  The  vessel  D lost  0*0311  grm.,  while  E gained  0'031.5  grm.,  the  third  vessel 
not  sustaining  any  appreciable  change  of  weight.  If,  therefore,  D and  E had  been 
weighed  together,  the  change  of  weight  would  have  been  only  0*0004  grm.  In  an- 
other experiment,  in  which  a solution  of  strong  caustic  potassa  was  placed  in  D,  the 
loss  of  D was  0*0175  grm.,  and  the  gain  of  E 0*0172  grm.,  the  difference  being  less 
than  one-third  of  a milligramme.  Other  experiments  of  the  same  kind,  with  differ- 
ent solutions  in  D,  gave  similar  results.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  at  the  rate  at 
which  the  gas  traversed  the  apparatus,  the  whole  of  the  moisture  carried  off  from  the 
liquid  in  D was  retained  by  the  sulphuric  acid  in  E. 

To  determine  whether  a notable  quantity  of  iodine  would  be  carried  over  by  the 
current  of  the  gas  from  D to  E,  a solution  of  iodide  of  potassium  containing  a large 


* This  correction  was  calculated  as  follows : — To  the  volume  iii  cubic  centimetres  of  the  solution  of  iodide 
of  potassium  in  D and  of  sulphuric  acid  in  E,  was  added  the  volume  of  the  glass  of  which  the  vessels  D and  E 
were  formed.  From  this  was  deducted  the  volume  of  the  weights  employed  Let  V be  the  difference  of  the 
volumes  so  found  in  cubic  centimetres ; p and  p\  the  atmospheric  pressures  in  English  inches  at  the  first  and 
second  weighings ; t and  the  corresponding  temperatures  in  Centigrade  degrees ; x,  the  weight,  in  grammes, 
of  a volume  of  air  equal  to  V,  measured  under  the  pressure  p,  and  at  the  temperature  t ; x\  the  weight  of  the 
same  volume  of  air  at  p'  and  f'.  Then,  since  1 cub.  cent,  air,  at  0°,  and  under  a pressure  of  29’92  inches,  weighs 
0-00129  grm.. 


,=v(r 


1 


p. 


1 


+ 0-00367<'  29-92  l-j-0-00367.^  29-92 


).o. 


00129. 


The  value  of  — x is  to  be  added  to,  or  subtracted  from,  the  increase  of  weight,  as  found  by  direct  experiment, 
according  as  it  is  a positive  or  negative  quantity. 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


quantity  of  free  iodine  was  introduced  into  D,  and  a solution  of  pure  iodide  of  potas- 
sium into  E.  After  passing  4 litres  of  air  through  the  apparatus,  E was  found  to 
contain  0‘0015  grm,  iodine.  This  is  equivalent  to  one-tenth  of  a milligramme  of 
oxygen,  and,  from  the  large  excess  of  iodine  in  the  first  solution,  must  be  a greater 
quantity  than  could  have  been  carried  over  in  any  of  the  subsequent  experiments, 
although  in  some  of  them  larger  volumes  of  gas  were  passed  through  the  apparatus. 

The  free  iodine  was  determined  according  to  the  very  delicate  method  first,  I be- 
lieve, proposed  by  Bunsen.  A dilute  solution  of  sulphurous  acid  was  prepared,  and 
its  strength  determined,  immediately  before  analysing  the  liquid  in  D,  by  ascertain- 
ing how  many  measures  of  it  were  required  to  destroy  a known  weight  of  free  iodine 
in  a solution  of  iodide  of  potassium.  A corresponding  experiment  was  made  with 
the  solution  in  D,  from  which  the  quantity  of  free  iodine  in  it  was  deduced  by  a very 
simple  calculation. 

I.  10’2  litres  of  electrolytic  oxygen  containing  ozone  were  passed  through  the 
apparatus  at  the  rate  of  about  three-quarters  of  a liti’e  per  hour.  At  the  first 
weighing,  the  barometer  was  29*85  in.  and  the  thermometer,  5°*9  C. ; at  the  second 
weighing,  the  barometer  was  29*98  in.  and  the  thermometer,  5°*3.  The  value  of  V 
(see  preceding  note)  was  47  cub.  cent.  The  gain  in  weight  of  the  double  apparatus 
D and  E was  0*0375  grm.,  which  gives,  when  corrected  for  atmospheric  changes,  for 
the  true  gain, 

0*0379  grm. 

The  free  iodine  in  the  solution  contained  in  D,  was  neutralized  by  112*7  measures  of 
a dilute  solution  of  sulphurous  acid.  The  other  solution  of  iodide  of  potassium, 
which  had  been  prepared  at  the  same  time  as  the  first,  and  to  which  the  same  amount 
of  acid  had  been  added,  required  0*8  measure  of  the  same  solution  of  sulphurous  acid 
for  neutralization.  Hence  the  iodine  eliminated  by  the  action  of  the  ozone  was 
equivalent  to  111*9  measures.  Next,  0'5341  grm.  pure  iodine  was  added,  togethei* 
with  2 grms.  of  iodide  of  potassium,  to  a few  drops  of  water,  and  when  both  were 
dissolved,  the  solution  was  diluted  till  it  occupied  exactly  100  cub.  cent.  From  the 
mean  of  two  experiments  which  closely  agreed  with  one  another,  it  appeared  that 
100  measures  of  the  solution  of  sulphurous  acid  neutralized  95'96  cub.  cent,  of  this 
solution,  and  hence  1 measure  of  the  former  corresponded  to  0*005 12  grm.  iodine. 
From  these  data  it  follows,  by  an  easy  calculation,  that  the  iodine  disengaged  by  the 
ozone  amounted  to  0*609  grm.,  and  the  equivalent  of  oxygen  to 

0*0386  grm. 

II.  2*72  litres  of  electrolytic  oxygen  were  passed  through  the  apparatus  at  the  same 
rate  as  before.  At  first  weighing,  barometer  29*60  in.,  thermometer  5°*8  C. ; at 
second  weighing,  barometer  29'60in.,  thermometer  6°*0  C.  Gain  of  weight  of  D 
and  E 0*0107  grm.,  corrected, 

0 0107  grm. 

The-free  iodine  in  D,  after  deducting  the  iodine  due  to  the  small  quantity  of  iodate 


8 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


of  potassa  in  the  original  solution,  was  neutralized  by  30’23  measures  of  a solution  of 
sulphurous  acid,  of  which,  as  ascertained  by  direct  experiment  made  at  the  time, 
1 measure  neutralized  0 00521  grm.  free  iodine.  Hence  the  oxygen  due  to  the  dis- 
placement of  iodine  was 

O'OlOO  grm. 

III.  2'86  litres  of  the  same  gas  as  in  the  preceding  experiments  were  passed 
through  the  apparatus.  At  first  weighing,  barometer  30’06  in.,  thermometer  6°'6  C. ; 
at  second  weighing,  barometer  30'20  in.,  thermometer  6°‘l  C.  Gain  of  weight  of  D 
and  E 0'0152  grm.,  corrected, 

0 0154  grm. 

The  free  iodine  in  D,  corrected  as  before,  was  neutralized  by  4T52  measures  of  a 
solution  of  sulphurous  acid,  of  which  1 measure  neutralized  0’00525  grm.  iodine; 
hence  the  weight  of  oxygen,  as  deduced  from  the  weight  of  iodine  set  free,  was 


0'0138  grm. 

IV.  6‘45  litres  of  electrolytic  oxygen  were  passed  through  the  apparatus.  At  first 
weighing,  barometer  29'96  in.,  thermometer  6°‘8  C. ; at  second  weighing,  barometer 
29’29in.,  thermometer  7°'8  C.  Gain  of  weight  of  D and  E 0‘0303grm.,  corrected, 

0‘0288  grm. 

The  free  iodine  in  D was  neutralized  by  100’4  measures  of  a solution  of  sulphurous 
acid,  of  which  1 measure  neutralized  0‘00441  grm.  iodine  ; hence  the  weight  of  oxygen 
deduced  in  this  way  was 

0‘0281  grm. 

V.  6'8  litres  of  electrolytic  oxygen  passed.  At  first  weighing,  barometer  30‘53in., 
thermometer  9°'8  C. ; at  second  weighing,  barometer  30‘44in.,  thermometer  10°‘4  C. 
Gain  of  weight  of  D and  E 0'0254,  corrected, 

0'0251  grm. 

The  free  iodine  in  D neutralized  107*9  measures  of  a solution  of  sulphurous  acid,  of 
which  I measure  was  equivalent  to  0*00358  grm.  iodine  ; hence  the  weight  of  oxygen 
deduced  from  the  iodine  set  free  was 


0’0273  grm. 


Collecting  these  results  and  adding  them  together,  so  as  to  obtain  the  mean  of  the 
whole,  we  have 


Ozone  deduced  from  the  increase 
in  weight  of  the  apparatus. 

I.  0*0379  grm. 

II.  0 0107  grm. 

III.  0‘0154grm. 

IV.  0*0288  grm. 

V.  0*0251  grm. 


Ozone  deduced  from 
the  iodine  liberated. 

0*0386  grm. 
0*0100  grm. 
0*0138  grm. 
0*0281  grm. 
0*0273  grm. 


0*1 179  grm. 


0*1 178  grm. 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


9 


The  agreement  is  complete,  and  proves  unequivocally  that  water  is  not  a product 
of  the  decomposition  of  ozone,  which  therefore  does  not  contain  hydrogen  as  a con- 
stituent. If  its  composition  were  HO3,  the  apparatus  would  have  increased  0T841 
grm.  in  weight,  instead  of  0'll79grm. 

The  amount  of  ozone  formed  in  these  experiments  was  tolerably  uniform.  For 
1 litre  of  oxygen  the  following  weiglits  of  ozone  were  obtained  ; — 


I.  0'0038  grm. 

II.  00037  grm. 

III.  0'0046grm. 

IV.  0*0043  grm. 

V.  0*0040  grm. 


Mean  . . 0*0041  grm. 


In  the  arangement  above  described,  the  oxygen  gas  derived  from  the  electrolytic 
decomposition  of  water  was  therefore  accmpanied  by  about  a-g^th  of  its  weight  of 
ozone. 

In  order  to  remove  every  possible  doubt  from  these  results,  I fitted  up  an  apparatus 
from  every  part  of  which  organic  substances  were  excluded.  No  diaphragm  was 
used,  and  all  the  connexions  were  made,  either  by  fusing  the  ends  of  the  connecting 
tubes  together,  or  by  means  of  ground  glass  joints.  The  arrangement  is  represented 
in  fig.  2.  Two  platina  wires  (fig.  3)  were  fused  into  the  end  of  a glass  tube,  which 
was  fitted  by  grinding  to  the  tubulated  neck  h of  the  vessel  A.  The  tube  BB'B"  was 
connected  at  a with  the  vessel  A by  a ground  joint,  and  with  C by  fusion.  It  con- 
tained pumice  moistened  with  sulphuric  acid.  The  vessel  C was  also  filled  with 
sulphuric  acid,  and  was  connected  by  a ground  glass  joint  with  the  iodide  of  potas- 
sium vessel  D.  The  vessel  E contained,  as  before,  sulphuric  acid.  In  this  experi- 
ment, both  the  hydrogen  and  the  oxygen  traversed  the  apparatus,  the  accuracy  of 
which  was  thus  exposed  to  a very  severe  test. 

Twenty-two  litres  of  the  mixed  gases  were  passed  through  the  apparatus.  The 
gain  in  weight  of  D and  E was  0*0135  grm.,  the  respective  heights  of  the  barometer 
at  the  first  and  second  weighings  having  been  28*96  in.  and  29*57  in*?  and  the  tempe- 
ratures 1]°*1  and  10°*0.  The  correction  for  change  of  pressure  and  temperature  is 
therefore  4-0*0014  grm.,  and  the  true  gain 

0*0149  grm. 

The  free  iodine  in  D,  due  to  the  action  of  the  ozone,  neutralized  62*65  measures  of  a 
solution  of  sulphurous  acid,  of  which  1 measure  corresponded  to  0*00373  grm.  iodine. 
The  weight  of  ozone  deduced  from  the  iodine  set  free  is  therefore 


0*0148  grm. 

The  identity  of  these  results  is  very  satisfactory,  when  it  is  considered  that  this 
small  weight  of  ozone  was  separated  from  22  litres,  or  nearly  five  gallon  measures  of 


MDCCCLVI. 


c 


10  DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


the  mixed  gases.  The  relative  quantity  of  ozone  to  the  amount  of  water  decomposed 
is  less  than  in  the  former  experiments,  arising  perhaps  partly  from  a single  platina 
wire  having  been  in  this  case  employed  as  the  positive  pole.  In  this  experiment, 
great  care  was  taken  to  exclude  both  carbonic  acid  and  nitrogen  from  the  electrolyte. 

My  next  object  was  to  determine,  by  careful  quantitative  experiments,  whether 
water  is  really  formed,  as  Williamson  and  Baumert  have  stated,  when  ozone  is 
decomposed  by  heat.  For  this  purpose,  the  same  general  arrangement  was  employed 
as  in  the  first  series  of  these  experiments ; but  the  first  Liebig’s  apparatus  D,  instead 
of  being  filled  with  a solution  of  iodide  of  potassium,  was  now  empty,  and  placed  in 
the  upper  part  of  a metallic  cylinder  (fig.  4 HH),  where  it  was  raised  to  a tempe- 
rature of  about  400°  C.,  by  a current  of  heated  air  from  a Leslie’s  burner.  To  the 
sulphuric  acid  apparatus  E,  was  permanently  attached  and  weighed  along  with  it,  a 
small  U-tube  G,  containing  anhydrous  phosphoric  acid,  so  as  to  secure  the  condensa- 
tion of  the  last  trace  of  aqueous  vapour,  if  any  were  present.  The  oxygen  gas  was 
collected  and  measured  as  in  the  former  experiments. 

Two  experiments  were  made.  In  the  first,  6'8  litres  of  oxygen  containing  0*027  grni. 
ozone  were  passed  through  the  apparatus ; in  the  second,  9*6  litres  containing  0*038 
grm.  ozone,  d’he  compound  sulphuric  and  phosphoric  acid  apparatus  was  found,  all 
corrections  having  been  made,  to  have  increased,  in  the  one  case  one-third,  and  in 
the  other  case  one-half  of  a milligramme  in  weight.  Such  quantities  can  only  be 
referred  to  the  unavoidable  errors  of  experiment.  If  ozone  were  a compound  body 
having  the  constitution  HO3,  the  apparatus  would  have  gained  in  the  first  experi- 
ment 10,  and  in  the  second  14  milligrammes. 

That  ozone  cannot  contain  nitrogen  will  appear  from  the  following  experiment. 
Two  platina  wires  were  hermetically  sealed  into  the  bottom  of  a small  flask,  into 
which  water,  containing  a little  sulphuric  acid,  was  introduced  and  made  to  boil 
rapidly  for  some  time.  While  the  water  was  in  a state  of  ebullition,  the  wires  were 
connected  with  the  poles  of  a voltaic  arrangement,  so  as  to  disengage  the  mixed  gases 
along  with  the  vapour  of  water.  So  long  as  the  ebullition  continued,  no  ozone  made 
its  appearance ; but  on  allowing  the  liquid  gradually  to  cool,  without  arresting  the 
current,  its  presence  soon  became  manifest  from  its  odour  and  action  on  iodide  of 
potassium  paper.  The  ebullition  and  the  current  of  the  mixed  gases  must  have 
rendered  the  presence  of  nitrogen  here  impossible. 

One  question  still  remains  to  be  answered.  Does  ozone,  besides  oxygen,  contain 
any  other  constituent  which  is  not  absorbable  by  any  of  the  reagents  employed? 
Although  the  gas  which  escaped  from  the  apparatus,  after  the  separation  of  the  ozone, 
appeared  to  be  pure  oxygen,  yet  it  would  be  rash  to  assert  that  it  might  not  have 
contained  some  unknown  body  amounting  to  of  its  weight,  and  having  no 

very  salient  properties.  This  question  appeared  to  me  to  admit  of  solution  in  another 
way.  It  will  be  seen,  in  a subsequent  part  of  this  paper,  that  there  can  be  no  doubt 
of  the  formation  of  ozone  from  pure  and  dry  oxygen  by  the  action  of  the  electrical 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


11 


spark,  and  nothing  is  easier  than  to  convert  the  whole  of  a given  volume  of  oxygen 
into  ozone  in  presence  of  a solution  of  iodide  of  potassium.  The  next  step  in  the 
inquiry  was  therefore  to  ascertain  whether  ozone  derived  from  electrolysis,  from  the 
action  of  the  electrical  spark,  and  from  the  oxidation  of  phosphorus,  exhibited  a per- 
fect identity  in  all  its  properties. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  properties  of  ozone  is  its  destruction  by  heat,  or  rather 
its  conversion  by  heat  into  ordinary  oxygen.  To  ascertain  the  temperature  at  which 
this  change  occurs,  the  vessel  D,  fig.  4,  was  placed  in  a bath  of  mercury,  and  the  gas 
examined  as  it  escaped,  without  previously  passing  it  through  the  rest  of  the  apparatus. 
On  heating  the  mercurial  bath,  the  amount  of  ozone,  as  determined  by  its  action  on 
iodide  of  potassium  paper*,  did  not  notably  diminish  till  the  temperature  attained 
230°  C.  It  still  continued,  however,  very  intense  till  the  thermometer  rose  to  235°. 
Between  that  point  and  240°  the  ozone  reactions  entirely  disappeared,  when  the  ozone 
was  in  a very  dilute  state  ; but  when  more  concentrated,  slight  traces  of  ozone  could 
still  be  discovered,  which  no  doubt  would  have  also  disappeared  if  the  current  of 
gas  had  been  passed  very  slowly.  Time  is  in  fact  an  element  in  this  action.  Even 
at  the  temperature  of  100°  C.  ozone  is  slowly  destroyed.  Two  similar  tubes  were 
filled,  at  the  same  time,  and  by  the  same  process,  with  ozone  diluted  as  usual  with 
oxygen,  and  afterwards  hermetically  sealed.  One  of  these  tubes  was  maintained 
for  three  hours  in  a vapour  bath  at  100°C.,  the  other  was  not  exposed  to  heat.  On 
examining  both  tubes  at  the  end  of  the  time,  it  was  found  that  the  ozone  in  the  tube 
which  had  been  exposed  to  heat  was  perceptibly  less  than  in  the  other.  I have  no 
doubt  that,  even  at  the  common  temperature  of  the  air,  ozone  preserved  in  an  herme- 
tically sealed  glass  tube  would  gradually  change  into  common  oxygen.  I made  an 
experiment  of  this  kind  two  or  three  years  ago,  which  resulted  in  the  disappearance 
of  the  ozone,  but  I do  not  remember  the  source  from  which  the  ozone  was  derived, 
nor  what  precautions  were  taken  to  dry  the  gas. 

On  the  other  hand,  ozone  brought  directly  into  contact  with  the  vapour  of  water 
at  the  boiling-point  is  instantly  destroyed. 

To  obtain  a continuous  stream  of  ozone  from  the  action  of  the  electrical  spark,  a 
current  of  pure  oxygen  gas,  obtained  from  the  decomposition  of  the  chlorate  of 
potassa,  and  purified  and  dried  by  passing  through  tubes  containing  hydrate  of 
potassa  and  sulphuric  acid,  was  exposed  to  a rapid  succession  of  electrical  sparks. 
To  obtain  a sufficient  stream  of  electricity,  an  electrical  machine,  firmly  screwed 
down  to  the  floor  of  the  apartment,  was  connected  by  a belt  with  a heavy  cast-iron 
wheel,  40  inches  in  diameter,  contained  in  a frame  which  was  also  firmly  secured  to 
the  floor.  By  this  arrangement,  the  machine  could  be  worked  for  any  length  of  time 

* Bibulous  paper  which  has  been  dipped  into  a solution  of  iodide  of  potassium  of  moderate  strength  and 
afterwards  allowed  to  dry,  hut  still  retaining  its  hygrometric  moisture,  is  the  most  convenient  test  of  ozone. 
If  it  be  exposed  to  a continuous  current  of  dry  air,  it  should  be  removed  from  time  to  time  and  its  hygrometric 
moisture  restored. 


12 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


continuously,  the  plate  performing  about  360  revolutions  per  minute.  It  was  of 
course  necessary  to  apply  very  frequently  a hand  rubber  covered  with  amalgam  to 
the  plate,  and  it  required  the  cooperation  of  three  persons  to  permit  the  work  to  be 
easily  performed.  On  passing  the  gas  through  the  apparatus  at  nearly  the  same  rate 
as  in  the  experiments  already  described,  an  abundant  stream  of  ozone  was  obtained, 
which  enabled  me  to  institute  a very  exact  comparison  between  its  properties  and 
those  of  ozone  obtained  by  electrolysis. 

When  heated  in  the  mercurial  bath,  ozone  prepared  in  this  way  was  rapidly 
destroyed  at  the  temperature  of  237° C.,  which  is  the  same  temperature  at  which 
electrolytic  ozone  was  also  destroyed.  The  vapour  of  boiling  water,  in  like  manner, 
caused  all  the  ozone  reactions  to  disappear. 

The  action  of  water  at  common  temperatures  and  of  alkaline  solutions  upon  ozone 
is  very  remarkable.  It  is  commonly  stated  that  caustic  potassa  absorbs  ozone,  but 
that  pure  water,  and  solutions  of  lime,  baryta,  and  ammonia,  have  no  action  upon  it. 
This  statement  is  far  from  being  accurate.  Pure  water  does  not  absorb  ozone,  and 
a stream  of  ;iir  containing  ozone  may  be  passed  for  any  length  of  time  through  water 
without  producing  any  change  in  the  properties  of  the  water.  I have  also  preserved 
ozone  for  several  days  in  a stoppered  vial  containing  a little  distilled  water,  and 
although  the  vessel  was  agitated  from  time  to  time,  the  ozone  did  not  disappear. 
On  the  other  hand,  pure  water  has  the  property  of  destroying  a small  quantity  of 
ozone.  If  ozone,  obtained  by  the  electrolysis  of  water,  or  by  the  action  of  the  elec- 
trical spark,  or  by  means  of  phosphorus,  be  largely  diluted  with  atmospheric  air,  it 
will  entirely  disappear,  if  an  attempt  be  made  to  collect  it  in  a jar  inverted  over 
water.  The  following  experiment  is  more  precise.  A flask  provided  with  a ground 
glass  stopper,  of  the  capacity  of  half  a litre,  was  filled  with  equal  volumes  of  water 
and  atmospheric  air  and  inverted  in  the  pneumatic  trough.  The  ozone  in  a single 
bubble  of  electrolytic  oxygen,  passed  quietly  through  the  water  into  this  volume  of 
air,  could  easily  be  detected  ; but  on  agitating  the  water  briskly,  even  four  or  five 
bubbles  were  deprived  of  their  ozone.  The  same  gas,  agitated  with  twice  its  volume 
of  lime  water,  or  one-third  of  its  volume  of  baryta  water,  also  ceased  to  exhibit  the 
reactions  of  ozone.  In  like  manner,  the  action  of  caustic  potassa  is  also  limited. 
A strong  solution  of  that  alkali  in  a Liebig’s  apparatus  deprived  one  litre  of  electro- 
lytic oxygen  of  its  ozone,  after  which  the  ozone  passed  freely  through  it.  These 
phenomena  are  singular  and  characteristic,  and  are  the  same  with  ozone  from  what- 
ever source  it  is  derived. 

Peroxide  of  manganese  destroys  ozone,  affording  an  interesting  example  of  what 
is  commonly  called  catalytic  action.  The  oxide  of  manganese  does  not  increase  in 
weight,  nor  is  water  formed.  Ozone  from  the  three  sources  gives  the  same  results. 

The  odour  of  ozone,  from  whatever  source  derived,  is  the  same.  The  same  remark 
applies  to  its  property  of  bleaching,  without  producing  at  first  an  acid  reaction. 

Iodide  of  potassium  is  decomposed  with  the  formation  of  iodate  of  potassa,  and 


DR.  ANDREWS  ON  THE  CONSTITUTION  AND  PROPERTIES  OF  OZONE. 


13 


oxidable  substances  in  solution,  as  the  protosulphate  of  iron,  are  raised  to  a higher 
state  of  oxidation  by  all  the  varieties  of  ozone. 

It  would  not  be  difficult  to  extend  this  comparison,  but  enough  has  been  shown,  I 
conceive,  to  establish  the  absolute  identity  in  properties  of  ozone  in  whatever  way  it 
may  be  prepared.  Any  difference  which,  on  a superficial  examination,  may  appear 
to  exist,  will  be  found  on  further  inquiry  to  arise  from  the  ozone  being  in  a more  or 
less  dilute  state. 

That  ozone  is  formed  by  the  action  of  the  electrical  spark  on  perfectly  dry  oxygen, 
is  placed  beyond  all  doubt  by  the  following  experiment.  The  curved  tube  a,  fig.  5, 
having  two  platina  wires,  pp' , hermetically  sealed  into  it,  was  inverted  over  mercury 
and  carefully  filled  with  pure  oxygen,  after  which  a little  sulphuric  acid  was  intro- 
duced into  one  end  {h).  The  whole  was  allowed  to  remain  for  twenty-four  hours, 
when  the  oxygen  was  considered  to  be  perfectly  dry.  Electrical  sparks  were  now 
passed  for  some  time  between  the  platina  wires,  after  which  a solution  of  iodide  of 
potassium  was  introduced  into  the  other  end  of  the  tube.  It  became  immediately 
coloured  from  the  formation  of  free  iodine,  and  the  colour  continued  slowly  to 
increase  as  the  ozone  was  gradually  absorbed. 

Again,  a solution  of  iodide  of  potassium  may  be  made  to  absorb  the  whole  of  the 
oxygen  in  a narrow  tube,  by  the  passage  of  electrical  sparks.  This  experiment 
has  been  described  by  Fremy  and  Becquerel,  and  I have  myself  repeatedly  verified 
its  accuracy.  With  a thermometer  tube  2 inches  long,  the  whole  of  the  oxygen  may 
be  made  to  disappear  in  the  course  of  one  minute.  The  solution  becomes  always 
red  from  the  decomposition  of  the  iodide  of  potassium. 

We  have  already  seen  that  neither  hydrogen  nor  nitrogen  can  be  constituents  of 
ozone,  whether  it  be  obtained  from  electrolysis,  or  from  the  action  of  the  electrical 
spark  on  oxygen  ; and  further,  that  all  the  supposed  varieties  of  ozone  exhibit  in  all 
respects  identical  properties. 

Connecting  all  these  facts  together,  it  clearly  follows, — 

That  no  gaseous  compound  having  the  composition  HO3  is  formed  during  the 
electrolysis  of  water ; and 

That  ozone,  from  whatever  source  derived,  is  one  and  the  same  body,  having 
identical  properties  and  the  same  constitution,  and  is  not  a compound  body,  but 
oxygen  in  an  altered  or  allotropic  condition. 


S*"'  V 


O' 

E'."  7? 


I t 


s.’if'-.i.tS 


* ' . < ' V'r. 


•r 


■ 'f  V- 


■Jis-;.  .7  : U'. 


; .,J  .%-w  - Vf. 


^ '. ' " ' '■ ' ? ( ’’ » - ' ^ 


.'V  ■■}  -•  i-*' 

....  . 

„■  .‘#..^f^7u.ii 

■ / ' . ’ ' . ■ ' ' " ^ ; v. 

,,  i ■■■;  ; ■A;i::^tt3;|fV'7-- :h  'i^ ■"'■'■  T;| 

...  1 • -'-v  ' -;.'  ''■ 


.,i  ki  j 


, A .;:.,»((» limni  »«•’'■■ '■‘-*>-‘;*a"'^y 7® 


;4 

.i? 7 i '7.^  V . 7 =70  a?7- . i y :7 ‘■5;’'’ ^7-7 ^777.- 

>;:Ai\'' . :7  ii-.,  77  i^.'O  {■■■, 


...1,  «7.- 


. I?-'.-*.' 


7'^7a 


• •■'  ' ,'7 


[ 15  ] 


11.  On  the  Formation  and  some  of  the  Properties  of  Cymidine,  the  Organic  Base  of  the 
Cymole  Series.  By  the  Rev.  John  Barlow,  Chaplain-in-Ordinary  to  Her  Majesty's 
Household  at  Kensington  Palace,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Fice-President  and  Secretary  of 
the  Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britain,  8fc. 


Received  June  14, — Read  June  21,  1855. 

By  submitting  the  nitro-compounds  of  the  series  of  hydrocarbons,  of  which  benzole 
is  the  lowest  term,  to  Zinin’s  well-known  process,  chemists  have  successively  obtained 
the  organic  bases  corresponding  to  these  hydrocarbons.  Aniline,  toluidine,  xylidine 
and  cumidine  have  been  prepared  in  this  manner.  Aniline  was  obtained  by  this  pro- 
cess by  Zinin*  himself  in  1845  ; toluidine  by  Muspratt  and  Hofmann -f-,  in  1845  ; 
xylidine  by  Cahours  in  1850 ; and  cumidine  by  Nicholson,  in  1847  Whilst  the 
last-named  chemist  was  engaged  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Royal  College  of  Chemistry 
with  the  study  of  cumidine,  the  derivative  of  cumole.  Dr.  Noad,  at  the  suggestion  of 
Dr.  Hofmann,  pursued  the  same  direction  of  research  towards  cymole,  the  only 
remaining  hydrocarbon  of  this  group,  with  a view  of  completing  the  series  of  the 
alkaloids  \\.  In  his  experiments  on  the  action  of  concentrated  nitric  acid  on  cymole, 
Dr.  Noad  found  that  this  hydrocarbon  differs  somewhat  from  the  other  members  of 
the  series.  Instead  of  furnishing  the  nitro-substitute,  which  is  the  link  of  connexion 
between  the  hydrocarbon  and  the  alkaloid,  cymole  was  found  to  undergo  a partial 
oxidation,  a portion  of  the  carbon  being  eliminated  in  the  form  of  carbonic  acid  with 
the  simultaneous  formation  of  several  acids  which  belong  to  a group  of  bodies  stand- 
ing lower  in  the  scale  of  organic  compounds.  The  study  of  these  very  interesting 
acids,  toluylic  and  nitrotoluylic,  appears  to  have  detached  Dr.  Noad’s  attention  from 
the  formation  of  the  substitution-product  of  cymole ; and  when  he  again  returned  to 
this  inquiry  he  soon  quitted  it,  in  order  to  pursue  still  further  a research  in  which  he 
had  already  been  successful 

At  the  suggestion,  and  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Hofmann,  the  following  investi- 
gation has  been  made,  in  the  hope  of  filling  up  a gap  still  existing  in  the  series  of 

* Journal  fvir  practlsche  Chemie,  Band  xxxvi.  S.  98. 

f Mem.  Chem.  Soc.  vol.  ii.  p.  367.  + Comptes  Rendus,  tome  xxx.  p.  321. 

§ “ On  Cumidine,  a new  Organic  Base,”  Reports  of  Royal  College  of  Chemistry,  p.  178. 

II  Mem.  Chem.  Soc.  vol.  iii.  p.  421. 

^ “ On  some  of  the  Products  of  the  Decomposition  of  Nitrotoluylic  Acid,”  Philosophical  Transactions, 
vol.  cxliv. 


16 


MR.  BARLOW  ON  THE  FORMATION  AND 


bases,  and  the  desired  alkaloid  has  been  obtained  ; thds  completing  the  inquiry  which 
was  commenced  in  the  Royal  College  of  Chemistry  seven  years  ago. 

Preparation  of  Nitrocy mole. — It  has  been  already  stated  that  cymole,  when  heated 
in  the  usual  way  with  concentrated  nitric  acid,  produces  substances  differing  greatly 
from  the  expected  substitution-compound.  To  prevent  this  result,  cymole  and  nitric 
acid,  having  been  severally  kept  for  some  minutes  in  a freezing  mixture  of  ice  and 
salt,  were  cautiously  mixed.  The  cold  cymole  was  dropped  from  a pipette  into  the 
cold  nitric  acid.  The  mixture  was  at  first  brown,  but,  on  continued  addition  of 
cymole,  it  gradually  changed  to  green ; and  when  the  substitution  was  complete,  it 
assumed  the  consistency  of  cream.  It  was  then  projected  into  cold  water,  when  the 
oily  reddish-brown  nitrocymole  subsided  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  This  was 
washed,  first  with  water,  and  lastly,  with  a weak  solution  of  carbonate  of  soda. 

Properties  of  Nitrocymole. — In  the  purest  state  in  which  it  has  yet  been  obtained, 
nitrocymole  is  a reddish-brown,  transparent,  oily  fluid,  of  greater  specific  gravity  than 
water,  in  which  it  is  insoluble.  It  does  not  appear  to  be  readily  decomposed  by  con- 
tact of  air.  When  distilled  with  water  it  produces  a neutral  oil,  which  floats  on 
water,  than  which  it  is,  consequently,  of  less  specific  gravity.  It  was  found  impos- 
sible to  obtain  the  boiling-point  either  of  nitrocymole  or  of  this  oily  distillate,  or  to 
procure  the  body  in  a state  fit  for  analysis.  But  subsequent  examination  of  sub- 
stances derived  from  it  removed  all  doubt  that  its  composition  is  represented  by  the 
formula  C20  H13NO4. 

Formation  of  Cymidine  from  Nitrocymole. — The  process  of  Zinin,  although  suc- 
cessfully adopted  in  obtaining  the  lower  bases  of  this  series,  was  not  found  equally 
effectual  when  applied  to  this  new  substitution-product.  A better  result,  though 
the  quantity  was  still  very  scanty,  was  obtained  by  Bechamp’s  modification  of  this 
method*.  Nitrocymole  was  added  to  iron-filings  brought  to  the  consistency  of  paste 
by  mixture  with  acetic  acid,  whereupon  an  immediate  and  considerable  elevation  of 
temperature  indicated  the  commencement  of  chemical  action.  From  the  distillation 
of  this  mixture  at  a carefully-regulated  heat  a complicated  product  resulted.  A con- 
siderable proportion  of  the  distillate  was  found  to  be  insoluble  in  hydrochloric  acid. 
This  was  set  aside  for  separate  examination,  the  result  of  which  will  be  stated  at  the 
close  of  this  memoir.  To  the  portion  of  the  distillate  which  was  soluble  in  hydro- 
chloric acid,  soda  was  added  in  quantity  just  sufficient  to  neutralize  the  acid.  The 
base  (for  which  the  name  cymidine  is  suggested  by  obvious  analogy)  was  then  sepa- 
rated by  ether  and  subsequently  distilled.  The  same  instability  of  composition,  and 
tendency  to  oxidize,  which  have  been  noted  as  characterizing  the  hydrocarbon  cymole, 
exist  in  this  base,  derived  from  it.  Accordingly,  it  was  found  necessary  to  perform 
the  distillation  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen,  in  order  to  prevent  the  conversion  of 
the  cymidine,  at  a high  temperature,  into  a resin. 


* Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  tome  xlii.  p.  193. 


SOME  OF  THE  PROPERTIES  OF  CYMIDINE. 


17 


Properties  of  Cymidine. — ^The  specific  gravity  of  cymidine  is  less  than  that  of  water. 
Its  boiling-point  is  about  250°  Cent. ; it  has  a yellow  colour ; it  is  odorous  ; it  does 
not  affect  test-paper.  It  is  slightly  soluble  in  water,  and  completely  soluble  in  alcohol 
and  ether.  The  quantity  of  this  alkaloid  available  for  experiment  was  too  small  to 
admit  of  its  being  entirely  purified  by  distillation.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to  have 
recourse  to  the  analysis  of  its  platinum-salt  for  ascertaining  its  composition. 

Platinum-salt  of  Cymidine. — When  bichloride  of  platinum  is  added  to  an  aqueous 
solution  of  the  hydrochlorate  of  cymidine,  a characteristic  yellow  salt  is  obtained, 
whieh,  like  cymidine  itself,  is  slightly  soluble  in  water,  more  soluble  in  alcohol,  and 
most  of  all  in  ether. 

I.  "4598  grm.  of  this  substance,  burnt  with  chromate  of  lead  and  oxide  of  copper, 

’5695  grm.  of  Carbonic  acid. 

*1935  grm.  of  Water. 

•1270  grm.  of  Platinum. 

This,  calculated  for  100  parts,  gives  33*777  Carbon. 

4*675  Hydrogen. 

27*620  Platinum. 


II.  *4213  grm.  of  the  same  substance,  ignited,  gave  *1178  grm.  of  platinum,  which, 
calculated  for  100  parts,  gives  27*699. 


These  numbers  lead  to  the  formula  C20  H 

HCl,PtCl2, 

as  may  be  seen  from  the 

following  comparison  of  the  theoretical  and  experimental  numbers  : — 

Theory. 

A 

Experiment. 

f 

Per  cent. 

Per  cent. 

20  equivs.  Carbon  . . 

120 

33784 

33*777 

16  equivs.  Hydrogen 

16 

4*505 

4*675 

1 equiv.  Nitrogen  . . 

14 

3*941 

3 equivs.  Chlorine  . 

1 equiv.  Platinum  . . 

106*5 

98*7 

29*983 

27*787 

f mean  of  the  two 

27*641 

L experiments. 

1 equiv.  Platinum-salt 

355*2 

100*000 

Hydrochlorate  of  Cymidine. — When  strong  hydrochloric  acid  is  added  to  cymidine, 
fumes  are  evolved,  the  hydrochlorate  of  cymidine,  in  the  form  of  an  oily  layer,  rises 
to  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  and  crystallizes  on  being  agitated  and  evaporated.  Like 
the  salts  of  aniline,  it  stains  firwood  yellow,  but,  unlike  these  salts,  it  produces  no 
reaction  with  the  chloride  of  lime  ; it  also  stains  the  skin  red. 

A determination  of  hydrochloric  acid  in  the  hydrochlorate  of  cymidine  was  made. 

Weight  of  hydrochlorate  taken  . . . *412  grm. 

Weight  of  chloride  of  silver  ....  *319  grm. 

From  whence  the  per-centage  number  19*679  hydrochloric  acid  is  obtained.  This 


MDCCt’LVI. 


D 


18 


MR.  BARLOW  ON  THE  FORMATION  AND 


number  agrees  with  the  per-centage  corresponding  to  the  formula  C20  N HCl,  as 
will  appear  on  comparing  the  theoretical  and  experimental  numbers. 

Theory. 

I ^ 

Per  cent. 

1 equivalent  of  Cymidine  . . . 149  80*281 

1 equivalent  of  Hydrochloric  acid  . 36*5  19*719 

1 equivalent  of  Hydrochlorate  of  Cymidine  . . 100 

Sulphate  of  Cymidine. — A white  crystalline  salt,  soluble  in  water. 

Oxalate  of  Cymidine. — A white  crystalline  salt,  soluble  in  water. 

Gold  Salt. — A yellow  crystalline  salt,  slightly  soluble  in  water. 

Iodine  has  no  perceptible  reaction  on  cymidine. 

Bromine  produces  a very  feeble  reaction  on  this  base. 

When  chloride  of  cyanogen  was  added  to  cymidine,  a slight  action  took  place,  and 
the  resulting  substance,  after  having  been  boiled  with  water,  and  filtered,  gave  a pre- 
cipitate on  the  addition  of  caustic  soda;  thus  affording  evidence  of  the  presence  of 
a salt  of  a new  solid  base,  probably  analogous  to  melaniline. 

On  adding  chloride  of  benzoyle  to  cymidine,  a slight  action  ensued,  and  a few 
minute  crystals  appeared,  probably  of  benzo-cymidide. 

Nitric  acid  acts  violently  on  cymidine ; a semi-solid  substance  separating  on 
addition  of  soda. 

These  are,  however,  merely  qualitative  experiments,  and  require  further  elaboration. 

Examination  of  substance,  insoluble  in  hydrochloric  acid,  produced  during  the 

formation  of  Cymidine. 

Having  been  purified  by  repeated  distillation,  this  substance  was  burnt  with  oxide 
of  copper,  when  the  following  result  was  obtained : — 

*2623  grm.  gave  "8615  carbonic  acid  and  *2530  water. 

The  formula  of  cymole  is  C20H14.  On  comparing  the  per-centage  numbers  derived 
from  this  formula  with  those  obtained  from  the  substance  by  experiment,  we  find 


Theory. 

A 

Experiment. 

( ^ 

Per  cent. 

Per  cent. 

10  equivalents  of  Carbon  . . 

120  89*552 

89*213 

14  equivalents  of  Hydrogen  . 

14  10*448 

10*672 

134  100*000 

99*885 

The  chemical  identity  of  this  substance  with  cymole  is  thus  established. 

The  boiling-point  175°  C.  also  coincides  with  that  of  camphogene,  which  is  recog- 
nized as  the  isomer  of  cymole.  There  is  however  an  important  physical  distinction 
between  cymole  and  this  isomeric  substance.  It  has  already  been  stated,  that  when 
cymole  is  submitted  to  the  action  of  fuming  nitric  acid  at  — a reddish-brown 


Experiment. 
Per  cent. 

19*679 


SOME  OF  THE  PROPERTIES  OF  CYMIDINE, 


19 


nitrocymole  is  produced,  which  is  specifically  heavier  than  water.  But  when  this 
cymole-isomer  (a-cymole)  is  similarly  treated,  there  results  a dark  oily  liquid,  which, 
on  being  projected  into  water,  first  blackens,  then  becomes  pale  yellow,  and  finally 
floats  on  the  surface,  indicating  a specific  gravity  less  than  that  of  water. 

From  this  nitro-a-cymole,  an  a-cyrnidine  was  also  obtained  by  Bechamp’s  process, 
and  from  this  a platinum-salt  was  formed.  The  platinum  determination  of  this  salt 
gave  the  following  result : — 


Weight  of  platinum-salt  taken T840grm. 

Weight  of  platinum  obtained '0509  grm. 


This  gave  a per-centage  weight  of  27*662  platinum,  differing  only  by  *125  from  the 
theoretical  per-centage  27*787,  calculated  from  the  formula  Cjo  N,  HCl,  PICI2. 
Further  researches  are  however  necessary  to  establish  the  relation  of  this  substance 
to  cymidine. 

An  unsuccessful  attempt  to  obtain  the  boiling-point  of  nitrocymole  has  been  already 
noticed.  The  distillate  from  this  operation  was  lighter  than  water,  and  had  the 
colour  and  general  appearance  of  a-cymole ; when  treated  with  fuming  nitric  acid  in 
a freezing  mixture,  the  resulting  substance  presented  a close  resemblance  to  nitro- 
a-cymole. 

Nitrocymole  and  cymidine,  the  formation  of  which  is  described  in  the  preceding 
memoir,  complete  the  series  of  nitro-substitutions  and  bases  corresponding  to  the 
hydrocarbons,  of  which  benzole  is  the  lowest  homologue,  as  will  appear  from  the  fol- 
lowing synoptical  table : — 


Hydrocarbons. 

Benzole  C12  Hs 
Toluole  Ci4  Hg 
Xylole  Ci6  H,„ 
Cumole  Ci8  H12 
Cymole  C20  H,4 


Nitro-substitutions. 

Nitrobenzole  C12  Hj  NO4 
Nitrotoluole  C,4  H;  NO4 
Nitroxylole  Cjg  Hp  NO4 
Nitrocumole  Cjg  Hu  NO4 
Nitrocymole  C20  H13  NO4 


Bases. 

Aniline  Ci2  H;  N. 
Toluidine  C,4  Hp  N. 
Xylidine  Cjg  H,i  N. 
Cumidine  Cig  H,3  N. 
Cymidine  C20  Hjg  N. 


The  author  of  this  memoir  desires,  in  conclusion,  to  record  his  sense  of  the  valuable 
assistance  he  received  from  Mr.  Alfred  Noble,  Student  in  the  College  of  Chemistry. 


[ 21  ] 


III.  Some  Observations  on  the  Ova  of  the  Salmon,  in  relation  to  the  distribution  of 
Species ; in  a letter  addressed  to  Charles  Darwin,  Esq.,  M.A.,  E.P.R.S.  ^c. 

By  John  Davy,  M.D.,  F.R.  S.,  Inspector- General  of  Army  Hospitals. 


Received  March  27, — Read  April  26,  1855. 

My  dear  Sir, 

In  a letter  with  which  you  have  favoured  me,  that  of  the  28th  of  January,  you  did 
me  the  honour  to  ask  my  aid  in  an  inquiry  in  which  you  take  an  interest,  in  common, 
as  you  remark,  with  most  naturalists,  viz.  the  geographical  distribution  of  species, 
especially  that  of  fish.  At  the  same  time  you  expressed  your  opinion  that  some 
useful  information  might  be  procured  by  experiments  on  the  impregnated  ova  of  the 
latter,  were  they  so  conducted  as  to  show  what  the  ova  are  capable  of  bearing  with- 
out loss  of  vitality,  and  under  exposure  to  circumstances  such  as  might  be  com- 
patible with  their  being  conveyed  from  one  river  or  lake  to  another,  adhering,  for 
instance,  to  the  plumage,  beak  or  legs  of  birds.  In  reply,  I acquainted  you  of  my 
willingness,  should  I have  an  opportunity,  to  accede  to  your  wishes  ; and,  that  occur- 
ring, having  been  so  fortunate  as  to  procure  the  means  of  making  some  experiments 
likely  to  be  elucidatory,  I have  now  the  pleasure  of  communicating  the  results  ob- 
tained. 

All  the  experiments  I have  to  describe  have  been  made  on  the  ova  of  the  Salmon, 
for  which  I have  been  indebted  to  two  gentlemen,  John  Barker,  Esq.,  of  Broughton 
Lodge  in  Cartmel,  and  William  Ayrton,  Esq.,  of  Chester.  By  the  first,  through  one 
of  his  keepers,  I was  supplied  with  a considerable  quantity  of  ova,  taken  from  a 
breeding-bed  in  the  Leven,  a river  that  flows  out  of  Windermere,  and  from  a part  of 
it  near  Newby  Bridge,  about  eighteen  miles  distant  from  my  house.  Through  the 
latter  I obtained  ova  from  Overton  on  the  Dee,  taken  from  boxes  in  which  they  had 
been  placed  in  the  process,  as  it  has  been  called,  of  artificial  breeding. 

Both  gentlemen  were  so  good  as  to  desire  the  keepers,  in  packing  the  ova,  to 
attend  to  the  directions  I gave  in  writing,  with  the  intent  of  commencing  the  inquiry 
even  in  the  act  of  their  being  sent.  Those  from  the  Leven  were  divided  into  three 
portions;  one,  of  110  ova,  was  contained  in  an  eight-ounce  vial,  two-thirds  full  of 
water,  which  was  changed  more  than  once  on  the  way ; another,  of  75  ova,  was 
enclosed  in  wet  wool ; and  the  third,  of  62  ova,  in  dry  wool.  The  latter  two  were  in 
a small  box,  the  lid  on,  which  box  as  also  the  bottle  were  carried  by  hand.  These 
ova  reached  me  in  about  twenty-four  hours  from  the  time  they  were  taken  from  the 
river,  and  were  received  on  the  6th  of  February.  They  all  appeared  healthy  and  in 


22 


DR.  DAVY  ON  THE  OVA  OF  THE  SALMON, 


good  progress  of  development,  the  eyes  of  the  embryos  being  visible,  and  the  blood- 
corpuscles  distinct  in  the  vessels  of  the  vitelline  membrane,  when  placed  under  the 
microscope,  using  a glass  of  one-inch  focal  distance.  Without  loss  of  time  they  were 
variously  distributed  ; some  in  shallow  earthenware  pans,  some  in  finger-glasses  used 
at  table,  and  with  water  in  all  little  more  than  sufficed  to  cover  them.  No  gravel 
was  added.  The  water  employed  was  well-water  of  considerable  purity,  of  about  50° 
Fahr.,  and  was  changed  once  daily,  and  once  only.  The  vessels  were  kept  in  a room, 
the  temperature  of  which  seldom  exceeded  50°,  and  was  rarely  below  46°.  Most  of 
these  eggs  proved  productive,  and  have  yielded  young  and  vigorous  fish.  The  first 
which  broke  their  shell  appeared  on  the  15th  of  February,  the  last  on  the  17th  of 
March:  of  the  total  number  not  more  than  three  or  four  aborted. 

The  ova  from  the  Dee  were  received  on  the  7th  of  February,  conveyed  by  rail,  and 
had  been  sent  off  the  preceding  day.  One  portion  of  them  was  in  a two-ounce  vial, 
two-thirds  full  of  water  ; another,  in  a vial  of  the  same  size  full  of  water  ; a third,  in 
dry  sand  ; a fourth,  in  wet  sand  ; a fifth,  in  wet  cotton-wadding ; and  a sixth,  in  dry 
wadding : all  enclosed  in  a covered  box.  These  ova  on  arrival  exhibited  no  signs  of 
organic  development.  They  were  distributed  immediately  much  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  preceding,  and  were  treated  in  the  same  way,  but  with  a different  result.  All 
of  them  in  succession  became  opake  from  imbibing  water,  and  not  in  a single  instance 
were  there  any  indications  afforded  of  vital  progress ; leading  to  the  inference  that 
they  were  dead  when  they  reached  me.  From  Mr.  Ayrton  I have  recently  been  in- 
formed that  the  ova  remaining  in  the  box  from  which  those  had  been  taken  were 
doing  well ; and  hence,  necessarily,  the  conclusion,  that  the  journey  had  been  fatal 
to  those  I received.  This  may  have  been  owing  to  their  having  been  sent  at  so  early 
a stage ; and  I may  mention  in  confirmation,  that  a second  supply  which  was  for- 
warded to  me  later — three  weeks  later — sent  by  post  in  moist  wool,  in  a more  advanced 
stage,  nearly  as  much  advanced  as  those  from  the  Leven,  arrived  alive  and  are  now 
hatched.  It  may  perhaps  be  said,  that  the  treatment  of  the  unsuccessful  ova  after  I 
received  them,  especially  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  water  was  supplied,  was  the 
cause  of  their  failure : but  this  does  not  appear  to  me  probable,  having  found  it  to 
succeed  with  the  ova  of  the  delicate  Charr, — ova  taken  by  myself  from  the  parent-fish, 
and  impregnated  forthwith  and  immediately  distributed  in  the  same  kind  of  vessels 
as  those  now  used,  and  the  water  in  which,  of  the  same  quality,  was  changed  once 
only  daily. 

Having  premised  thus  much,  I shall  now  describe  the  several  experiments  which  I 
have  made  for  the  purpose  of  testing  the  power  of  endurance  of  the  ova.  Unless 
otherwise  specified,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  ova  in  each  instance  used  were  of 
those  from  the  Leven.  v 

I.  Of  Exposure  to  the  Atmosphere. 

1.  An  ovum  exposed  for  an  hour  on  a slip  of  glass  to  the  air  of  a room  at  64°, 
placed  near  a fire,  became  dry  superficially  without  its  circulation  being  stopped. 


IN  RELATION  TO  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES. 


93 


Returned  to  water,  its  circulation  was  distinct  at  the  end  of  forty-eight  hours.  Nine 
days  after  it  was  in  a dying  state. 

2.  An  ovum  on  a slip  of  glass  was  exposed  to  the  air  of  a room  at  52°  for  two  hours. 
The  shell  then  had  become  at  one  spot  indented  as  from  shrinking,  the  effect  of  eva- 
poration, yet  the  circulation  seemed  unimpaired  ; but  transferred  to  water,  the  circu- 
lation presently  stopped,  the  egg  becoming  opake  from  the  absorption  of  water,  and 
of  course  dead. 

3.  An  ovum  exposed  to  the  air  of  a room  on  a watch-glass  from  noon  till  4 p.m., 
the  thermometer  rising  from  49°  to  51°,  had  become  dry  and  shriveled.  From  the 
state  of  the  shell  the  blood-vessels  were  indistinct  under  the  microscope.  Put  into 
water,  in  one  or  two  minutes  a rupture  of  the  shell  took  place  and  the  young  fish 
escaped.  It  was  very  languid,  only  the  slightest  indications  of  life  being  perceptible ; 
yet  the  heart  did  not  cease  its  feeble  action  till  the  eighth  day,  counting  from  the 
rupture  of  the  shell. 

4.  An  ovum  on  a support  of  glass  was  exposed  to  the  air  of  a room  at  49°  for  an 
hour  and  ten  minutes ; its  shell  was  slightly  indented.  Returned  to  water,  on  the 
second  day  the  young  fish  burst  its  shell,  was  vigorous,  and  so  continued. 

5.  An  ovum  was  exposed  to  the  air  of  a room  during  the  night  for  about  ten  hours, 
the  thermometer  under  50°.  The  following  morning  it  was  found  shriveled;  put 
into  water,  the  shell  presently  burst ; the  young  fish,  excepting  for  a slight  motion 
of  its  pectoral  fins,  appeared  lifeless,  and  it  soon  died. 

6.  An  ovum  placed  on  a rock  in  the  open  air  in  the  shade  at  38°,  after  two  hours 
was  slightly  shriveled  and  its  circulation  had  become  languid.  The  following  morn- 
ing its  circulation  had  ceased,  and  it  shortly  became  opake. 

7.  An  ovum  placed  on  snow  during  a thaw  with  occasional  gentle  rain,  the  air 
about  34°,  and  kept  there  from  half-past  nine  in  the  morning  till  four  in  the  after- 
noon, did  not  appear  to  be  shrunk,  nor  was  its  circulation  interrupted.  Replaced  in 
water,  its  circulation  the  following  day  was  active. 

II.  Of  Exposure  to  Moist  Air. 

To  ascertain  the  effect  of  exposure  to  moist  air,  I have  made  many  experiments,  as 
by  placing  the  wet  ova  in  watch-glasses  covered  with  other  glasses  of  the  same  size ; 
keeping  them  in  moist  wool,  from  which  water  had  been  wrung  out ; and  in  vials 
slightly  wet  within  ; in  each  instance  taking  the  precaution  to  allow  of  the  admis- 
sion of  air.  The  trials  have  been  made  at  temperatures  varying  from  34°  to  50°. 
The  results  have  been  so  uniform  that  I do  not  think  it  necessary  to  enter  into  mi- 
nute details.  The  ova  in  no  instance  appear  to  have  materially  suffered,  whether  the 
exposure  has  been  for  an  hour  or  for  several  days.  Thus,  in  one  experiment,  nine  ova 
were  kept  in  a vial,  one  of  six-ounce  capacity,  eleven  days  ; examined  then  under  the 
microscope,  the  circulation  in  each  of  them  appeared  to  be  vigorous,  as  vigorous  as 
before ; and,  replaced  in  water,  they  all  produced  healthy  fish,  and  sooner  on  an 


24 


DR.  DAVY  ON  THE  OVA  OF  THE  SALMON, 


average  than  those  constantly  kept  in  water.  These  ova  were  from  the  Leven.  In 
another  experiment,  with  ova  last  received  from  the  Dee,  four  were  kept  in  a vial  of 
the  same  capacity  and  merely  moist  within,  fourteen  days  without  apparently  suffer- 
ing ; they  were  all  hatched  on  being  replaced  in  water.  And,  in  a third  trial,  two 
ova,  also  from  the  Dee,  have  been  kept  in  moist  wool  twelve  days,  also  without  any 
appearance  of  injury,  these  too  having  been  hatched  after  having  been  put  into  water. 

in.  Of  Exposure  in  Air  and  TVater  to  a Temperature  at  or  below  the  Freezing-^point. 

1.  An  ovum  exposed  on  a watch-glass  to  the  open  air  from  4 p.m.  one  day  to  10  a.m. 
the  following,  the  thermometer  at  30°  at  the  commencement  and  termination  of  the 
trial,  had  become  slightly  shriveled  and  its  circulation  was  stopped;  put  into  water 
with  snow,  so  as  to  be  gradually  thawed  if  frozen,  it  did  not  revive ; its  death  was 
denoted  by  its  yelk  becoming  opake. 

2.  An  ovum  exposed  to  the  open  air  at  about  30°  for  an  hour,  was  found  adhering 
to  the  slip  of  glass  on  which  it  rested  by  a frozen  drop  of  water,  so  that  it  could  be 
carried  inverted  without  falling  off.  Under  the  microscope,  still  attached  to  the  glass 
by  ice,  the  blood-corpuscles  were  seen  in  slow  motion  in  the  vessels ; in  one  vessel 
they  were  moving  backward  and  forward.  Where  adhering  to  the  glass  the  ovum 
was  slightly  flattened.  Removed  to  water,  the  following  day  the  embryo  was  seen 
active  and  the  circulation  vigorous  ; thirteen  days  later  the  young  fish  burst  its  shell, 
and  was  to  all  appearance  uninjured. 

3.  Another  ovum,  exposed  to  the  open  air  of  29°  for  an  hour  and  twenty  minutes, 
was  found  frozen  to  the  glass,  but  without  loss  of  vitality.  The  result  was  the  same 
as.  that  of  the  preceding  experiment. 

4.  An  ovum  exposed  in  water  in  a watch-glass  to  the  open  air  during  the  night, 
tlie  thermometer  so  low  as  20°,  was  found  in  the  morning  included  in  ice  and  dead ; 
the  yelk  had  become  opake  and  was  probably  frozen. 

h.  Exposed  an  egg  in  a wine-glass  to  the  open  air  from  3 p.m.  one  day  to  10  a.m. 
the  next,  the  thermometer  as  low  as  22°.  The  whole  of  the  water  was  frozen  ; when 
thawed  no  circulation  was  visible  in  the  ovum;  two  days  after  a feeble  circulation 
was  detected,  which  ceased  the  following  day  and  the  yelk  became  opake. 

6.  An  ovum  exposed  in  water  to  the  open  air,  about  31°,  in  an  hour  was  covered 
with  a pellicle  of  ice  ; the  circulation  had  become  languid.  An  hour  and  a half  later, 
the  thermometer  at  30°,  the  ovum  was  included  in  ice ; the  circulation  much  the 
same.  Tiie  experiment  was  continued  about  eighteen  hours  longer,  the  ovum  in- 
cluded in  ice  at  about  the  same  temperature ; the  circulation  was  now  languid  but 
distinct,  and  the  ovum  was  nowise  altered  in  appearance. 

7-  An  ovum  was  exposed  in  water  in  a wine-glass  to  the  open  air  below  the  freezing- 
point.  When  a pellicle  of  ice  had  formed  on  the  water,  the  glass  was  surrounded 
with  wool  in  a little  box  and  left  in  the  open  air.  During  the  night  the  thermo- 
meter fell  to  9°.  The  ovum  in  the  morning  was  found  adhering  to  the  bottom  of  the 


IN  RELATION  TO  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES. 


25 


glass  by  ice,  and  the  inside  of  the  glass  was  coated  with  ice,  the  greater  portion  of 
the  egg  however  remaining  in  water.  The  ice  thawed,  the  circulation  was  seen 
going  on,  and  it  soon  became  active.  Twelve  days  after,  the  young  fish  burst  its 
shell,  was,  and  has  continued  vigorous. 

8.  An  ovum  was  exposed  in  water  to  the  open  air  at  28°.  In  about  two  hours  the 
water  was  frozen  at  the  surface  and  spicula  of  ice  had  formed  round  the  ovum,  as  it 
were  shooting  from  it.  Thawed  on  the  following  day,  the  circulation  was  found  to 
be  vigorous,  and  in  eleven  days  a young  active  fish  was  produced. 

9.  An  ovum,  one  of  those  last  received  from  the  Dee,  was  exposed  to  the  open  air, 
placed  on  green  moss,  and  left  so  exposed  during  three  entire  days  and  nights.  It 
was  then  returned  to  water.  In  six  hours  after  it  was  hatched.  The  young  fish  was 
languid  and  in  point  of  size  comparatively  diminutive,  as  if  prematurely  produced, 
yet  the  action  of  the  heart  was  vigorous,  and  the  circulation  as  seen  under  the  micro- 
scope normal.  It  may  be  right  to  notice  the  kind  of  weather  that  prevailed  during 
the  exposure  of  the  ovum.  During  the  first  twenty-four  hours  the  thermometer  by 
day  was  between  36°  and  38° ; there  was  some  rain,  '39  inch  was  the  quantity,  and 
partial  sunshine  ; during  the  night  the  thermometer  on  the  grass  fell  so  low  as  29°'5  ; 
there  was  a little  rain,  *02  inch.  During  the  second  twenty-four  hours  the  thermo- 
meter by  day  varied  from  39°  to  33°;  the  air  most  of  the  time  was  misty,  but  without 
rain  ; at  night  the  thermometer  fell  to  28°,  yet,  as  there  was  no  frost  in  the  morning, 
it  was  probably  so  low  only  for  a very  short  time.  During  the  last  twenty-four 
hours,  the  state  of  atmosphere  and  the  temperature  differed  but  little  from  what  they 
were  in  the  preceding.  Part  of  the  time,  especially  during  the  latter  third,  the  ovum 
was  a good  deal  protected  by  the  leaves  of  the  moss,  between  which  it  had  sunk.  At 
the  end  of  the  three  days  it  was  neither  dry  nor  shriveled,  and  only  very  slightly 
indented,  and  that  on  the  point  on  which  it  rested.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  it 
was  the  first  hatched  of  the  ova  last  received  from  the  Dee  ; and  that  the  young  fish, 
now  six  days  old,  is  alive  and  thriving. 

IV.  Of  Exposure  in  IVater  to  a Temperature  of,  or  above  70°. 

In  these  trials  ova  were  employed  and  young  fish,  and  chiefly  the  latter,  as  better 
adapted  to  show  the  effect  of  the  high  temperature.  In  each  instance  the  ovum  or 
young  fish  was  put  into  a thin  glass  vessel  of  the  capacity  of  about  four  ounce  mea- 
sures, nearly  full  of  water,  and  this  vessel  was  placed  in  a water-bath  of  the  tempe- 
rature required.  The  temperature  given  in  each  following  instance  was  that  of  the 
water  in  which  the  subject  of  the  experiment  was  immersed. 

1.  An  ovum  kept  two  hours  and  a half  in  water  at  70°,  placed  under  the  micro- 
scope, was  found  to  have  its  circulation  somewhat  impaired,  rendered  more  languid  ; 
kept  in  two  hours  more,  the  temperature  rising  to  80°,  no  further  injurious  effect 
was  produced,  at  least  that  was  apparent.  The  vessel  was  now  withdrawn  from 


MDCCCLVI. 


£ 


26 


DR.  DAW  ON  THE  OVA  OF  THE  SALMON, 


the  bath  and  allowed  to  cool  gradually.  When  next  seen,  ten  hours  later,  a young 
fish  had  burst  its  shell  and  was  vigorous. 

2.  An  ovum  and  a young  fish  were  kept  in  water  between  68°  and  72°  about  eight 
hours.  The  ovum,  one  of  those  from  the  Dee,  was  then  found  hatched,  and  the 
young  fish  produced  was  tolerably  active.  The  following  day  both  were  exposed 
about  nine  hours  to  a temperature  between  70°  and  80°,  rarely  reaching  80°.  At 
the  end  of  this  time  they  appeared  languid,  and  when  in  motion  disposed  to  irre- 
gular movements.  Removed  from  the  water-bath,  on  the  following  day  they  were 
active,  and  exhibited  no  peculiarity  appreciable  that  could  be  attributed  to  the  higher 
temperature  to  which  they  had  been  subjected.  The  ovum  in  its  hatching  in  this 
instance  preceded  all  the  others  from  the  Dee,  with  the  exception  of  the  one  already 
mentioned,  that  exposed  three  days  to  the  open  air. 

3.  A young  fish  and  an  ovum  were  put  into  water  which  in  the  bath  presently 
acquired  the  temperature  of  82°,  and  in  an  hour  rose  to  85°.  Now  taken  out  and 
allowed  to  cool  gradually,  the  circulation  in  the  young  fish  was  found  to  be  very 
languid,  the  heart  contracting  feebly.  The  following  day  it  was  found  dead.  The 
ovum  did  not  appear  to  suffer  materially ; three  days  after,  it  was  hatched  and  a 
vigorous  young  fish  was  produced. 

4.  An  ovum  kept  in  water  for  two  hours,  at  a temperature  from  90°  to  95°,  lost  its 
translucency,  and  opened  under  water  was  found  to  be  dead. 

5.  An  ovum,  one  of  the  last  from  the  Dee,  kept  half  an  hour  in  water  at  100°, 
afforded  the  same  result. 

6.  A young  fish  was  kept  in  water  three  hours,  the  temperature  of  which  at  the 
commencement  was  70° ; it  rose  to  85°,  and  when  taken  from  the  bath  it  had  fallen 
to  82°.  The  heart  then  was  acting  with  tolerable  vigour,  and  the  day  following  the 
fish  appeared  to  be  nearly  in  its  usual  state : five  days  later  it  was  alive  and  tolerably 
active,  but  less  vigorous  than  those  which  had  not  been  so  exposed. 

7.  A young  fish  kept  in  water  an  hour  at  84°  was  found  dead.  No  action  of  the 
heart  was  perceptible  nor  of  any  of  the  muscles  when  it  was  taken  out.  Another  young 
fish  was  put  into  the  water  when  cold  without  experiencing  any  bad  effect.  This 
trial  was  made  to  be  certain  that  the  fatal  effect  was  not  owing  to  want  of  air  in  the 
water. 

8.  A young  fish  was  kept  in  water  rising  in  temperature  from  78°  to  81°  three  hours 
and  a half  without  any  permanent  bad  effect  that  was  appreciable.  When  taken  out 
it  appeared  torpid,  but  the  heart  was  acting  well.  Two  days  after  the  fish  was  as 
active  as  before. 

9.  A young  fish,  kept  two  hours  in  water  between  88°  and  90°,  was,  when  taken  out, 
dead. 

10.  A young  fish,  kept  only  a few  minutes  in  water  at  92°,  appeared  to  be  dying 
when  taken  out ; the  circulation  in  its  tail  was  stopped  and  the  heart  was  acting  feebly ; 


IN  RELATION  TO  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES. 


27 


in  about  a quarter  of  an  hour  it  ceased  to  act.  The  following  morning  the  fish  had 
a sodden  appearance,  and  its  disinteg'ration  had  commenced. 

11.  A young  fish  was  put  into  water  at  80°;  after  three  hours,  when  the  tempera- 
ture had  risen  to  85°,  it  appeared  to  be  dead;  its  body  was  bent  and  it  had  become 
pallid.  Under  the  microscope  the  heart  was  seen  acting  feebly,  and  the  circulation 
was  pi’oportionably  languid.  On  the  following  day  the  body  had  become  unbent ; 
the  circulation  in  the  tail  had  ceased,  but  the  heart  was  still  acting  feebly.  Two  days 
later  the  heart’s  action  had  ceased,  and  the  only  vestige  of  life  was  indicated  by  a just 
perceptible  motion  of  the  lower  jaw,  which  was  protracted  three  days  longer. 

12.  A young  fish  was  kept  in  water  gradually  rising  from  78°  to  88°  for  three  hours. 
At  85°,  the  heart  acting,  no  circulation  was  perceptible  in  the  tail ; at  88°  the  body 
had  become  bent  and  pale,  and  the  heart’s  action  arrested. 

V.  Of  the  Effect  of  Salt  and  Brackish  Water. 

1.  An  active  young  fish  and  an  ovum  in  which  the  circulation  was  vigorous,  were 
put  into  a solution  of  common  salt  of  the  specific  gravity  1026,  which  it  may  be 
conjectured  is  nearly  the  degree  of  saltness  of  the  sea  at  the  estuaries  of  our  salmon 
rivers.  The  fish  immediately  became  restless,  and  the  heart’s  action  accelerated. 
At  the  end  of  five  hours  it  appeared  to  be  dying;  the  heart’s  action  had  become  so 
languid  as  not  to  suffice  for  the  circulation ; notwithstanding,  life  was  not  entirely 
extinct,  as  was  indicated  by  a feeble  motion  of  the  lower  jaw,  till  about  forty-eight 
hours  from  the  commencement  of  the  experiment.  The  dead  fish  was  colourless  and 
contracted  in  all  its  dimensions,  and  shortened  at  least  one-third  of  its  length. 

The  effect  of  the  salt  water  on  the  ovum  was  equally  fatal,  but  judging  from  the 
circulation,  life  was  protracted  in  it  a few  hours  longer. 

2.  An  active  young  fish  was  put  into  a solution  of  common  salt  of  the  specific 
gravity  1016.  It  lived  about  four  days,  the  heart’s  action  gradually  becoming  feebler 
till  the  circulation  ceased.  When  dead  there  was  an  accumulation  of  blood  in  the 
large  vessels,  and,  as  in  the  former  instance,  a diminution  of  the  bulk  of  the  fish,  as 
if  from  contraction.  The  saline  solution,  it  may  be  remarked,  was  changed  daily  so 
as  to  be  sure  that  death  was  not  owing  to,  or  had  been  hastened  by,  deficiency 
of  air. 

3.  A young  fish  was  put  into  a solution  of  salt  reduced  to  the  specific  gravity  1007, 
so  as  to  be  only  slightly  brackish.  Immediately  on  immersion  it  showed  great  rest- 
lessness and  increased  activity,  which  continued  with  little  abatement  for  several 
days.  It  has  now  been  in  the  solution  ten  days.  During  the  two  last  its  activity 
has  diminished,  and  at  times  it  has  appeared  to  be  dying.  It  is  rather  more  changed 
in  form  than  the  fish  of  the  same  age  left  in  spring  water,  and  the  vitelline  sack  is 
decidedly  more  diminished,  as  if  from  increased  vascular  action  produced  by  the 
stimulus  imparted  by  the  solution. 

4.  An  ovum  from  the  Dee,  the  circulation  in  which  was  active,  was  put  into  saline 

E 2 


28 


DR.  DAVY  ON  THE  OVA  OF  THE  SALMON, 


water  of  the  same  specific  gravity  as  the  last.  It  was  hatched  at  the  end  of  about 
forty-eight  hours.  The  young  fish  was  at  first  languid;  now,  on  the  fourth  day,  it 
is  little  altered;  it  is  seen  commonly  lying  on  its  side,  and  is  restless  only  by  fits 
and  starts. 

Besides  the  experiments  above  detailed,  1 have  made  others,  but  differing  so  little 
in  their  results,  that  I do  not  think  it  necessary  to  describe  them  even  in  confirmation. 

VI.  Concluding  Remarhs. 

On  the  conclusions  which  may  be  drawn  from  the  experiments  as  bearing  on  the 
subject  under  consideration  I shall  be  very  brief ; for  the  sake  of  order  I shall  advert 
to  each  section. 

From  the  experiments  detailed  in  the  first  section,  it  would  appear  that  the  ova  of 
the  Salmon  in  an  advanced  stage  can  be  exposed  to  the  open  air,  if  dry,  but  a short 
time,  at  ordinary  temperatures,  without  loss  of  vitality;  but  for  a considerable  time, 
if  the  temperature  be  low  and  if  the  air  be  moist;  the  limit  in  the  former  case  not 
having  exceeded  an  hour,  whilst  in  the  latter  it  has  exceeded  many  hours. 

From  the  experiments  in  the  second  section,  it  would  appear  that  the  vitality  of  the 
ova  was  as  well  preserved  in  air  saturated  with  moisture,  as  it  would  have  been 
had  they  been  in  water. 

From  the  expei’iments  in  the  third  section,  it  would  appear  that  the  ova  might  be 
included  in  ice  without  losing  their  vitality;  but  that  if  exposed  to  a temperature 
many  degrees  below  the  freezing-point,  probably  effecting  their  congelation,  they 
were  deprived  of  their  vitality. 

From  the  experiments  in  the  fourth  section,  it  would  appear  that  both  the  ova  and 
the  young  fish  were  capable  of  bearing  a temperature  of  about  80°  or  82°  in  water  for 
a moderate  time  with  impunity,  but  not  without  loss  of  life  at  a higher  temperature, 
any  exceeding  84°  or  85°. 

From  the  experiments  in  the  fifth  section,  it  would  appear  that  a degree  of  saltness 
of  water  equal,  or  nearly  equal,  to  that  of  sea-water  is  pretty  speedily  fatal  both  to  the 
ovum  of  the  Salmon  and  to  the  young  fish  ; that  the  same  effect  is  produced  on  the 
young  fish  by  brackish  water  of  specific  gravity  1016,  but  in  a longer  time;  and  that 
when  the  solution  is  so  diluted  as  to  be  reduced  to  the  specific  gravity  1007,  the 
advanced  ovum  may  be  hatched  in  it,  and  the  life  of  the  young  fish  may  be  sustained 
in  it  for  many  days,  but  with  diminishing  power. 

Finally,  in  reference  to  the  distribution  of  species,  do  not  many  of  the  preceding 
results  render  it  probable,  in  the  instances  of  fish  of  the  salmon-kind,  and  by  analogy  of 
other  kinds,  that  it  may  be  effected  in  the  manner  you  have  suggested  in  proposing  the 
inquiry,  viz.  by  means  of  impregnated  ova  conveyed  by  animals,  whether  birds  or 
quadrupeds,  adhering  to  some  part  of  their  body,  such  as  their  feathers  or  hair,  feet 
or  mouth, — by  the  latter  provided  the  temperature  do  not  exceed  84°  or  85°  ? And, 
during  rain  or  snow,  are  we  not  warranted  in  concluding  that  an  ovum  may  be  taken 


IN  RELATION  TO  THE  DISTRIBUTION  OF  SPECIES. 


29 


from  one  river  to  another  without  loss  of  vitality  by  an  Otter  or  Heron  or  other 
aquatic  bird,  if  lodged  in  the  mouth  of  the  one — with  the  proviso  mentioned  above, 
— or  in  the  bill  of  the  other ; or  during  a time  of  frost  or  snow  if  adhering  to  the 
feet  of  either  of  the  animals  mentioned? 

When  my  attention  was  first  given  to  the  subject,  which  was  before  I was  favoured 
with  your  letter,  I imagined  that  the  impregnated  ova  might  be  conveyed  in  the 
stomach  of  birds,  taken  up  from  one  river,  and,  it  might  be,  disgorged  in  another, 
without  loss  of  vitality,  inasmuch  as  the  ova  of  the  Salmon  found  in  the  stomach  of 
a trout  have  been  known  to  be  productive  when  returned  to  water.  For  an  authen- 
ticated instance  of  the  kind,  I may  refer  to  a report  by  Mr.  Halliday,  the  agent  of 
Messrs.  Edmund  and  Thomas  Ashworth,  on  the  artificial  process  of  breeding  Salmon 
carried  on  at  Oughterard  in  Galway*.  It  was  to  test  this  conjecture  that  the  experi- 
ments in  the  fourth  section  were  made;  and,  I may  add,  with  negative  results,  know- 
ing as  we  do,  that  the  temperature  of  the  stomach  of  birds  is  usually  above  100°  of 
Fahr. 

Besides  the  main  and  express  object  for  which  the  preceding  experiments  were 
made,  I trust  the  results  may  be  of  some  use  in  aiding  to  solve  the  question  as  to  the 
period,  the  age,  at  which  the  impregnated  ova  of  fish  are  most  retentive  of  life,  and 
consequently,  are  in  the  state  best  fitted  for  transport  without  loss  of  life ; and  that 
those  in  the  two  last  sections  may  help  to  explain  the  absence  of  the  Salmonidae  in 
tropical  seas  and  in  those  approaching  to  them  in  temperature,  such  as  the  Mediter- 
ranean ; and  may  also  throw  a little  light  on  some  of  the  peculiar  habits  as  well  as 
on  the  localities  of  their  migratory  species. 

I am,  my  dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly, 

Lesketh  How,  Amhleside,  John  Davy. 

March  21,  1855. 

* The  Report  is  attached  to  “ A Treatise  on  the  Propagation  of  Salmon  and  other  Fish,”  by  Edmund  and 
Thomas  Ashworth:  London,  Simpkin  and  Marshall,  1853. 


- ;■  If  ■’ 

! ( ( ; ; ' 

O:' 


■■  ■ 


[ 31  ] 


IV.  Oh  the  Effect  of  Local  Attraction  upon  the  Plumb-line  at  Stations  on  the  English 
Arc  of  the  Meridian,  between  Dunnose  and  Burleigh  Moor ; and  a Method  of 
computing  its  Amount.  By  the  Venerable  John  Henry  Pratt,  M.A.,  Archdeacon 
of  Calcutta.  Communicated  by  the  Rev.  J.  Challis,  M.A.,  F.R.S.  8fc. 

Received  June  5, — Read  June  21,  1855. 


1.  In  a former  communication  I endeavoured  to  point  out  a method  for  calculating 
the  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  at  stations  on  the  Indian  arc,  caused  by  the  attraction 
of  the  Himalayas  and  the  vast  regions  beyond,  with  a view  to  the  correction  of  the 
astronomical  amplitudes  of  the  measured  subdivisions  of  the  arc,  before  they  are 
applied  to  the  determination  of  the  ellipticity  of  the  earth. 

The  same  subject  is  taken  up  in  the  present  paper,  but  in  reference  to  one  of  the 
English  arcs,  that  between  Dunnose  and  Burleigh  Moor;  and  a different  method  of 
calculating  the  attraction  is  given. 

1.  Calculation  of  the  Ellipticity  of  the  English  Arc  between  Dunnose  and  Burleigh 

Moor,  without  taking  account  of  Local  Attraction. 

2.  The  data  for  this  calculation  are  taken  from  Mudge’s  ‘Trigonometrical  Survey 
of  England,’  vols.  ii.  iii.,  and  are  as  follows  : — 


Arc  between 

Amplitude. 

Arc  in  feet. 

Latitude  of  middle  point. 

1.  Dunnose  and  Greenwich  

2.  Greenwich  and  Blenheim  

3.  Blenheim  and  Arbury  Hill  

4.  Arbury  Hill  and  Clifton  

5.  Clifton  and  Burleigh  Moor  

o / // 

0 51  31-39 

0 21  47-90 

0 23  0-30 

1 14  3-40 

1 6 50-11 

313696-0 

132802-0 

139822-0 

450045-3 

406462-9 

51  2 53-316 

51  39  33-316 

52  1 57-831 

52  50  29-580 

54  0 56-335 

Captain  Kater  has  shown,  by  an  examination  of  the  scale  employed,  that  the  lengths 
of  the  arcs  in  feet  should  all  be  corrected  by  multiplying  by  O’OOOO/  and  adding  the 
results ; but  as  I shall  use  only  the  ratios  of  these  arcs  to  each  other,  this  correction 
need  not  be  applied. 

3.  From  these  data  I now  proceed  to  compare  these  five  subdivisions  of  the  arc 
between  Dunnose  and  Burleigh  Moor,  two  and  two,  and  thence  deduce  the  ten  values 
of  the  ellipticity  which  the  ten  combinations  will  give,  and  the  arithmetic  mean  of 
them,  which  will  be  a fair  representation  of  the  mean  ellipticity  of  the  whole  arc,  upon 
the  supposition  that  the  above  amplitudes  are  correct ; that  is,  upon  the  supposition 
that  there  is  no  local  attraction. 


32 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL 


Let  X be  the  amplitude  of  any  one  of  these  arcs^  expressed  in  seconds  of  a degree ; 
jM-  the  latitude  of  its  middle  point ; 
a the  number  of  feet  in  the  arc  ; 

a the  semi-axis  major  of  the  ellipse  to  which  the  arc  belongs  ; 
e the  ellipticity  of  the  arc. 

Then,  by  the  Integral  Calculus, 

a f /I  , 3 sin  A ^ \ . 1 o / . - sin  A \1 

_=x|1-£(^2  + 2 cosXcos 

neglecting  the  cube  and  higher  powers  of  s ; 

af,  . /I  . 3 sin  A ^ \ 

,„/l,3sinA  sin  A xl 

+ ^ ( 2 + 2 “IT  ) “l6^  + ^^  ~A~  ^ f- 

The  coefficient  of  in  this  may  be  written  thus : 

1 r3  , 15  sin  A , ^ sin  A ^ ^ /sin  A\^/  5 A \ , „ 1 

4(4+4  — cos X+6  —cos  2^+9 (—)  (l-g  i^)cos'‘2f.|. 

Since  tan?i  is  always  greater  than  X,  the  coefficient  of  cos^2[jt,  is  always  positive ; and 
therefore  the  greatest  value  which  the  coefficient  of  can  attain  is  when  cos  2/^0=!  ; 
in  which  case  it  equals 


1 /3  , 15  sin  A , ^ sin  A\  , 9/sinA\^/,  5 A \ 

iU+T  — )+4(— ) 


9 /sin  A\ ^ , 


or  3 — g X^,  neglecting  higher  powers  of  X,  which  is  alv/ays  small.  As  the  ellipticity  is 

a very  small  fraction,  and  this  coefficient  is  not  a large  number,  the  square  of  s may 
be  neglected  without  any  perceptible  error.  Hence 


^—a]  ^+H2  + 


3 sin  A 


COS 


1 , 3 sin  A 
“a” 


E = COS  2/a, 


X = -(1+£.E). 


or  if  we  make 
then 

Let  X1X2X3 ciiCi2«3 EiEaEg be  the  values  of  X,  a,  E for  the  several  arcs. 

Hence 


^.^^=H-£(E-E3), 


or 


e= 


j 

Ao  a 


2 “1 


Put 


i=A 

u 


Ei-E^ 

A, 


5-1 


E1-E2 


then 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARC. 


33 


Similar  expressions  for  a may  be  obtained  by  comparing- all  the  five  arcs  two  and  two  ; 
and  hence 

1 ( ^ 

mean  ellipticity=:j-j::2  — ? 


10  VEi-Ej- 

4.  The  following  Table  exhibits  the  values  of  E and  A for  the  several  arcs  (see 
Appendix) : — 


Values  of  E. 

Values  of  A. 

] st  arc  

0-18569 

0-00985473 

2r)d  arc  

0-15446 

0-00984850 

3rd  arc  

01 3545 

0-00987184 

4th  arc  

0-09455 

0-00987324 

5th  arc  

0-03571 

0-00986587 

From  this,  taking  the  arcs  two  and  two,  we  obtain  the  following  results  (see 
Appendix).: — 


Arcs  compared. 

Ellipticity  deduced  therefrom. 

1st  and  2nd  . 

....  +0*0202690 

1st  and  3i-d  . 

....  —0*0344944 

1st  and  4th  . 

....  —0*0205622 

1st  and  5th  . 

....  —0*0075277 

2nd  and  3i-d . 

....  —0*1244090 

2nd  and  4th  . 

....  —0*0418294 

2nd  and  5th  . 

....  —0*0148295 

3rd  and  4th  . 

....  —0*05968*22 

3rd  and  5th  . 

....  +0*0607577 

4th  and  5th  . 

....  +0*0125964 

Mean  value 


= —0-0209711  = — 


47-6846 


5.  This  mean  value  differs  widely  from  the  mean  ellipticity  of  the  whole  earth, 

which  is  about  The  discrepancy  must  arise,  either  from  the  English  arc  being 

curved  very  differently  to  the  mean  meridian  of  the  earth  and  belonging  to  an  ellipse 
of  which  the  polar  axis  is  greater  than  the  equatorial  in  the  ratio  of  48*6846  : 47*6846, 
or  from  the  amplitudes  being  incorrectly  determined.  In  this  i assume  that  the  arcs 
themselves  are  measured  with  such  exactness  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  error 
in  the  ellipticity  from  this  source.  (An  error  of  100  feet  would  not  make  an  error  of 
1"  in  the  amplitude.) 

It  is  evident  that  the  latter  is  the  true  cause  of  the  ellipticity  coming  out  so  differ- 
ent to  the  mean  ellipticity  of  the  earth ; for  the  ellipticities  deduced  from  the  com- 
parison of  the  several  subdivisions  of  the  arc,  two  and  two,  would  not  vary  among 
themselves,  as  the  last  Table  shows  they  do,  if  the  whole  arc  were  elliptic.  It  may 

MDCCCLVI.  F 


34 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL 


be  concluded  that  the  true  cause  is  error  in  the  amplitudes,  or  in  the  latitudes  of  the 
stations  terminating  the  several  arcs.  And  as  these  latitudes  have  been  deduced 
from  the  most  careful  observations,  it  must  be  inferred  that  the  errors  arise  from 
local  attraction  affecting  the  plumb-line. 

6.  An  examination  of  the  values  of  A deduced  above  will  serve  to  show  where  the 
chief  sources  of  attraction  lie. 

If  the  elements  of  the  mean  meridian  of  the  earth  be  taken  (as  laid  down  by 
Mr.  Airy  in  his  Article  on  the  Figure  of  the  Earth)  to  be 

a=209237l3  feet,  £=^^1:8’ 

then  the  formula  for  A in  art.  3.  leads  to  the  following  values  of  A for  arcs  with  their 
middle  latitudes  the  same  as  those  of  the  subdivisions  of  the  English  arc  under  con- 
sideration [the  calculation  is  given  in  the  Appendix] : — 

1st  arc,  value  of  A=0’00986402  . 

2nd  arc,  value  of  A=0'00986300 
3rd  arc,  value  of  A = 0 00986238 
4th  arc,  value  of  A = 0'00986104 
5th  arc,  value  of  A=0'00985911 

If  we  take  the  differences  between  these  and  the  values  before  deduced,  we  have 

1st  arc,  defect  of  A below  the  mean  =0*0000929 
2nd  arc,  defect  of  A below  the  mean  =0*0001450 
3rd  arc,  excess  of  A above  the  mean  =0*0000946 
4th  arc,  excess  of  A above  the  mean  =0*0001220 
5th  arc,  excess  of  A above  the  mean  =0*0000676 

If  these  are  multiplied  by  the  lengths  of  the  several  arcs,  the  results  will  be  the 
errors  in  the  amplitudes  ; that  is,  on  the  supposition  that  the  ellipticity  of  the  arc  is 
the  same  as  the  mean  ellipticity  of  the  whole  earth,  and  that  the  discrepancies  in  the 
amplitudes  arise  from  local  attraction  alone. 

The  results  are  as  follows  (see  Appendix): — • 

// 

1st  arc,  amplitude  is  in  defect  2*914 
2nd  arc,  amplitude  is  in  defect  1*926 
3rd  arc,  amplitude  is  in  excess  1*323 
4th  arc,  amplitude  is  in  excess  5*491 
5th  arc,  amplitude  is  in  excess  2*748 

From  this  it  appears  that  the  local  attraction  is  so  distributed  as  to  make  the  observed 
zeniths  of  Dunnose  and  Greenwich,  and  also  of  Greenwich  and  Blenheim,  to  approach 
each  otlier,  and  those  of  the  extremities  of  the  other  three  arcs  to  recede  from  each 
other ; and  that  in  the  degree  marked  by  the  above  angles. 

7.  In  the  following  diagram  I lay  down  these  angles  (on  an  exaggerated  scale)  in 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARC. 


35 


order  to  represent  to  the  eye  the  effects  produced  by  local  attraction.  The  parallel 
dotted  lines  are  the  positions  which  the  verticals  at  the  several  stations  would  assume, 


when  corrected  for  local  attraction,  if  the  arc  were  bent  up  into  a straight  line  at  right 
angles  to  the  vertical  at  Arbury  Hill,  which  is  the  station  nearest  to  the  middle  of  the 
arc.  The  other  lines  passing  through  the  stations  of  the  arc  show  the  direction  and 
relative  magnitude  (the  actual  magnitude  would  be  hardly  discernible)  of  the  de- 
flection of  the  plumb-line  at  the  other  five  stations  relatively  to  that  at  Arbury  Hill. 

This  diagram  shows  that  the  plumb-line  at  Arbury  Hill  and  Greenwich  is  nearly 
equally  affected,  and  that  on  the  Arbury  side  of  Blenheim  there  must  be  more 
attracting  matter  than  on  the  Greenwich  side.  At  Clifton  the  plumb-line  is  drawn 
much  to  the  south,  and  still  more  so  at  Burleigh  Moor,  as  might  be  expected  from 
its  proximity  to  the  sea. 

8.  The  chief  peculiarity  is  in  the  arc  between  Dunnose  and  Greenwich.  As  Dun- 
nose  is  on  the  south  coast  of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  it  might  have  been  (a  jonori)  expected 
that  the  plumb-line  would  have  been  drawn  considerably  northward,  so  as  to  increase 
the  amplitude  between  that  place  and  Greenwich,  whereas  it  is  diminished.  This 
peculiarity  must  arise  from  the  character  of  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Dun- 
nose  and  the  form  of  the  coast  there.  That  there  is  some  peculiar  arrangement  of 
the  mass  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dunnose,  more  lying  on  the  south  of  its  parallel 
than  on  the  north,  appears  from  the  table  of  differences  of  amplitude  between  South- 
ampton and  Dunnose,  Boniface  Down,  Week  Down,  and  Port  Valley,  given  at  p.  xl 
of  the  Introduction  to  Captain  Yolland’s  ‘Astronomical  Observations  made  with 
Airy’s  Zenith  Sector,’  published  in  1852.  The  following  is  the  Table  alluded  to: — 


Amplitudes. 

G— A. 

Geodetical. 

Astronomical. 

Southampton  and  Dunnose  

Southampton  and  Boniface  Down  ... 

Southampton  and  Week  Down  

Southampton  and  Port  Valley 

Southampton  and  Black  Down  

0°  17  43-24 

0 18  37-36 

0 18  56-71 

0 19  1*58 

0 13  36-69 

0 17  39-53 

0 18  36-13 

0 18  55-26  . 
0 19  1-16 

0 13  37-79 

-P3-71 
-f  1-23 
-1-1-45 
-1-0-42 
— 1-10 

F 2 


36 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL 


For  the  position  of  these  places  see  Plate  II.  Three  of  them  are  in  the  Isle  of 
Wight,  south  of  the  parallel  of  Dunnose.  The  Table  shows  that  the  plumb-line  at 
Dunnose  is  affected  in  the  southerly  direction  with  reference  to  each  of  these  three 
places,  Boniface  Down,  Week  Down,  and  Port  Valley,  to  a considerable  degree, 
viz.  2"'48,  2"'26,  and  3"‘29 ; and  therefore  there  must  be  some  large  mass  in  the  im- 
mediate neighbourhood  of  Dunnose  Station  between  its  parallel  and  that  of  Boniface 
Down.  The  Table  show's  that  the  amplitude  between  the  parallel  of  Southampton 
and  Black  Down  on  the  Dorsetshire  coast  is  increased — as  we  should  expect.  This 
confirms  the  supposition  that  there  is  some  peculiarity  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  south  of 
Dunnose,  which  an  actual  geographical  survey  can  alone  determine. 

9.  The  calculation  I have  gone  through,  in  the  last  article  but  two,  shows  that  the 
amplitude  of  the  whole  arc  between  Dunnose  and  Burleigh  Moor  is  increased  by 
local  attraction  to  the  amount  of  4"'722. 

10.  This  discussion  of  the  arc  between  Dunnose  and  Burleigh  Moor  suggests  the 
importance  of  obtaining,  in  the  best  way  we  can,  the  amount  of  local  attraction  at 
the  several  stations  of  the  arc  by  some  direct  means,  that  the  corrections  may  be 
applied  to  the  amplitudes  before  they  are  used  in  the  Problem  of  the  Figure  of  the 
Earth.  For  although  these  errors  in  the  amplitudes  are  rendered  less  injurious  to 
the  result  by  comparing  the  arc  with  other  arcs  separated  from  it  considerably 
in  latitude,  an  arc  which  per  se  leads  to  so  unusual  an  ellipticity  cannot  be  so  safely 
employed  in  the  general  problem,  as  when  it  is  freed  from  the  source  of  error  which 
seems  to  lead  to  that  ellipticity. 

11.  It  may  in  the  end  appear,  even  after  the  corrections  for  local  attraction  are 
applied,  that  the  curvature  of  the  English  arc  is  different  from  the  mean  curvature, 
and,  as  I have  stated  in  my  foianer  |)aper,  the  science  of  geology  w'ould  tend  rather 
to  favour  such  a conception.  But  even  in  that  case,  the  values  of  the  ellipticities 
of  the  separate  portions  of  the  arc  must  present  a much  more  uniform  appearance 
than  those  deduced  in  this  paper  from  the  present  data  (see  art.  4.). 

I proceed  now  to  the  second  part  of  this  communication,  to  obtain  a formula  for 
calculating  the  attraction. 

II.  Investigation  of  a Formula  for  calculating  the  amount  of  Local  Attraction  on  any 

Station. 

12.  In  the  former  paper  I obtained  a formula  for  calculating  the  attraction  by 
supposing  the  superficial  mass  cut  into  lanes  by  great  circles  passing  through  the 
attracted  station,  and  the  limes  divided  into  compartments  according  to  a certain 
law.  'File  formula  thence  deduced  may  be  applied  to  attraction  in  England.  But  I 
will  now  deduce  another  foi  niida  which  in  some  cases  may  be  found  more  con- 
venient in  practice.  Tlie  former  tnethod  takes  account  of  the  curvature  of  the  earth, 
and  determines  the  attraction  of  any  masses  lying  anywhere  above  the  sea-level 
lietween  the  given  station  and  the  antipodes.  In  the  present  instance  I shall  suppose 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGIRSH  ARC. 


37 


the  attracting-  mass  to  lie  wholly  on  a plane — a supposition  which  will  lead  to  no  error 
in  the  calculation  of  attraction  on  stations  in  the  British  Isles. 

13.  Let  the  horizontal  plane  through  the  station  be  taken  as  the  plane  of  xy,  the 
axes  ofxand  1/  being  chosen  in  such  a position  (at  right  angles  to  each  other)  as  may 
be  found  in  any  particular  case  most  convenient  for  the  application  of  the  resulting 
formula.  Let  « be  measured  vertically  downwards.  Suppose  the  attracting  mass 
cut  by  vertical  planes,  parallel  to  the  co-ordinate  planes,  into  a number  of  masses 
on  rectangular  bases — the  bases  being  of  any  size,  large  or  small,  and  if  necessary 
all  different  from  each  other,  the  dimensions  of  each  being  determined  by  the  contour 
of  the  upper  surface  of  the  mass,  so  that  a fair  average  height  of  the  mass  may  be 
easily  found.  The  smaller  the  parallelograms  are  the  more  accurate  will  be  the 
result,  but  then  they  will  be  more  numerous  and  the  calculation  more  tedious.  The 
nearer  the  parallelograms  are  to  the  station,  and  also  the  more  irregular  the  contour 
of  the  country,  the  more  attention  will  be  required  to  make  a judicious  dissection  of 
the  mass.  By  supposing  the  several  divisions  thus  made  to  be  levelled  down  to  their 
average  height  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  1 conceive  the  whole  attracting  body  to 
consist  of  a number  of  tabular  masses  of  various  dimensions. 

Let  A be  the  station  on  which  the  attraction 
is  to  be  found  ; Kx,  hy  the  axes  of  x and  y ; 

BCDE  the  projection  on  the  plane  of  xy  of  a 
tabular  mass,  lying  in  contact  with  the  ver- 
tical plane  zx,  and  very  near  to  the  plane  %y  ; 

AB  = m;  X,  Y coordinates  to  the  furthest  angle 
D ; xyz  coordinates  to  any  point  in  the  mass; 

H the  height  of  the  mass,  its  base  being  on  the 
sea-level  ; h he  height  of  A above  the  sea  ; both 

H and  h I suppose  to  be  small  compared  with  X and  Y,  so  that  the  squares  of  ^ and  y 
may  be  neglected  ; § the  density  of  the  mass. 

Then  §dxdydz  is  the  mass  of  an  element, 

qdxdydz 


y 

E 1 

" ZJ 

a 

c 

1 

A 

B 

H 

c 

a' 

a' 

y 

E' 

D 

qxdxdydz 


its  attraction  on  A, 

its  attraction  on  A parallel  to  x. 


{x^-i-y^  + z^\^ 

Hence,  whole  attraction  of  the  tabular  mass  on  A parallel  to  x 

xdxdydz 


{x^ 


from  x—m  to  x=X, 

3/  = 0 t0  3/=Y, 
z=ih — H to  z — h. 


Integrating  first  with  respect  toy,  then  2,  and  then  x, 

xdxdz 


attraction 


,38 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL 

xdxdz 


{x^  + z^)  »^x^  + YH  " + Y2 

xdxdz 


' + z’^)  \/x^  + Y‘^ 

-si.rr.  xdxdz  ! ?>x^  -f  2 Y^  ^ 


=?fl: 


{x^  + Y^)^\  + 


(l— 2(^2^'Yg)),  neglecting  ;s",  &c. 

) 


_£Yf — ^ — 5|(3j?^+2Y^)  tan"*-— const. 

2j(a^2  + Y2)^r  ^ ^ a?  ^ 


Put 


-iZ 

2 Xx^+Y^)^\ 

+•••+(-1)’ 

2n  + \' 


X 


{x'^  + Y^^f 
A-(A-H)  A3-(^-H)^ 

X 3a^ 


^2«+l_(^_  JJ)2»+1 

(2w  + l)a;^“+' 


K -A_L_/i  ^ 

r^2«+l  — JJ  2w+l|^  A 


The  maximum  value  of  this  coefficient  is  ^ This  may  be  proved  by  putting 

A=H  sin^^,  or  H = Asin®^,  according  as  h is  less  or  greater  than  H,  and  finding  the 
maximum  by  the  Differential  Calculus. 

Hence,  attraction  of  whole  mass  parallel  to  x 


=1  fY  f f-^-i  2^^ + (2  - 3K3/O- 


' + Y2) 

. (2  Y^K3- 3K,/o5+ ...  + (- 1 )n2Y^K,„^- 

h 


or,  since  the  squares  of  y be  neglected 


^{x^+Y^f 
Now  by  the  Integral  Calculus, 

dx  2n  + 1 dx 


I 

'■■J 


and 


dx  2n+\ 

fX  dx 

Jn 


1+^ 


v'a;2  + Y2~Y2\X2™  v^X^  + Y^  -C 


_r_n.l2  ^”-1  L 

V U 2 4'“  2ra  Y2”+* 


a;2»  + l 

+ 27^YW»{^^^^'^- Y' ( 1 - 2^  T2+”-  + (~^)"''I'--L:^(y)  +•••) 

-y>w(i-|£iS+^^^+(-i)-i.^S($r+^.^)(;)-l. 


. , X^+\/l  + Y2 

L=lo&.  - 


m 


1 + 


/ . X2 

\/  l + ya 


where 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARC. 


39 


171  171 

I shall  make  m so  small  that  the  squares  and  higher  powers  of  ^ and  y be 


neglected.  Hence  these  formulse  become 


I 

I 


dx 


2n+  i 


Y2)2 

^ dx 


V ^ 0 A 


dx 


2 4 


2n  ~ 2ra  Y nd" 


and 


L=log, 


X 

m 


1 + 


^/ 


, X2 

1 + ya 


These  formulse  fail  when  n—0 ; but  in  that  case 

dx  L . 1 / 1 


I 


V3“h 


. x{x^+Y^f  Y^^Y^V  VX^  + Y^  Vm^  + Y^ 


2 + Y2) 


by  direct  integration. 


L-l 


Y3 


also 


f 


xdx 


Y2  vx^  + y^ 

1 I 


{x^  + Y'^f  Vm^  + Y^  VX:^  + Y^~Y  ^/X2+Y2 

Substituting  these  in  the  expression  for  the  attraction, 
Attraction  of  the  whole  mass  on  A parallel  to  x 


h 


Y^  Y ' VX^  + Y^ 
1 h h^' 


IK-  f-lLj  1 A 
+ ^3(^2  Y3^“2  Y mV 

+ .... 

IK  I / ^ 

“•"^2m+i^2  4”'  2n  2n  Y m^V 


+ 


} 


=fH[L(l+|K.^+...+|| 


3 5 2»+l^- 

Jv, 


2n 


^2»+ 


1Y2»“  J 


/I  ^ 1 ^ ^ K A!_L  M 

r(~  V ^^2«+i,„2n+‘-y  | 5 

or,  neglecting  the  squares  and  higher  powers  of  y’ 

=fH{L-(iK,^,-iK.5+...  + (-l)-iK,„,^+..)}. 

It  has  been  laid  down  that  h and  m are  both  small  quantities.  This  expression 
shows  what  the  limiting  value  of  their  ratio  must  be,  that  this  formula  may  be 
capable  of  use. 


40 


ARCHDliACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL 


In  order  that  the  series  above  may  be  convergent, 


1 , 1 

^ ^2n  + 1^2«  — 2„_2 


must  be  less  than  unity 


^ 111  2/Z  J 

must  be  less  than  ; tt — - 
2n-l 

2n(2n+  1) 


7/r 


(2?2  — i)(2n  — 2) 

The  least  value  of  this  is  when  w=co , when  it  =1  ; 


m must  not  be  less  than  h. 

This  then  is  the  value  we  shall  give  to  m ; and  the  attraction  of  the  whole  mass  on 
A parallel  to  x 

=^h|l—  ^2  1^3—4  KsH !“(— l)”^K.2n+iH--*)j  ; 

or,  calling  the  series  S,  =:g>H(L  — S). 

14.  If  BCD'E'  be  a tabular  mass  lying  symmetrically  on  the  opposite  sifle  of  the 
axis  of  X,  the  attraction  of  this  mass  on  A parallel  to  x will  obviously  be  the  same 
as  the  attraction  of  the  mass  BCDE.  This,  indeed,  our  formula  shows  ; for  if  — Y 
be  put  for  Y it  does  not  change  the  value  of  L.  The  same  is  not  true  if  we  change 
the  sign  of  X ; the  reason  of  which  is,  that  negative  powers  of  <r  occur  in  the  inte- 
gration, and  these  all  become  infinite  as  we  pass  across  the  axis  of  y from  x—m  to 
X—  —X.  On  account  of  this  we  must  calculate  the  attraction  of  the  masses  all  lying 
on  one  side  of  y and  add  them  together,  and  then  separately  those  on  the  other  side 
and  add  them  together,  and  take  the  difference  of  the  results. 

15.  The  tabular  mass  has  been  hitherto  supposed  to  be  always  in  contact  with  the 
axis  of  X,  and  at  a small  distance  m from  that  of  y,  and  is  therefore  restricted  in  its 
position.  I will  now,  however,  deduce  a more  general  formula. 

Draw  ah  and  a!h'  at  equal  distances  parallel  to  x on  opposite  sides  ; and  let  Bff=j/. 

Then  the  attraction  of  either  of  the  masses  aC  or  a'C  on  A parallel  to  x, 


' 

^ X ^ 

■ 

log'. 

m 

— S 

S being  independent  of  the  coordinates  X,  y.  ^Subtracting  this  from  the  attraction 
of  EC,  and  adding  it  also,  we  have, 

Attractions  of  tabular  masses  E6  and  E6' 


v 


. I 

1 H — ^ + ] 
V 

I , 

1 + Y2"^  ^ 


and  ^11 


loge 


X2 


m 


Y2 


-2S 


log. 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARC. 


41 


Now  draw  FGHG'  parallel  to  the  axis  of?/,  and  let  AH=^.  Then  the  attractions  of 
tabular  masses  on  ¥b  and  Fb'—  those  of  the  masses  on  Fb  and  Fb'—  those  of  the 
masses  on  EG  and  EG' : hence 

Attraction  on  A parallel  to  x of  the  tabular  masses  on  Fb  and  Fb'— 


log. 


and  fli  log. 


+ 1 


These  may  be  written  in  the  following  form  : — 


f H log. 


V‘*S*5  \/'*S+l 


and  fH  log. 


If  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  the  fraction  under  the  logarithm  in  the  second 
of  these  be  multiplied  by 

its  value  will  not  be  changed,  but  it  will  become 


fH  log. 


Now  this  is  precisely  the  same  as  the  first  when  —y  is  put  for  y ; and  it  is  only  in 
this  change  of  sign  my  that  the  parallelogram  F^'  differs  from  Fb.  Hence  the  first 
formula  includes  the  second,  and  is  applicable  to  all  tabular  masses  lying  on  the  right 
(or  the  positive  side)  of  the  axis  of  j/,  on  either  side  of  x.  It  will  be  observed,  how- 
ever, that  the  same  is  not  true  of  Y in  this  formula,  as  may  easily  be  seen  by  going 
through  a process  similar  to  this  transformation  for  ?/.  We  must  therefore  remember 
not  to  let  Y be  negative.  The  way  to  obviate  this  in  the  use  of  the  formula  is  to 
make  the  direction  in  which  Y is  measured  in  any  particular  case  the  direction  of 
positive  ordinates  for  that  case,  and  then  y will  be  positive  or  negative  as  it  lies  on 
the  same  or  the  opposite  side  of  the  axis  of  x from  Y. 

16.  The  formula  can  be  very  much  simplified  as  follows. 

Put  — = tan  ^1,  ^ = tan  0^,  ^ = tan  6.^,  - = tan  6^ ; 


Y 1 + sin  5, 

X cos  Sj 


— tan  ^45°-j-2 

and  similarly  of  the  others. 


MDCCCLVI. 


G 


42 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL 


Hence,  since  0*43429  is  the  modulus  of  common  logarithms, 

attraction=Q:^^|log  tan  + log  tan  ^45°+^ 

- log  tan  (^45°+^  — log  tan  (^45°+^ 

17.  A similar  formula  is  true  for  the  attraction  parallel  to  the  axis  of  3/ ; and  may 
be  obtained  from  the  above  by  interchanging  X and  Y,  x and  3/. 

‘18.  As  a kind  of  test  of  the  truth  of  the  formula  deduced  in  the  last  article  but 
two,  let  X=a:-j-dx  and  In  this  case  the  tabular  mass  becomes  an 

elementary  vertical  prism  of  height  H and  base  dx.dy  \ and  by  expanding  in  powers 

of  dx  and  dv  the  expression  comes  out,  as  it  should,  attraction  i= 

19.  The  attraction  of  the  earth  on  a point  at  its  surface,  that  is,  gravity 


47r 


(^)=— D.a,  where  D is  the  mean  density  of  the  earth,  and  a the  radius, 


D = 


At:  a 


and  the  coefficient  of  the  last  formula  in  art.  16 

3 q 9 


^ TT 

~-434  47r(-434)  D a 


Let  the  density  of  the  attracting  mass  be  taken  to  be  that  of  granite*,  that  is,  about 


* Should  the  density  dilFer  from  this  in  any  particular  case  of  application  of  the  formula,  especially  for  parts 
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  plumb-line,  then  the  coefficient  must  be  altered  in  proportion. 

Judging  from  the  following  Table,  which  is  taken  from  Colonel’s  Sabine’s  volume  on  the  Pendulum,  p.  338^ 
it  would  appear  that  pendulum  experiments  afford  a good  means  of  measuring  the  relative  density  of  the  parts 
of  the  earth’s  crust  near  the  place  of  observation.  He  gives  this  as  the  result  of  his  calculations  on  the  subject : — 


Stations. 

Excess  or  defect 
of  vilirations. 

Scale  of  density 
[of  the  strata  beneath]. 

St.  Thomas  

+ 5-58 

100 

Ascension  

-f  5-04 

94 

Spitzbergen  

+ 3-50 

79 

Jamaica  

-1-0-28 

45 

New  York  

-f  0-00 

43 

Greenland  

-0-08 

43 

Sierra  Leone 

— 0-12 

42 

London  

-0-28 

41 

Hammerfest  

-0-52 

37 

Bahia 

— 1-80 

26 

Drontheim 

—3-10 

12 

Trinidad 

— 4-12 

2 

Maranham 

— 4-34 

1 

Thus  pendulum  experiments  seem  well  calculated  to  test  the  existence  of  local  attraction,  at  any  rate  the 
vertical  part  of  it.  But  they  can  be  of  no  service  in  determining  the  part  of  local  attraction  which  is  effective 
in  deflecting  the  plumb-line,  except  in  determining  the  density  of  the  attracting  mass ; for  the  part  which  is 
effective  in  one  case  is  entirely  inoperative  in  the  other.  If  G be  the  force  of  local  attraction,  and  this  be 
resolved  into  two  forces,  V vertical  and  H horizontal,  then  H is  the  only  part  which  has  any  sensible  effect  in 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARC. 


43 


half  the  mean  density  of  the  earth;  and  put  n=20923713  feet.  Then  the  above 
coefficient  =^6X^7500  ^ being-  expressed  in  feet.  Hence  also 

Tangent  of  angle  of  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  at  A in  the  vertical  plane  through 
X caused  by  the  tabular  mass  on  F6 

= attraction  parallel  to  x-^g 

=76i^50Q{*og  tan(^45°-f  ^ ^i)  +log  tan(^45°-l-^  ^2) 

- log  tan  (45° -fi  ^3)  - log  tan  (45°+^  ^4)  j ; 
or,  angle  of  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  in  the  vertical  plane  through  x 

=~  njlog  tan  (^45°+^  -flog  tan^45°-f  ^ ^3) 

— log  tan  (45°-f  i ^3)  — log  tan  (45°+^  ^4) 

20.  From  this  easily  flows  the  following  Rule  for  calculating  the  deviation  caused 
in  the  plumb-line  in  any  plane  by  the  attraction  of  a tabular  mass  of  which  the  height 
above  the  sea-level  is  H feet. 

Take  the  origin  of  coordinates  at  the  station  where  the  plumh-line  is.  Let  the  jilane 
of  xy  be  horizontal,  and  the  axis  of  x in  the  vertical  plane  in  which  the  amount  of  de- 
flection is  to  be  found. 

Write  down  the  coordinates  XY  xy  of  the  furthest  and  nearest  angles  of  the  tabular 
mass  from  the  origin  ; Y is  always  to  he  considered  positive,  and  y positive  or  negative 
accordingly . 

Form  four  ratios,  by  first  dividing  each  ordinate  by  the  abscissa  not  belonging  to  it, 
and  then  by  dividing  each  ordinate  by  its  own  abscissa,  viz.  —3 

Look  in  a Table  of  Tangents  for  the  four  angles  of  which  the  tangents  equal  the 
above  ratios. 

Form  four  more  angles  by  adding  (subtracting  if  they  be  negative)  half  of  each  of  - 
these  angles  just  found  to  45°. 

From  the  sum  of  the  log-tangents  of  the  first  two  of  these  angles  subtract  the  sum  of 
the  log-tangents  of  the  second  two. 

This  result,  multiplied  by  H feet  and  by  will  give  the  required  deflection  in 
seconds  of  a degree. 

deflecting  the  plumb-line ; and  V is  the  only  part  which  has  any  influence  in  altering  the  time  of  vibration  of 
the  pendulum,  as  it  is  easily  proved  that  a small  constant  horizontal  force,  though  it  affects  the  arc  of  vibration, 
has  no  effect  on  the  time  of  vibration.  Thus  the  determinations  of  local  attraction  by  the  pendulum  cannot 
assist  in  determining  the  effect  of  local  attraction  on  the  plumb-line,  except  in  as  far  as  they  assist  in  pointing 
out  the  relative  density  of  the  mass  which  deranges  the  normal  state  of  things. 

G 2 


44 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL 


The  simplicity  of  this  Rule  will  be  seen  in  the  application  I propose  to  make  of  it 
in  the  next  section. 

It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  only  restriction  to  be  attended  to  in  the  applica- 
tion of  this  Rule  is,  that  the  ratio  of  the  height  of  the  attracted  station  above  the  sea 
to  each  of  the  horizontal  coordinates  of  the  nearest  angle  of  the  attracting  mass  must 
be  small,  and  so  small  that  its  square  may  be  neglected. 

If  any  part  of  the  attracting  mass  is  nearer  to  the  station  than  this,  the  approxi- 
mate formula  must  for  that  part  of  the  mass  be  abandoned,  and  a direct  calculation 
made 

III.  Application  of  the  Formula  to  obtain  a rough  approximation  to  the  meridian 
defection  of  the  Plumh-line  at  Burleigh  Moor. 

21.  In  the  Plate  attached  to  this  paper,  an  outline  sketch  is  given  of  the  east 
of  England,  with  a view  to  show  how  the  land  lies  with  reference  to  Burleigh 
Moor — the  station  to  which  I now  propose  to  apply  the  formula,  by  way  of  illustra- 
tion, with  the  scanty  data  which  I have  been  able  as  yet  to  obtain.  By  the  help  of 
accurate  survey  maps  no  doubt  a very  close  approximation  might  be  obtained  to  the 
actual  amount  of  the  deflection,  not  only  at  Burleigh  Moor,  but  at  the  other  stations. 
The  data  used  in  this  calculation  are  taken  from  the  outline  map  of  England  in  the 
third  volume  of  General  Mudge’s  Account  of  the  English  Survey,  published  in  1811. 
A number  of  heights  of  stations  are  marked  down  on  the  map ; and  it  is  from  these, 
as  I have  no  other  source  of  information,  that  I have  inferred  the  average  height  of 
the  masses  into  which  I divide  the  land.  But  as  these  heights,  as  I conjecture, 
almost  all  appertain  to  elevated  points,  visible  from  a distance  for  the  purposes  of  the 
survey,  their  average  will  be  much  greater  than  the  average  height  of  the  country  to 
which  they  appertain.  I have  taken  the  height  of  the  masses  equal  to  three-fifths  of 
the  average  height  above  the  sea  of  the  various  stations  belonging  to  that  mass.  The 
result  which  I arrive  at  will  therefore  be  only  a rough  approximation,  for  want  of 

* If  XY  are  the  horizontal  coordinates  to  the  middle  of  a vertical  prism,  of  which  the  height  measured  from 
the  sea-level  is  H,  h being  the  height  of  the  station,  and  A the  area  (in  squEire  feet)  of  the  horizontal  section 
of  the  prism ; then,  if  A be  small,  the  horizontal  attraction  of  the  prism  parallel  to  x 

_ pAX  f h , H-  A 1 

X2  + Y2  { v/X2-i-Y2-f/j«  ^X‘^-l-Y2-f  (H-Ay^J  ' 

By  the  same  reasoning  as  in  art.  19,  this 

__p  AX  f h H— A 1 g 

*“5  X^  + Y2  \ //X^+Y^T^'^  J 8764500’ 

D being  the  mean  density  of  the  earth,  and  A being  expressed  in  square  feet,  XYHA  in  feet. 

Or,  the  angle  of  deflection,  in  the  vertical  plane  through  the  axis  of  x,  caused  by  this  prism 

_p  AX  f h H-A  I 1" 

D X*-f  Y'^  1 4/X2-t- Y2-1-A2  4/X“-f-Y2-t-(H-A)^/  424-9' 

The  value  of  this  must  be  found  for  each  of  the  vertical  prisms  near  the  station,  and  their  sum  taken. 


ArrRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGEISH  ARC. 


45 


more  accurate  data.  But  the  calculation  may  be  useful  to  illustrate  the  use  of  the 
formula. 

22-  If  a meridian  line  be  drawn  about  thirty  miles  west  of  Burleigh  Moor,  the 
resultant  attraction  on  that  place  of  the  portion  of  the  British  Isles  to  the  west  of 
that  line  will  be  due  west  or  nearly  so,  whatever  be  its  amount,  which  is  doubtless 
smali.  For  the  mountain  region  of  Cumberland  and  Westmoreland  lies  due  west; 
and  those  of  Scotland  and  Wales  lie  at  about  the  same  bearing  north  and  south  of  west, 
and  therefore  taking  their  mass  to  be  about  the  same  their  resultant  attraction  will 
be  west.  The  attraction  too  of  the  level  country  west  of  the  line  laid  down,  and  of 
the  table  on  which  the  mountain  regions  rest,  will  be  about  west.  So  that  we  may 
conclude  that  the  part  of  the  land  which  is  effective  in  deflecting  the  plumb-line  at 
Burleigh  Moor  in  the  plane  of  the  meridian  is  that  portion  which  lies  east  of  the 
line. 

This  tract  of  country  I divide  into  four  portions.  A,  B,  C,  D,  as  marked  in  the  Plate. 
The  small  irregular  portions  a and  b on  opposite  sides  of  the  station  I suppose  to 
counteract  each  other.  The  station  itself  I suppose  to  be  in  the  centre  of  a neutral 
parallelogram,  of  which  the  north  and  east  sides  are  the  average  line  of  sea  cliff  in 
that  neighbourhood.  The  distances  of  these  cliffs  1 put  down  as  3 and  10  miles. 
This  I deduce  merely  from  the  map  in  the  account  of  the  Survey : it  is  in  these 
assumptions  regaiding  the  parts  nearest  the  station  that  the  chief  sources  of  error 
will  lie  in  the  present  calculation,  from  insufficient  data.  The  portion  to  the  west  of 
the  station,  marked  c,  will  have  no  effect  in  the  direction  of  the  meridian. 

The  mass  A will  produce  a deflection  northward  ; the  other  masses,  southward. 
The  average  heights  I take  to  be  505,  628,  448,  394  feet  above  the  sea-level. 

23.  The  following  Table  is  formed  from  the  formula  given  in  art.  16,  according  to 
the  Rule  laid  down  in  art.  20. 


46 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL 


Coordinates. 

Ratios. 

Ratios 
in  decimals. 

First  angles. 

Second  angles. 

Log-tangents. 

Results. 

For  A (lying  to  the  north  of  the  parallel  through  Burleigh  Moor). 

miles 

30 

0 / II 

0 1 li 

0-1825496 

X = 23 

10-0000000 

84  17  20 

87  8 40 

1-3020723 

10 

23  “ 

Deflection 

Y = 30 

0-4347826 

23  29  50 

56  44  55 

0-1833190 

in  merid". 
505 

X =■  3 

30 

23  ~ 

1-3043478 

52  31  20 

71  15  40 

0-4694955 

x^=_0"«0 

y = 10 

10 

3 ~ 

3-3333333 

73  18  0 

81  39  0 

0-8333462 

For  B (lying  to  the  south). 

X = 40 

30  _ 

3 ~ 

10-0000000 

84  17  30 

87  8 45 

1-3022389 

1-8638725 

16 

Y = 30 

40  ~ 

— 0-4000000 

—21  48  2 

34  5 59 

r-8306l68 

628  ,,  ^ 

30 

X 369  = + 

X = 3 

40  ~ 

0-7500000 

36  52  6 

63  26  3 

0-3010169 

y =-16 

16 

~Y  ~ 

— 5-3333333 

—79  23  10 

5 18  25 

2-9679663 

For  C. 

X = 88 

32  _ 
40  “ 

0-8000000 

38  39  35 

64  19  47 

0-3181903 

0-3192385 

II  II 

O ^0 

30  _ 

m ~ 

32 

88  ~ 

-0-3409091 

0-3636364 

— 18  49  30 

19  59  0 

35  35  15 

54  59  30 

r-8546701 

0-1546388 

x|g=+«».388 

y =-30 

30  _ 
40  — 

— 0-7500000 

-36  52  6 

26  33  57 

T-6989831 

For  D. 

X = 270 

80  _ 
88  ~ 

0-9090909 

42  16  26 

66  8 13 

0-3542184 

0-3278590 

Y = 80 

X ■=■  88 

30  _ 
270~ 
80 

270~ 

— 0-1111111 

0-2962963 

- 6 20  30 

16  30  15 

41  49  45 

53  15  7 

1-9518325 

0-1268639 

X II  = + 0"-350 

30 

y =-30 

~ ^ ~ 

-0-3490909 

-19  14  38 

35  22  41 

r-8513280 

Total  deflection  to  south  = 3"'660 


24.  Hence,  according'  to  this  rough  approximation,  the  deflection  of  the  plumb-line 
at  Burleigh  Moor  to  the  south  is  3"-660.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  attraction  of 
the  space  B is  much  larger  in  its  amount  than  that  of  any  of  the  other  spaces ; in 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARC. 


47 


fact,  it  is  87  per  cent,  of  the  whole  attraction,  although  it  is  of  smaller  dimensions 
than  those  to  the  south  of  it.  This  arises  from  its  proximity  to  the  station,  its 
distance  being  put  down  as  3 miles  south  of  Burleigh  Moor — that  being  the  sup- 
posed distance  of  that  station  from  the  average  line  of  coast  on  the  north.  . If  I had 
made  this  2 miles  instead  of  3,  the  attraction  of  B would  have  produced  a deflection 
of  4"T80  instead  of  3"T72,  so  considerable  is  the  effect  of  the  parts  lying  necirest  to 
the  attracted  station.  This  shows  the  importance  of  an  accurate  survey  being  made 
of  the  neighbourhood  of  each  of  the  terminal  stations  of  the  several  portions  of  the 
arc,  that  the  local  deflections  may  be  accurately  calculated. 

25.  Should  it  prove,  on  a careful  survey  of  the  neighbourhood  of  Burleigh  Moor, 
that  the  deflection  above  deduced  is  correct,  then  the 

// 

Deflection  at  Clifton  is  . . . 0'912  to  the  south. 

Deflection  at  Arbury  Hill  is  . 4‘579  to  the  north. 

Deflection  at  Blenheim  is  . . 5'902  to  the  north. 

Deflection  at  Greenwich  is  . 3‘976  to  the  north. 

Deflection  at  Dunnose  is  . . T062  to  the  north. 

And  by  making  use  of  the  Table  from  Captain  Yolland’s  volume  quoted  in  art.  8, — 

II 

Deflection  at  Southampton  will  be  . . 4 772  to  the  north. 

Deflection  at  Boniface  Down  will  be  . 3'542  to  the  north. 

Deflection  at  Week  Down  will  be  . . 3‘322  to  the  north. 

Deflection  at  Port  Valley  will  be  . . . 4‘352  to  the  north. 

Deflection  at  Black  Down  will  be  . . 5‘872  to  the  north. 

The  coast  about  Black  Down  attains  an  altitude  of  about  800  feet,  and  the  whole  of 
England  and  Scotland  lies  north  of  it.  The  deflection,  therefore,  of  the  plumb-line  at 
that  place  deduced  above  is  about  what  might  have  been  anticipated,  viz.  5"’872 

northward,  if  the  amount  at  Burleigh  Moor  be  what  ray  calculation  brings  it  out, 

viz.  3"'660. 

But  it  is  only  an  accurate  survey  which  can  afford  data  fully  satisfactory,  upon 
which  to  base  the  calculation  of  the  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  at  the  extremities  of 
the  several  portions  of  the  arc.  When  the  true  amounts  of  deflection  are  calculated, 
and  the  amplitudes  corrected  for  local  attraction,  the  process  followed  in  art.  3 will 
bring  out  the  actual  ellipticity  of  the  English  arc  ; when  it  will  be  seen  whether  it  is 

or  is  not  more  curved  than  the  ellipticity  would  indicate. 

Deep  River,  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 

September  23,  1854. 


48 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAL. 


Arc  1. 


Arc  2. 


/ c 3. 


Arc  4. 


Ai'C  5. 


Appendix. 

Calculation  of  the  Values  of  E (see  art.  4). 


h— cos  2a 

2 2 arc  A 

, , 1*5  sinX  n 

='5+  — n-  COS  2a 

sin  1"  X"  ^ 


=•5+  Iog->^5-4905l68+  log!^+  logcos2/xj. 


2ix= 

E,= 


102°  5'  46"'6 
•5— Iog-»r5.4905l68 
I 6-6855586 
1 1-3212823 


2fj.— 

E.,= 


2/x: 

E,= 


^1-4973577J 
103°  19'  6"-6 
5_  logr-i  ''5-49051681 
6-6855720 
1-3624091 
.T-5384979J 
:104°  3'  55"-7 
•5-log-‘  r5-4905l68' 
6-6855716 
r-3856669 


=0-18569. 


:0-15446. 


2/r  = 

E.= 


2fi- 

E.: 


L1-5617553J  =0-13545. 

105°  40'  59"-2 
5—  log-1  r5-4905l68' 

'6-6855413 
T-4318788 


1-6079369J  =0-09455. 


-5—  log-1  r5-4905l68l 
6-6855475 

T-4907261 


L1'6667904. 


= 0-03571. 


Calculation  of  the  V alues  of  A (see  art.  4). 


A=Iog-i(log  X—  log  a). 


Xi  = 309 1-39 
X2=1307-90 
X3=  1380-30 
X4=4443-40 
X5  = 4010-11 


ai=313696 
a2= 132802 
a3=  139822 
a4=450045 
a5= 406463 


Ai=log-i 


'3-4901538' 

5-4965090 

>9936448. 


= 0-00985473. 


A2=log-' 


'3-1165745' 

5-1232046 

>9933699. 


= 0-00984850. 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARC. 


49 


A3=log-i 


■3-1399735' 

5-1455755 


13-9943980J  =0-00987184. 

A4=log-i  r3-6477l54' 

5-6532559 

.3-9944595J  =0-00987324. 


A5=log-i 


'3-6031562' 

5-6090210 

J-9941352J  =0-00986587. 


Calculation  of  the  Values  of  s (see  art.  4). 


Arcs  compared. 

Values  of 

'“'(li)- 

^-1. 

A2 

^'-1 

6 = '^ . 

E1-E2 

Values  of  t. 

1st  and  2nd... 

0-0002749 

+ 0-000633 

63-3  _ 
"^3123 

log-1 

'1-8014037^ 

3-4945720 

.2-3068317. 

= +0-0202690 

1st  and  3rd... 

1-9992468 

-0-001733 

l73-3_ 

5024 

log-1 

'2-2387986' 

3-7010496 

.2-5377490.. 

= —0-0344944 

1st  and  4th... 

1-9991853 

-0-008874 

187-4_ 

9114 

log-1 

'2-2727696' 

3-9597090 

.2-3130606.. 

= -0-0205622 

1st  and  5th... 

1-9995096 

-0-001129 

112-9  _ 
14998 

log-1 

'2-0526939' 

4-1760333 

.3-8766606.. 

= -0-0075277 

2nd  and  3rd.. 

1-9989719 

-0-002365 

_236-5_ 

1901 

log-1 

'2-3738311' 

3-2789801 

.1-0948510. 

= -0-1244090 

2nd  and  4th.. 

1-9989104 

-0-002506 

_250-6_ 

5991 

log-1 

'2-39898111 

3-7774993 

.2-6214818. 

= -0-0418294 

2nd  and  5th.. 

T-9992347 

-0-001761 

_ 176-1  _ 
11875 

log-1 

r2-2457594i 

4-0746336 

l2-1711258. 

= -0-0148295 

3rd  and  4th  .. 

T-9989385 

-0-002441 

_244-l_ 

4090  ~ 

log-1 

'2-3875678' 

3-6117233 

l2-7758445. 

= -0-0596822 

3rd  and  5th  .. 

0-0002628 

+ 0-000605 

60-5  _ 

log-1 

ri-7817554' 

3-9988694 

.2-782886oJ 

= + 0-0607577 

4th  and  5th  .. 

0-0003243 

+ 0-000747 

, 74-7  _ 

"^5884 

Mean 

log-1 

of  the  ten 

'1-8733206' 

3-7696727 

>1036479. 

values  of  e 

= + 0-0125964 

= — 0-0209711 
_ 1 
“ 47-6846 

MDCCCLVI 


H 


50 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OF  LOCAI 


Calculation  of  the  Values  of  A for  an  ellipse,  in  which  a =209237 1 3 


and  2 


1 

~300-8 


(see  art.  6). 


^=i(l  + E.s)=— ^/1+e). 

arc  a ojsinr'Ve  / 


=log 


'7*3206389' 

6*6855749 

2*4782778 

[4*4844916 

300*8 + E= 


300*98569 

300*95446 

300*93545 

300*89455 

300*83571. 


=log-i 


5*5155084  + 2*4785458' 
5007 
4733 
4144 
3293. 


=log- 


'3*9940542' 

3*9940091 

3*9939817 

3*9939228 

.3*9938377. 


= 0*00986402 
0*00986300 
0*00986238 
0*00986104 
0*00985911 


Differences  between  these  and 
the  former  values  of  A. 

— 0*00000929 
-0*00001450 
+ 0*00000946 
+ 0*00001220 
+ 0*00000676 


Calculation  of  the  Errors  in  amplitude  (see  art.  6). 


Multiply  these  last  differences  by  the  lengths  of  the  arcs. 


1st  arc,  amplitude  is  in  defect  log“> 


6*9680157' 

5*4965090 


0*4645247. 

2nd  arc,  amplitude  is  in  defect  log"’  r5*l6l3680 

5*1232046 

10*2845726, 


=2"*914 


:1"*926 


3rd  arc,  amplitude  is  in  excess  log"’ 

4th  arc,  amplitude  is  in  excess  log"* 

5th  arc,  amplitude  is  in  excess  log-’ 


5*9758911 

5*1455755 

.0*1214666. 

'5*0863598' 

5*6532559 

.0*7396158 

6*8299467 
5*6090210 
0^9677 J 


= 1"*323 


= 5"*491 


= 2"*748 


ATTRACTION  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  ENGLISH  ARC. 


51 


Postscript. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  I have  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  a notice  of  the 
communication  of  the  Astronomer  Royal  on  the  density  of  table-lands  supposed  to 
be  supported  by  a dense  fluid  or  semifluid  mass,  and  the  use  he  makes  of  his  sugges- 
tions to  remove  the  discrepancy,  pointed  out  in  my  first  communication,  between  the 
values  of  the  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  in  India,  as  determined  by  calculating  the 
attraction  of  the  Himalayas,  and  as  indicated  by  the  results  of  the  Great  Trigono- 
metrical Survey.  The  following  difficulties  occur  to  me  in  the  way  of  this  highly 
ingenious  and  philosophical  method  of  removing  the  discrepancy; — 

1.  It  assumes  that  the  hard  crust  of  the  earth  is  sensibly  lighter  than  the  fluid  or 
semifluid  mass,  imagined  to  be  a few  miles  below  the  surface.  But  I know  of  no  law, 
except  the  unique  law  of  water  and  ice,  which  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  fluid 
mass  in  consolidating  would  expand  and  become  lighter.  One  would  rather  expect 
it  to  become  denser,  by  loss  of  heat  and  mutual  approximation  of  its  particles. 

2.  There  is,  moreover,  every  reason  to  suppose  that  the  crust  of  the  earth  has 
long  been  so  thick,  that  the  position  of  its  parts  relatively  to  a mean  level  cannot 
be  any  longer  subject  to  the  laws  of  floatation.  If  the  elevations  and  depressions 
of  the  earth’s  surface  have  always  remained  exactly  what  they  were  at  the  time  when 
the  laws  of  floatation  ceased  to  have  an  uncontrolled  effect,  then  the  same  reasoning 
would  no  doubt  apply  in  our  case,  as  if  they  still  had  their  full  sway.  But  geology 
shows  that  other  laws  are  in  constant  operation  (arising  most  probably,  as  Mr.  Bab- 
bage has  suggested,  from  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  solid  materials  of  the 
crust),  which  change  the  relative  levels  of  the  various  parts  of  the  earth’s  surface, 
quite  irrespectively  of  the  laws  of  floatation.  If  Mr.  Hopkins’s  estimate  of  the  thick- 
ness of  the  crust  be  correct,  viz.  at  least  1000  miles,  these  laws  of  change  in  the  sur- 
face must  have  been  in  operation  for  such  an  enormous  interval  of  time,  as  quite  to 
obliterate  any  traces  of  the  form  of  surface  which  the  simple  principles  of  hydro- 
statics would  occasion.  Indeed,  it  seems  to  me  highly  probable,  that  the  elevation 
of  the  Himalayas  and  the  vast  regions  beyond  may  have  taken  place  altogether  from 
a slow  upheaving  force  arising  from  this  cause. 

I am  inclined  to  think  that  the  only  explanation  of  tlie  discrepancy  between  my 
calculation  and  the  results  of  the  Indian  Survey  is  to  be  found  in  the  greater  curva- 
ture of  the  Indian  arc. 

London,  June  2,  1855. 

Note  added  after  the  reading  of  the  Paper. 

A further  difficulty  arises  from  the  peculiar  law  which  the  thickness  of  the  crust 
must  follow,  if  the  present  form  of  the  surface  arises  altogether  from  hydrostatic 
principles.  For  if  an  excess  of  matter  at  the  surface,  in  table-lands  and  mountains, 
implies  a deficiency  of  matter  below  and  therefore  a protrusion  of  the  light  crust 


52 


ARCHDEACON  PRATT  ON  THE  EFFECT  OP  LOCAL  ATTRACTION. 


down  into  the  heavy  fluid  supporting  it ; so  must  a deficiency  of  matter  near  the 
surface,  in  deep  and  wide  oceans,  imply  an  excess  of  matter  below  the  ocean-bed, 
and  therefore  a protrusion  of  the  heavy  fluid  up  into  the  light  crust.  If  this  were 
not  the  case,  the  fluid  below  would  by  its  greater  upward  pressure  burst  up  the  crust 
beneath  the  ocean,  and  this  would  lead  to  a catastrophe. 

Hence  the  thickness  of  the  crust  must  follow  this  singular  law, — that  wherever  its 
upper  part  is  increased  by  rising  into  mountains  and  table-lands,  its  lower  part  is 
also  increased  by  projecting  downwards  into  the  internal  fluid  ; and  wherever,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  upper  part  is  diminished  by  sinking  into  ocean-beds,  there  also  the 
lower  part  is  diminished  by  the  heavy  fluid  protruding  into  it. 

This  law  appears  to  be  contrary  to  what  we  should  expect  from  the  process  of 
cooling. 


Lausanne,  October  8,  1855. 


[ 53  ] 


V.  Discussion  of  the  Observed  Deviations  of  the  Compass  in  several  Ships,  IVood-huilt 
and  Iron-built : with  a General  Table  for  facilitating  the  examination  of  Compass- 
Deviations.  By  G.  B.  Airy,  Esq.,  Astronomer  Royal. 

Received  September  14, — Read  November  22,  1855. 


In  the  year  1839  I communicated  to  the  Royal  Society  a paper  (printed  in  the 
Philosophical  Transactions  of  that  year)  containing  the  results  of  examination  of  the 
compass  in  two  iron-built  ships,  and  a general  theory  of  the  effect  of  the  transient 
induced  magnetism  of  iron  in  disturbing  the  direction  of  the  compass-needle.  The 
result  of  the  theory  of  induced  magnetism  may  be  stated  as  follows. 

First,  I must  premise,  in  explanation  of  the  term  “polar-magnet-deviation”  which 
I shall  frequently  have  occasion  to  use,  the  following  theorem  on  the  disturbance  of 
the  compass  by  a magnetized  steel  bar,  or  one  which  possesses  independent  polar 
magnetism,  in  no  way  referred  to  the  influence  of  the  existing  terrestrial  magnetism. 
Let  the  line  CA,  fig.  1,  represent  in  magnitude  and  in  direction  the  Fig^  i. 

terrestrial  directive  force.  [In  the  applications  of  the  theory  to 
ships,  the  terrestrial  directive  force  is  diminished  in  a constant  ratio 
differing  little  from  unity;  and  then  it  must  be  understood  that  CA  / 
represents  the  terrestrial  force  so  diminished.]  A is  understood  to  \ 
be  the  magnetic-north  end  of  the  line.  And  let  AB  represent,  in  V,' 
proportional  magnitude  and  in  direction,  the  directive  force  of  the 
magnetized  steel  bar  or  “ polar-magnet,”  B corresponding  to  that 
end  of  the  polar-magnet  which  possesses  boreal  magnetism.  Then 
the  directive  force  which  really  acts  on  the  compass-needle  will  be 
represented  in  proportional  magnitude  and  direction  by  CB ; and  the  angle  ACB 
will  be  the  angle  of  deviation  of  the  compass.  And  if  the  polar-magnet  be  turned 
round  in  azimuth,  so  that  the  point  B occupies  successively  different  points  in  the 
circumference  of  the  circle,  the  angle  of  deviation  will  have  successively  the  different 
magnitudes  and  the  different  directions  (right  or  left  of  the  line  CA)  given  by  this 
construction  for  these  different  circumstances.  This  theorem  is  very  simply  founded 
On  the  ordinary  “ composition  of  forces,”  and  is  abundantly  proved  by  experiment. 
The  deviation  ACB  is  what  I shall  call  “ polar-magnet-deviation.”  In  some  cases 
it  is  convenient  to  refer  the  azimuth  of  the  polar-magnet  to  the  true  magnetic  meri- 
dian or  CA,  and  then  the  polar-magnet-deviation  is  given  by  this  formula: 

. Afli.sinBAD 

tQU  13  — 7TT  J A T>  TJ  A 

CA  + AB.cos  BAD 


54 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


where  BAD  is  the  true  azimuth  of  the  polar-magnet.  In  other  cases  it  is  convenient 
to  refer  the  azimuth  of  the  polar-magnet  to  the  disturbed  direction  of  the  compass- 
needle  or  BE,  and  then  the  polar-magnet-deviation  is  given  by  this  formula: 

sinACB=^.sinEBF, 

CA 

where  EBF  is  the  apparent  azimuth  of  the  polar-magnet.  In  either  case,  the  law 
which  connects  the  polar-magnet-deviation  with  the  azimuth  (true  or  apparent)  of 
the  polar-magnet  is  what  I shall  call  “the  law  of  polar-magnet-deviation.” 

Secondly:  the  disturbing  effect  of  the  polar-magnet,  whose  power  is  represented 
by  AB,  may  be  completely  neutralized  by  attaching  to  the  same  frame  (whether  it 
be  a ship,  or  an  experimental  wood  frame,  &c.)  which  carries  that  polar-magnet, 
another  polar-magnet  in  the  opposite  position,  its  power  and  direction  being  repre- 
sented by  the  line  kb. 

Thirdly : if,  instead  of  the  polar  magnetism  of  a steel  bar,  the  disturbing  force 
upon  the  compass  be  that  of  the  transient  induced  magnetism  in  a nearly  spherical 
mass  of  soft  iron  possessing  no  permanent  magnetism,  placed  in  the  same  horizontal 
plane  as  the  compass ; and  if  NOS,  fig.  2,  represent 
the  position  taken  by  the  needle  under  the  action  of 
terrestrial  magnetism  only;  then  if  the  mass  of  soft 
iron  be  in  either  of  the  positions  Mj,  Mg,  M3,  M4,  it 
will  not  disturb  the  needle  NOS:  if  the  mass  of  soft 
iron  be  placed  either  in  the  quadrant  between  Mi  and 
M2  (as  at  Mg)  or  in  the  quadrant  between  M3  and  M4 
(as  at  Mg),  it  will  make  the  point  N deviate  towards  ; 
and  if  the  soft  iron  be  placed  in  eithei"  of  the  remaining 
quadrants  (as  at  M;  or  Mg)  it  will  make  the  point  N 
deviate  towards  n^.  The  amount  of  deviation  is  pro- 
portional to  the  sine  of  double  the  angle  of  azimuth  of  the  disturbing  mass,  that  is  to 
the  sine  of  double  the  angle  MjOMg,  or  MjCMg,  &c.  If  the  disturbing  mass  be 
carried  round  the  circle  in  the  direction  M1M2M3M4M1,  the  deviation  of  the  needle 
(estimated  positive  when  the  point  N is  moved  towards  the  right,  and  negative 

when  towards  the  left)  will  in  the  four  quadrants  have  the  signs  -1 -j . The 

deviation  following  this  law  1 shall  call  “quadrantal  deviation.” 

Fourthly:  the  deviation  produced  by  the  mass  of  soft  iron  at  M5  will  not  be 
corrected  by  placing  a similar  mass  at  Mg  (which,  instead  of  correcting  the  deviation, 
will  double  it),  but  it  wiU  be  corrected  by  placing  a similar  mass  either  at  or  at  mg, 
the  angles  MgCmg  and  MjOmg  being  supposed  to  be  right  angles.  Similarly,  the 
deviation  produced  by  the  mass  at  Mg  will  be  neutralized  by  a similar  mass  either  at 
ni^  or  at  mg,  if  the  angles  MgOA^s,  MgOmg  are  right  angles.  Thus  the  “ quadrantal 
deviation”  may  be  corrected  by  attaching  to  the  same  frame  (whether  it  be  a ship, 
or  a wooden  experimental  frame,  &c.),  which  carries  the  mass  that  produces  the 
“ quadrantal  deviation,”  another  mass,  at  the  same  level  as  the  compass  hut  in  an 


Fig.  2. 


S / 




M.3 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


55 


azimuth  differing  90°  from  that  of  the  disturbing  mass.  And,  if  it  be  found  that 
when  a ship’s  head  is  in  the  quadrant  between  N.  and  E.,  or  between  S.  and  W.,  the 
needle  deviates  to  the  right,  and  the  opposite  way  for  the  remaining  quadrants  ; or 
that,  in  respect  to  the  quadrants  of  azimuth  of  ship’s  head,  the  quadrantal  deviation 

follows  the  law  H 1 — which  I shall  call  “positive  quadrantal  deviation;”  the 

inference  is  that  the  deviation  is  of  the  same  kind  as  would  be  produced  by  a mass 
of  iron  at  the  same  level  as  the  compass,  either  headward  or  sternward  of  the  com- 
pass : and  it  may  be  neutralized  by  placing  a mass  of  iron  at  the  same  level  as  the 
compass,  either  on  the  starboard  or  on  the  port  side.  But  if  the  deviation  follow  the 
law  — I h in  respect  of  the  four  quadrants  of  azimuth,  which  I shall  call  “ nega- 

tive quadrantal  deviation,”  it  may  be  neutralized  by  placing  a mass  of  iron  at  the 
same  level  as  the  compass,  either  headward  or  sternward  of  the  compass.  All  these 
laws  I have  abundantly  confirmed  by  experiment. 

These  being  premised,  the  laws  of  the  deviation  of  the  compass  produced  by  the 
transient  induced  magnetism  of  a ship,  as  shown  by  swinging  the  ship  round  in 
a given  locality,  will  (according  to  the  theory  to  which  1 have  referred)  be  as  fol- 
lows ; — 

(1) .  There  will  be  a force,  similar  to  the  force  of  a polar-magnet,  and  producing 
a polar-raagnet-deviation.  In  northern  magnetic  latitudes,  the  nature  of  the  effect 
will  usually  be  the  same  as  if  the  boreal  magnetism  were  towards  the  ship’s  head  : in 
southern  magnetic  latitudes,  it  will  be  usually  the  same  as  if  the  austral  magnetism 
were  towards  the  ship’s  head.  The  absolute  magnitude  of  the  polar-magnet-force 
will  be  a multiple  of  the  vertical  terrestrial  magnetism  ; the  proportion  which  it 
bears  to  the  terrestrial  directive  force,  which  is  the  proportion  of  AB  to  AC  in  fig.  1 
(supposing  no  other  polar-magnet-force  to  act),  will  be  a multiple  of  the  tangent  of 
dip,  without  regard  to  the  absolute  force. 

(2) .  There  will  be  a quadrantal  deviation ; and  this  deviation  will  be  the  same  in 
all  magnetic  latitudes,  and  whatever  be  the  magnitude  of  the  earth’s  magnetic  force. 
It  will  usually  be  a positive  quadrantal  deviation. 

These  are  the  disturbances  that  are  produced  by  transient  induced  magnetism  only. 
But  if  the  iron  that  enters  into  the  composition  of  a ship  possess  independent  polar 
magnetism  similar  to  that  of  a magnetized  steel  bar  {i.  e.  not  depending  on  the  ter- 
restrial magnetism  at  the  present  moment  for  its  existence ; and  not  changing  its 
amount  or  quality  or  direction  in  regard  to  the  ship’s  keel,  while  the  ship  is  swung 
round  in  different  positions),  which  from  the  slowness  of  its  changes,  though  pro- 
bably more  variable  than  that  of  a steel  bar,  I propose  to  call  “subpermanent  mag- 
netism;” it  will  be  necessary  for  us  to  consider  how  the  expression  for  the  effects 
of  this  subpermanent  magnetism  can  be  most  easily  combined  with  those  for  the 
induced  transient  magnetism.  It  is  readily  seen  that  the  polar-magnet-force  of  sub- 
permanent magnetism  must  be  combined  with  the  polar-magnet-force  of  induced 
transient  magnetism  ; and  that,  at  a given  locality,  they  cannot  be  separated.  In 


56 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


fig'.  3,  let  SH  represent  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  polar-magnet-force  of 
induced  magnetism,  directed  from  the  ship’s  stern  to  her  head  (this  diagram  having 
no  relation  to  the  direction  of  terrestrial  magnetism),  and  let  HP 
represent  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  subpermanent  mag- 
netism, which,  inasmuch  as  its  direction  is  invariable  with  respect 
to  the  ship,  is  inclined  at  a constant  angle  to  SH  : then  the  force 
resulting  from  the  composition  of  these  two  will  be  repre-sented  in 
magnitude  and  direction  by  SP,  which  is  invariable  in  magnitude, 
and  inclined  at  a constant  angle  to  SH.  And  this  force  will  appear, 
in  the  phenomena  of  compass-disturbance  at  any  one  locality,  as  a 
whole,  and  cannot  immediately  be  separated  into  the  two  parts  SH 
and  HP. 

All  that  can  be  done  is  this.  At  a given  locality  we  can  find  the  direction  of  SP 
with  regard  to  the  ship’s  keel,  if,  by  methods  to  be  explained  below,  we  can  find  the 
“ neutral  position  of  the  ship  in  reference  to  the  polar-magnet-force,”  or  (which  is 
the  same  thing)  the  azimuth  of  the  ship’s  head,  or  of  the  line  SH,  when  the  polar- 
magnet-deviation  vanishes,  or  when  the  line  SP  coincides  with  the  magnetic  meridian. 
And  we  can  find  the  magnitude  of  SP  by  methods  to  be  explained  below.  Therefore 
we  can  find  SQ  and  QP.  And  if  we  assume  FIQ  to  be  constant,  and  SH  proportional 
to  the  earth’s  vertical  magnetic  force  at  the  given  locality,  we  shall  be  able,  by  com- 
parison of  the  results  at  different  localities  where  the  vertical  force  has  different 
magnitudes,  to  discover  the  value  of  SIT  at  each  place  and  the  value  of  HQ.  The 
value  of  QP  however  requires  no  combination  of  results  found  at  different  places,  and 
is  not  liable  to  any  uncertainty. 

But  without  at  present  insisting  on  this  separation  of  the  subpermanent  magnetism 
from  the  polar-magnet-force  of  induced  magnetism,  we  can  lay  down  the  following 
rule : — 

(3).  The  whole  disturbance  of  the  compass,  whether  the  ship  be  wood-built  or  iron- 
built,  will  be  represented  by  the  sum  of  the  effects  of  two  forces,  which  separately 
would  produce  these  two  disturbances:  one,  a polar-magnet-deviation  whose  neutral 
point  may  be  in  any  direction  ; the  other,  a quadrantal  deviation,  which  may  be 

expected  to  be  a positive  quadrantal  deviation,  following  the  law  of  signs  -\ 1 — 

as  depending  on  the  quadrants  of  azimuth  of  the  ship’s  head.  And  the  whole 
disturbance  will  be  very  nearly  (but  not  exactly)  the  algebraic  sum  of  these  two 
disturbances : the  slight  departure  from  that  law  will  be  the  subject  of  examination 
below. 

The  practical  problem,  then,  of  analysing  a given  series  of  compass-deviations,  is 
reduced  to  the  dividing  of  them  into  two  parts,  of  which  one  follows  the  law  of  polar- 
tnagnet-deviation,  and  the  other  follows  the  law  of  quadrantal  deviation,  subject  to 
the  trifling  correction  to  which  I have  just  alluded. 

In  the  experiments  with  the  ‘Rainbow’  and  ‘Ironsides’  (which  are  treated  in  my 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


57 


paper  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  1839),  I was  guided  by  experiments  on  hori- 
zontal intensity  as  determined  by  vibrations ; but  even  then  I found  the  computa- 
tion of  polar-magnet-deviation  so  troublesome,  that  I executed  the  calculations  by 
graphical  construction.  But  in  other  cases,  where  there  is  no  determination  of  hori- 
zontal intensity,  the  computation  of  polar-magnet-deviation  would  be  very  much 
more  troublesome.  This  consideration,  together  with  the  paucity  of  instances  in 
which  a comparison  of  the  ship’s  magnetism  in  different  localities  was  possible,  pre- 
vented me  from  entering  further  into  the  numerical  calculations  of  ships’  magnetism. 
But  having  lately  received  from  Captain  Washington,  R.N.,  Hydrographer  to  the 
Admiralty,  the  records  of  observations  in  several  ships,  which  I desired  to  treat 
numerically;  I remarked  that  the  trouble  of  calculation  might  be  much  diminished, 
and  the  process  might  be  made  perfectly  direct  and  definitive,  by  the  previous  prepa- 
ration of  a Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviation ; and  I proceeded  therefore  at  once  to 
compute  the  Table  which  is  appended  to  this  paper.  Of  this  Table  I will  now  give  a 
short  description. 

The  table  is  a Table  of  double-entry.  One  of  the  arguments  is  the  “ Modulus,” 
which  is  the  same  as  the  proportion  of  AB  to  AC  in  fig.  1.  It  is  given  to  every 
*01  from  *00  to  *80.  The  other  argument  is  the  “Apparent  Azimuth  of  the  Ship’s 
Head  from  the  Neutral  Position,”  which  is  the  same  as  the  “apparent  azimuth  of  the 
polar  magnet”  or  “azimuth  of  the  polar  magnet  as  measured  from  the  disturbed 
position  of  the  compass-needle,”  or  the  angle  EBF  in  fig.  ] . This  is  used  as  the 
argument  of  the  Table,  because,  in  the  examination  of  the  disturbance  of  ships’  com- 
passes, it  is  usually  most  convenient  to  fix  the  ship  in  position  by  means  of  its  own 
compass ; and  in  fact  all  the  observations  supplied  to  me  have  been  made  in  positions 
of  the  ship  so  determined.  As  the  observations  of  deviation  of  ships’  compasses  are 
usually  made  from  “point”  to  “point”  of  azimuth,  the  division  of  the  circle  here 
employed  is  that  by  points  and  decimals  of  a point.  The  Table  is  carried  to  8 points 
only,  as  the  polar-magnet-deviations  from  8 to  16  points  are  the  same  in  reversed 
order;  and  those  from  16  to  32  points  are  the  same  as  those  from  0 to  16  points  with 
change  of  sign.  At  the  bottom  of  each  column  is  the  “Mean  of  all  tlie  Polar-Magnet- 
Deviations  for  each  value  of  the  Modulus,”  M*hich  is  necessary  for  enabling  us  to  deter- 
mine the  value  of  the  modulus  in  any  given  case. 

In  ascertaining,  from  a given  series  of  observed  compass-deviations,  the  neutral 
position  and  modulus  to  be  used  in  the  application  of  this  Table,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  recognize  the  existence  of  a deviation  following  very  nearly  the  law  of  quadrantal 
deviation,  and  the  given  numbers  must  therefore  be  so  combined  that  quadrantal 
deviation  will  be  ipso  facto  eliminated.  This  will  be  done  by  so  arranging  the  pro- 
cess that  the  numbers  for  a whole  semicircle  of  apparent  azimuth  will  be  added 
together  algebraically.  This  being  understood,  we  may  now  proceed  with  advan- 
tage to  investigate  the  nature  of  the  terms  produced  by  combining  the  effects  of  the 
polar-magnet-force  and  the  quadrantal  force. 

MDCCCLVI.  1 


58 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Use  the  notation  of  the  paper  of  1839,  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  use  also  the  following 
notation : — 

In  fig.  1,  let  CA  represent  the  terrestrial  horizontal  force  multiplied  by  (1  — M),  M 
being  a constant  peculiar  to  each  ship. 

fjtj  the  modulus,  or  the  proportion  of  AB  to  CA.  It  will  be  remarked  that  SP  in 
fig.  3 is  the  representative  of  AB  in  fig.  1. 

a the  angle  QSP,  fig.  3,  or  the  starboard  angle  made  by  the  compound  polar- 
magnet-force  with  the  ship’s  keel. 

A the  true  eastern  azimuth  of  the  ship’s  head. 

A'  the  eastern  azimuth  of  the  ship’s  head  as  referred  to  the  needle  disturbed  by 
polar-magnet-force  only. 

A"  the  eastern  azimuth  of  the  ship’s  head  as  referred  to  the  needle  disturbed  by 
polar-magnet-force  and  quadrantal  force. 

I Ct  'I 

^ I the  corresponding  azimuths  of  the  compound  polar-magnet-force.  A+a  is 

A"-j-  same  as  the  angle  BAD  in  fig.  1 . 

A'  the  compass- deviation  to  the  east  produced  by  polar-magnet-force  only  —A— A' 
= ( A -j- a)  — ( A' -}- a) . 

A"  the  additional  deviation  produced  by  the  quadrantal  force  =A'— A"=(A'-l-a) 
-(A"+«). 

And  the  following  double  equation  is  accurate : — 
sin  A' 


=sin  A'-j-a=- 


sin  K+a 


I H- 2j«.  cos  A-|-«4-/x^} 

Then,  neglecting  MP  only,  the  formulae  in  the  paper  of  1839  give- 


Whole  force  to  north  =I.cosB.(l— M).(l+iM'*cos  A-l-c44-P-cos2A) 


Whole  force  to  east  =I.cosB.(I— M).((M-.sin A-l-a+P.sin2A). 
Therefore 


tanA'-h  A"=y 


]u,.sin  A-)-«  + P.sin  2 A 


-f-ft.cos  A + ct-fP.cos  2A 


But 


tan  A' 


j«..sinA-f« 

I -f-j«,.cosA-fa 


Therefore,  retaining  the  complete  multiplier  of  the  first  power  of  P,  but  no  higher 
powers  of  P, 

tan  A" = P-s^^^^A-ff^P.sinA— « ^ 

I -f  2/x . cos  A a + 


This  quantity,  however,  is  not  that  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  use,  for  the 
following  reason.  The  polar-magnet-deviation  which  we  shall  take  out  from  the 
Table  is  taken  for  an  argument  which,  is  referred  to  the  position  of  the  compass- 
needle  as  disturbed  hy  all  causes ; it  is  therefore  taken  out,  not  for  argument 
A'-f-«  (which  would  give  us  A exactly),  but  for  argument  A"-|-a.  Let  the  quantity 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


59 


thus  taken  from  the  Table  be  called  A^,  and  the  correction  required  be  called  A^. 
Then  A'-}- A"  ; and 

A/^=  ( A'  — AJ  -b  A"=/:A(sin  A' + a — sin  A" + a)  + A"  nearly 

=(jij{sm  A"-ba+A" — sin  A" + a)  + A"= A"(  1 +(j^  . cos  A" +a)  nearly. 

If  in  the  computation  of  this  small  quantity  we  reject  powers  of  jM/  following  the  first. 


A^^=(l— cos  A"-ba).P.  (sin  2A+|«/.sin  A — a). 

But  sin2A=sin2A"-b2jM-.cos2A".sin  A'+ci  nearly. 

After  all  reductions,  A^^=P.sin2A"+/AP.cos  2A".sin  A"H-a. 

The  first  term  of  this  expression  is  in  the  very  convenient  form  of  a quadrantal 
term  referred  to  the  apparent  azimuth  of  the  ship’s  head.  The  general  influence 
of  the  second  term  is,  that  it  produces  no  elfect  on  the  maxima  of  the  quadrantal 
terms,  that  it  slightly  increases  the  polar-magnet-deviation  when  A"=0  or  180°,  and 
slightly  diminishes  it  when  A"=90°  or  270°;  and  this  will  be  practically  a sufficient 
description  of  its  characteristic  effects. 

But  as,  in  the  aggregate  of  numbers,  small  terms  become  sensible  which  are  scarcely 
sensible  in  the  individual  numbers,  it  will  be  desirable  to  ascertain  the  effect  of  this 
on  a semicircular  group.  Combine  the  term  //;P.cos  2A".sin  A"-ba  with  the  approxi- 
mate polar-magnet-deviationjo/.sin  A"-ba, and  integrate  from  A"-b«=0  to  A"-ba=^: 

the  result  is  2|a-^l  — ^ cos  2ci^.  Without  the  small  term  we  should  have  obtained 

Hence  it  appears  that  the  result  for  modulus  found  from  semicircular  groups,  which 

p 

may  be  called  the  “Approximate  Modulus,”  must  be  multiplied  by  I + 3 cos  2a  in 


order  to  obtain  the  “True  Modulus.”  Again,  conceive  the  “approximate  starboard 
angle  made  by  the  compound  polar-magnet-force  with  the  ship’s  keel”  to  be  a-bjS; 

then  a semicircular  sum  from  A"+a-bj8=|  to  ought  to  vanish  ; the 


. . . r 2P  I 

integral  between  these  limits,  omitting  P/3  and  (3^,  is  2|sin  (B — ^ sin  2a| ; hence 


2P  . 


(^=~§~  sin  2a ; and  this  quantity  must  be  subtracted  from  the  “ Approximate  Starboard 


Angle,”  or  a-bjS,  in  order  to  obtain  the  “True  Starboard  Angle,”  or  a. 

Thus  it  appears  that,  in  the  column  of  Tabular  Polar-Magnet-Deviations,  we  are 

not  comparing  the  tabular  deviation  due  to  the  modulus  and  the  starboard  angle  a, 

(P  \ 2P 

1 — 2 cos  2a  j and  starboard  angle  a-f  — sin  2a;  and 

therefore  our  residual  numbers  ought  to  represent 


^.sinA"-|-a-l-P.sin2A"-l-jM<P.cos2A".sinA"-l-a— — ^cos2aysin^A"-l-a-l-^sin2a^. 


60 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Expanding  the  last  term,  this  quantity  becomes,  after  all  reductions, 

P.sin  2 sin  3A"H-a— ^ sin  A"+3a^ . 

It  will  scarcely  be  necessary  to  tabulate  the  small  terms  ; an  estimate  of  their  general 
effect  can  very  well  be  formed  in  the  mind. 

The  entire  process  will  therefore  be  the  following : — 

1.  For  the  nautical  terms  N.,  N.b.E.,  N.N.E.,  &c.,  use  the  numeral  reckoning  of 
points  0, 1,  2,  &c.,  as  far  as  31,  which  will  correspond  to  N.b.W.  And  for  deviation  E 
and  deviation  W,  use  the  algebraical  signs  deviation  + and  deviation  — . It  will 
always  be  convenient  to  place  the  + deviations  and  the  — deviations  in  separate 
columns. 

2.  Clear  the  deviations  of  constant  error  by  adding  together  all  the  + deviations, 
adding  together  all  the  — deviations,  combining  them  algebraically,  taking  the  mean 
of  the  sum,  and  applying  this  mean  with  sign  changed  to  every  deviation.  The 
deviations  thus  corrected  will  he  the  base  of  all  the  following  operations. 

3.  In  writing  down,  in  columns,  the  corrected  deviations,  repeat  those  from  0 to  15 
points,  in  sequence  to  those  from  0 to  31  points  ; so  that  the  Table  contains  forty-eight 
lines, 

4.  A conjecture  will  easily  be  formed  as  to  the  approximate  value  of  the  azimuth 
for  the  “ neutral  position  and  then  two  or  three  neighbouring  half-points  are  to  be 
adopted  for  trial.  Thus,  if  the  azimuth  for  neutral  position  appears  to  be  near 
3P  or  4P,  the  positions  to  be  tried  may  be  2P'5,  3P'5,  4P‘5. 

5.  The  trial  of  these  azimuths  will  be  effected  by  dividing  the  series  of  observed 
deviations,  not  at  these  azimuths,  but  at  azimuths  distant  from  them  8 points  on  each 
side.  Thus,  to  make  trial  of  the  assumption  2P’3,  the  observed  deviations  are  to  be 
divided  at  26P'5  and  10P‘5.  And  the  criterion  will  be  given  by  adding  algebraically 
all  the  deviations  from  27^  to  IQP,  both  included  ; a little  accuracy  will  be  gained  if 
we  also  add  in  a separate  sum  all  the  deviations  from  IIP  to  26P,  both  included,  and 
subtract  this  sum  from  the  former.  It  will  be  remarked  that  the  quadrantal  devia- 
tion is  here  eliminated. 

6.  If  our  assumption  2P‘5  for  the  neutral  position  were  strictly  correct,  the  sum  or 
difference  of  sums  found  in  the  manner  just  stated  would  =0.  As  this  usually  will 
not  prove  to  be  true,  we  must  try  the  next  assumption  3p-5  in  like  manner.  The 
comparison  of  the  sums  or  differences  of  sums  will  give  the  correction  to  be  applied 
to  2P’5  with  very  great  accuracy.  The  azimuth  thus  determined  is  strictly  an 
‘‘approximate  neutral  position,”  and  its  supplement  to  32p  is  the  “approximate 
starboard  angle.” 

7.  The  approximate  neutral  position  being  thus  determined,  the  observed  deviations 
are  to  be  divided  into  two  groups,  one  division  being  at  the  interval  in  which  the 
neutral  position  falls,  the  other  at  the  interval  distant  from  it  by  16p.  The  algebraic 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


61 


sums  of  the  deviations  in  the  two  groups  are  to  be  taken:  one  is  to  be  subtracted 
from  the  other,  and  the  remainder  is  to  be  divided  by  32.  The  quotient  is  the  mean 
deviation.  This  is  to  be  compared  with  the  Means  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations  at  the 
foot  of  the  columns  of  the  Table.  Two  adjacent  Tabular  Means  being  found,  one^ 
greater  and  one  less  than  the  mean  deviation  just  obtained,  and  the  values  of  modulus, 
corresponding  to  those  two  tabular  means  being  noted,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  find- 
ing by  interpolation  the  value  of  modulus  corresponding  to  the  mean  deviation  just 
obtained.  This  is  the  “Approximate  Modulus.” 

8.  By  use  of  the  approximate  neutral  position,  the  angle  of  apparent  azimuth  from 
the  neutral  position  will  be  formed  for  every  observation.  Using  this  as  the  argu- 
ment of  Azimuth  in  the  Table,  the  Polar-Magnet-Deviation  is  to  be  taken  out  for 
every  observation  with  two  tabular  values  of  Modulus,  one  greater  and  one  less  than 
the  approximate  modulus  just  found.  Between  these,  the  Polar-Magnet-Deviation 
will  be  interpolated  for  the  approximate  modulus ; and  thus  the  Tabular  Polar- 
Magnet-Deviation  corresponding  to  the  Approximate  Modulus  will  be  obtained  for 
every  observation. 

9.  Subtracting  this  Tabular  Polar-Magnet-Deviation  algebraically  from  theObserved 
Deviation,  the  residual  quantity  will  consist  of  Quadrantal  Deviation,  of  the  small  cor- 
rection and  of  errors  of  observation.  Neglecting  the  two  last  mentioned,  a pretty 
accurate  estimate  of  the  coefficient  of  quadrantal  deviation  may  be  got  by  omitting 
the  values  for  Op,  8p,  16p,  24p,  and  dividing  the  sum  of  each  group  of  seven  numbers 
by  5 ; the  quotient  will  be  the  coefficient,  or  the  Quadrantal  Deviation  for  4P,  12p,  20p, 
28P.  The  conversion  of  this  coefficient  into  abstract  number  (radius  =1)  gives  the 
numerical  coefficient  P. 

2 

10.  The  angle  g X coefficient  of  quadrantal  deviation  X sine  of  twice  the  approxi- 
mate starboard  angle  is  to  be  subtracted  from  the  approximate  starboard  angle  to 
give  the  “'True  Starboard  Angle.”  And  the  approximate  modulus  is  to  be  multiplied  by 

p 

l-pgX  cosine  of  twice  the  approximate  starboard  angle  to  give  the  “True  Modulus.” 

1 1 . The  Headward  Modulus  = True  Modulus  X cosine  True  Starboard  Angle ; and 
the  Starboard  Modulus  = True  Modulus  x sineTrue  Starboard  Angle.  As  the  modulus 
is  the  proportion  of  the  disturbing  force  to  the  terrestrial  horizontal  force  (slightly 
diminished  everywhere  in  the  same  proportion),  we  must,  for  the  exhibition  of  the 
absolute  values  of  the  disturbing  forces,  multiply  these  quantities  by  the  terrestrial 
horizontal  force.  Then  (referring  to  the  statements  at  the  commencement  of  this 
paper  for  the  results  of  theory)  we  shall  have. 

Headward  Modulus  X Terrestrial  Horizontal  Force=H-l-N  X Terrestrial  Vertical  Force, 
Starboard  Modulus  X Terrestrial  Horizontal  Force=S, 

where  H and  S are  the  forces  of  the  ship’s  subpermanent  magnetism  in  the  head- 
ward  and  starboard  directions ; andN  is  a constant  peculiar  to  the  ship,  depending 


62 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


on  the  arrangement  of  the  mass  of  iron,  and  having  relation  only  to  the  ship’s 
capacity  for  induced  magnetism,  but  in  no  way  related  to  terrestrial  magnetism. 

If  we  can  reconcile  the  observations  made  in  the  same  ship  at  various  localities  by 
making  H and  S constant,  then  the  subpermanent  magnetism  is  truly  permanent. 
In  any  case,  N must  be  constant  for  the  same  ship. 

Perhaps  the  process  of  obtaining  the  various  elements  of  a ship’s  magnetism  will 
be  rendered  a little  more  intelligible  by  exhibiting  the  work  in  a single  instance. 


Iron-Steamer  “Trident,”  examined  at  Greenhithe,  1852,  September. 

1.  Deviations  as  registered,  substituting  only  the  0, 1,  2, 3,  &c.  points  for  N.,  N.b.E., 
N.N.E.,  N.E.b.N.,  &c.,  and  the  signs  + and  — for  E.  and  W. 


Apparent 
azimuth 
of  ship’s 
head. 

Deviation. 

Apparent 
azimuth 
of  ship’s 
head. 

Deviation. 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

P 

o / 

O i 

P 

o / 

o / 

0 

2 55 

16 

2 30 

1 

3 40 

17 

0 0 

2 

9 15 

18 

2 30 

3 

12  32 

19 

5 50 

4 

15  50 

20 

9 10 

5 

17  40 

21 

11  52 

6 

19  30 

22 

14  35 

7 

19  5 

23 

16  47 

8 

18  40 

24 

19  0 

9 

17  15 

25 

20  22 

10 

15  50 

26 

21  45 

11 

14  10 

27 

22  10 

12 

12  30 

28 

20  0 

13 

11  30 

29 

16  30 

14 

9 20 

30 

13  0 

15 

5 55 

31 

7 32 

The  sum  of  the  + deviations  is  +205°  12';  the  sum  of  the  — deviations  is  — 203°  58'; 
the  algebraical  sum  of  all  is  +1°  14';  which  implies  a mean  error  of  +0°  2'.  Applying 
the  correction  — 0°2'  to  every  deviation,  the  next  table  is  formed. 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


63 


2 & 3.  Deviations  as  corrected  for  constant  error. 


Apparent 
azimuth 
of  ship’s 
head. 

Deviation. 

Apparent 
azimuth 
of  ship’s 
head. 

Deviation. 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

P 

o / 

o / 

P 

O / 

o t 

0 

2 57 

24 

19  2 

1 

3 38 

25 

20  24 

2 

9 13 

26 

21  47 

3 

12  30 

27 

22  12 

4 

15  48 

28 

20  2 

5 

17  38 

29 

16  32 

6 

19  28 

30 

13  2 

7 

19  3 

31 

7 34 

8 

18  38 

0 

2 57 

9 

17  13 

1 

3 38 

10 

15  48 

2 

9 13 

11 

14  8 

3 

12  30 

12 

12  28 

4 

15  48 

13 

11  28 

5 

17  38 

14 

9 18 

6 

19  28 

15 

5 53 

7 

19  3 

16 

2 28 

8 

18  38 

17 

0 2 

9 

17  13 

18 

2 32 

10 

15  48 

19 

5 52 

11 

14  8 

20 

9 12 

12 

12  28 

21 

11  54 

13 

11  28 

22 

14  37 

14 

9 18 

23 

16  49 

15 

5 53 

4.  The  neutral  position  appears  to  be  somewhere  near  IP,  and  therefore  trial  may 
be  made  with  the  two  assumptions  OP’5  and  1P’5. 

5.  For  trial  OP’5,  the  sums  must  be  taken  from  9P  to  24p,  and  from  25P  to  8p. 

Sum  from  9 to  24  = + 88  44—  80  0=+  8 44 

Sum  from  25  to  8=  + 115  56—124  30=—  8 34 

Excess  of  the  first  . . . . +17  18 

For  trial  1P‘5,  the  sums  must  be  taken  from  lOP  to  25p,  and  from  26P  to  9P. 

Sum  from  10  to  25  = + 71  31  — 100  24=— 28  53 

Sum  from  26  to  9=  + 133  9—104  6=+29  3 

Excess  of  the  first  . . . . —57  56 

6.  A change  of  IP  in  the  assumption  has  changed  the  excess”  from  +17°  18'  to 
— 57°  56',  or  has  changed  it  by  75°  14'.  Hence,  the  assumption  which  would  make 

17°  18^ 

the  “Excess”  =0  is  0P-5+1PX7|o-j4,=0p-5+1PX0-23=0P-5  + 0p-23=0P73.  This  is- 
the  “approximate  neutral  position”;  and  its  supplement  or  31P’27  is  the  “approxi- 
mate starboard  angle,”  or  the  approximate  value  of  a. 

7.  The  neutral  position  being  OP’73,  the  observed  deviations  which  are  to  be 
grouped  for  ascertaining  the  approximate  modulus  are  those  from  1p  to  16p  in  one 
part,  and  those  from  17p  to  0?  in  the  other  part.  The  sums  are  respectively 
+204°  40'  and  —204°  30';  the  excess  of  the  first  is  409°  10';  dividing  by  32,  the 


64 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


quotient  is  12°  47'.  On  examining-  the  ‘^Mean  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations”  at  the 
foot  of  the  columns  of  the  Table,  it  is  found  that  the  Mean  corresponding  to  Modulus 
0-34  is  12°  35',  and  that  corresponding  to  Modulus  0'35  is  12°  58'.  Hence  the 
Modulus  for  mean  12°  47'  is  0-3452. 

8 & 9.  The  neutral  position  being  0^-73,  the  ‘‘  Apparent  Inclination  from  Neutral 
Position”  for  azimuth  of  ship’s  head  OP  will  be  31P-27  ; and  so  for  the  others.  Then 
two  series  of  numbers  are  interpolated  from  the  Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations 
for  the  fractional  parts  of  the  points  ; one  for  Modulus  0*34,  and  the  other  for 
Modulus  0*35.  Between  the  pairs  of  corresponding  numbers  thus  found,  a third 
interpolation  is  made  for  the  fractional  part  of  the  Modulus,  to  0-3452  ; and  thus  are 
obtained  the  Tabular  Polar-Magnet-Deviations  required.  Subtracting  these  from 


Apparent 
azimuth  of 
ship’s 
head. 

Apparent 

inclination 

from 

neutral 

position. 

Tabular  polar-magnet-deviation. 

Excess  of 
corrected 
observed 
deviation. 

One-fifth  of 
quadrantal 
group. 

Modulus 

0-34. 

Modulus 

0-35. 

Modulus 

0-3452. 

P 

P 

— 2 47 

o / 

o / . 

0 

31-27 

— 2 52 

- 2 50 

(-0  7) 

1 

0-27 

-t-  1 2 

+ 1 4 

+ 1 3 

+ 2 35 

2 

1-27 

+ 4 49 

+ 4 57 

+ 4 53 

+ 4 20 

3 

2-27 

-F  8 26 

+ 8 40 

+ 8 33 

+ 3 57 

o f 

+ 3 57 

4 

3-27 

+ 11  45 

+ 12  6 

+ 11  56 

+ 3 52 

5 

4-27 

+ 14  38 

+ 15  5 

+ 14  52 

+ 2 46 

6 

5-27 

+ 16  59 

+ 17  31 

+ 17  16 

+ 2 12 

7 

6-27 

+ 18  42 

+ 19  16 

+ 19  0 

+ 0 3 

8 

7-27 

+ 19  40 

+ 20  16 

+ 19  59 

(-1  21) 

9 

8-27 

+ 19  51 

+ 20  27 

+ 20  10 

—2  57 

10 

9-27 

+ 19  14 

+ 19  50 

+ 19  33 

—3  45 

11 

10-27 

+ 17  52 

+ 18  24 

+ 18  9 

-4  1 

12 

11-27 

+ 15  48 

+ 16  16 

+ 16  3 

— 3 35 

— 3 33 

13 

12-27 

+ 13  9 

+ 13  32 

+ 13  21 

— 1 53 

14 

13-27 

+ 10  0 

+ 10  18 

+ 10  9 

— 0 51 

15 

14-27 

+ 6 31 

+ 6 42 

+ 6 37 

— 0 44 

16 

15-27 

+ 2 47 

+ 2 52 

+ 2 50 

( — 0 22) 

17 

16-27 

— 1 2 

— 1 4 

— 1 3 

+ 1 1 

18 

17-27 

- 4 49 

— 4 57 

— 4 53 

+ 2 21 

19 

18-27 

— 8 26 

— 8 40 

— 8 33 

+ 2 41 

20 

19-27 

— 11  45 

— 12  6 

— 11  56 

+ 2 44 

+ 3 19 

21 

20'27 

— 14  38 

— 15  5 

— 14  52 

+ 2 58 

22 

21-27 

-16  59 

-17  31 

-17  16 

+ 2 39 

23 

22-27 

— 18  42 

— 19  16 

-19  0 

+ 2 11 

24 

23-27 

-19  40 

—20  16 

-19  59 

( + 0 57) 

25 

24-27 

— 19  51 

— 20  27 

— 20  10 

-0  14 

26 

25-27 

-19  14 

-19  50 

-19  33 

-2  14 

27 

26-27 

— 17  52 

— 18  24 

-18  9 

-4  3 

28 

27-27 

— 15  48 

-16  16 

— 16  3 

-3  59 

—3  30 

29 

28-27 

-13  9 

— 13  32 

-13  21 

— 3 11 

30 

29-27 

— 10  0 

— 10  18 

— 10  9 

— 2 53 

31 

30-27 

— 6 31 

— 6 42 

— 6 37 

— 0 57 

the  corrected  observed  deviations,  we  have  the  excess,  which  clearly  follows  with 
considerable  accuracy,  a Positive  Quadrantal  law,  perhaps  slightly  disturbed  by  the 
residual  small  terms  in  the  manner  explained  above.  Its  Mean  Coefficient  is  +3° 35' 
or  OP-3185,  whose  equivalent  in  abstract  number  is  -l-0-0626  = P. 

2 

10.  From  these  numbers,  ^ quadrantal  coefficient  X sine  of  twice  approximate 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


65 


Starboard  angle  = — OP'06  ; which  subtracted  from  approximate  starboard  angle  gives 

P . 

True  Starboard  Angle  =31P'33.  And  ^ X cosine  of  twice  approximate  starboard 

angle  =0-020;  adding  this  to  unity  and  multiplying  the  Approximate  Modulus,  we 
have  the  True  Modulus  =0-352. 

11.  Expressing  the  magnitude  of  the  terrestrial  magnetic  force  in  the  manner 
introduced  by  Gauss  for  Absolute  Measure,  and  adopting  the  English  foot  and  English 
grain  as  the  units  of  length  and  weight,  the  measure  of  terrestrial  horizontal  force  at 
Greenhithe  is  3-79,  and  that  of  terrestrial  vertical  force  is  9-66.  Forming  the  quan- 
tities “True  Modulus  X cosine  True  Starboard  Angle  x Terrestrial  Horizontal 
Force,”  and  “ True  Modulus  X sine  True  Starboard  Angle  X Terrestrial  Horizontal 
Force,”  we  have  for  the  ‘Trident’  at  Greenhithe  in  1852, 

-f  1 -375  = H -fN  X 9-663 
— 0-182  = S; 

and  these  results,  with  that  just  obtained  for  the  Coefficient  of  Quadrantal  Deviation, 
are  the  most  advanced  that  can  be  obtained  from  the  deviations  of  the  compass  in 
the  ‘Trident’  observed  at  Greenhithe  only. 

I shall  now  exhibit,  in  a tabular  form,  the  results  of  the  twenty-nine  series  of  devi- 
ations which  have  reached  me.  Nos.  1 to  13  are  extracted  from  the  work  of  the  late 
Captain  Johnson,  R.N.,  “ On  the  Deviations  of  the  Compass.”  The  signs  of  the 
compass-deviations  of  the  ‘ Erebus’  at  St.  Helena  are  changed,  on  the  authority  of 
Colonel  Sabine,  as  conveyed  to  me  by  Archibald  Smith,  Esq.  Nos.  14  to  29  have 
been  communicated  to  me  by  Captain  Washington,  R.N.,  Hydrographer  to  the 
Admiralty. 

It  must  be  remarked  that  the  first  column,  in  every  case,  is  the  registered  deviation 
as  given  by  the  observer  (a  few  numbers  in  brackets  being  supplied  by  interpolation), 
and  not  the  deviation  as  cleared  of  Jiiean  error  or  index  error.  In  some  cases  this 
mean  error  is  large  (thus  with  the  ‘ Simoom’  at  Simon’s  Town  it  amounts  to  1°  47')3 
and  here  it  greatly  modifies  the  true  deviation,  and  even  causes  the  original  deviation 
to  appear  less  on  some  points  than  the  residual  error.  The  residual  error  is  formed 
by  computing  the  polar-raagnet-deviation  from  the  approximate  elements  at  the  top 
of  the  Table,  and  subtracting  it  from  the  deviation  corrected  for  constant  mean  error 
only;  it  therefore  contains  the  quadrantal  deviation,  the  small  terms  produced  by 
combination  of  polar-rnagnet-deviation  with  quadrantal  deviation,  and  the  accidental 
errors  of  observation.  The  coefficients  of  quadrantal  deviation  below  are  formed  by 
omitting  the  residual  errors  for  QP,  8P,  16p,  24P,  and  taking  one-fifth  part  of  the  sums 
of  the  residual  errors  in  the  groups  between  them  ; and  the  mean  coefficient  is  formed 
by  changing  the  signs  of  the  second  and  fourth  coefficients  of  quadrantal  deviation, 
and  taking  one-fourth  of  the  algebraical  sum.  The  true  elements  are  formed  by 
correcting  the  approximate  elements  in  the  manner  just  explained. 


MDCCCLVI. 


K 


66 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


No 

1. 

2. 

t. 

4. 

Ship’s  name  

Erebus. 

Place  of  observation  

Gillin 

gham. 

Porto  Praya. 

St.  Helena. 

Cape 

of  Good  Hope. 

Time  of  observation  

Index  correction  

+ 0°  16' 

-0' 

24' 

0° 

0' 

+ 0" 

19' 

Approximate  modulus  

•069 

•033 

•008 

•020 

Approx,  starboard  angle  ... 

0”- 

40 

O'”- 

93 

88 

14‘’-98 

Observed 

Observed 

Observed 

Observed 

deviation 

Residual 

deviation 

Residual 

deviation 

Residual 

deviation 

Residual 

uncor- 

error. 

uncor- 

error. 

uncor- 

error. 

uncor- 

error. 

reeled. 

reeled. 

reeled. 

reeled. 

P 

f 0 

O 

— 0 

6 

(-6 

9) 

+ 0 

56 

( + 0 

11) 

O 

+ 0 

4 

(-0 

6) 

O 

-0 

24 

(-0  18) 

1 

+ 0 

49 

0 

0 

+ 1 

17 

+ 0 

11 

+ 0 

16 

+ 0 

1 

-0 

24 

-0  6 

2 

+ 1 

39 

-}-  0 

6 

+ 1 

53 

+ 0 

27 

+ 0 

28 

+ 0 

10 

-0 

1 

-fO  31 

3 

+ 2 

16 

+ 0 

5 

+ 2 

12 

+ 0 

29 

+ 0 

51 

+ 0 

29 

-0 

11 

+ 0 34 

4 

+ 2 

59 

+ 0 

14 

+ 2 

10 

+ 0 

14 

+ 1 

10 

+ 0 

46 

— 0 

22 

-fO  35 

5 

+ 3 

18 

+ 0 

7 : 

+ 2 

30 

+ 0 

23 

+ 0 

48 

+ 0 

23 

-0 

31 

-fO  37 

6 

+ 3 

46 

+ 0 

17  1 

+ 2 

47 

+ 0 

34 

+ 0 

57 

+ 0 

31 

— 0 

51 

4-0  25 

7 

+ 4 

53 

+ 1 

13  1 

+ 2 

40 

+ 0 

24 

1 0 

55 

+ 0 

29 

— 1 

2 

+ 0 21 

8 

+ 3 

42 

( + 0 

1) 

+ 1 

56 

(-0 

18) 

+ 0 

32 

( + 0 

7) 

— 1 

15 

( + 0 12) 

9 

+ 3 

17 

— 0 

16  ! 

+ 1 

44 

-0 

25 

+ 0 

13 

-0 

9 

— 1 

34 

-0  6 

O 

fin 

10  

+ 2 

50 

— 0 

25 

+ 1 

18 

-0 

40 

-0 

5 

-0 

24 

— 1 

43 

-0  16 

CO 

11  

+ 2 

21 

— 0 

30 

+ 1 

25 

+ 0 

5 

-0 

20 

— 0 

35 

— 2 

1 

-0  38 

p< 

12  

+ 1 

53 

-0 

26 

+ 1 

9 

-0 

19 

-0 

20 

-0 

31 

— 1 

53 

-0  37 

CO 

13  

+ 1 

23 

— 0 

17 

+ 0 

25 

-0 

44 

-0 

25 

-0 

31 

— 1 

41 

-0  33 

O 

14  

+ 0 

48 

-0 

10 

+ 0 

42 

-0 

5 

-0 

30 

— 0 

31 

— 1 

26 

-0  29 

pd 

15  

+ 0 

19 

+ 0 

7 

+ 0 

32 

+ 0 

6 

— 0 

24 

-0 

19 

— 1 

14 

-0  29 

16  

-0 

28 

( + 0 

7) 

+ 0 

39 

( + 0 36) 

-0 

28 

(-0 

18) 

-0 

39 

(-0  7) 

p 

• fH 

17  

-0 

52 

+ 0 

29 

-0 

10 

+ 0 

8 

— 0 

8 

+ 0 

7 

-0 

16 

4-0  4 

18  

— 1 

34 

+ 0 

31 

+ 0 

2 

+ 0 

40 

-0 

1 

+ 0 

17 

+ 0 

2 

4-0  8 

1 "S 

19  

2 

8 

+ 0 

35 

— 0 

9 

+ 0 

46 

+ 0 

14 

+ 0 

36 

+ 0 

40 

4-0  33 

! 2 

20  

— 2 

45 

+ 0 

32 

— 0 

26 

+ 0 

42 

+ 0 

4 

+ 0 

28 

+ 0 

52 

4-0  33 

1 

21  

— 3 

24 

+ 0 

19 

— 1 

34 

-0 

15 

+ 0 

8 

+ 0 

33 

+ 1 

6 

4-0  36 

1 -S' 

1 ^ 

22  

— 4 

3 

-0 

2 

— 1 

24 

+ 0 

1 

+ 0 

9 

+ 0 

35 

+ 1 

5 

+ 0 27 

1 

23  

-4 

40 

— 0 

28 

— 1 

49 

-0 

21 

-0 

12 

+ 0 

14 

+ 1 

14 

+ 0 29 

24  

-4 

19 

(-0 

6) 

— 1 

33 

(-0 

7) 

-0 

32 

(-0 

7) 

+ 1 

9 

(+0  20) 

25  

-4. 

9 

— 0 

4 

— 1 

15 

+ 0 

6 

-0 

29 

-0 

7 

+.0 

51 

4-0  1 

1 

26  

— 3 

51 

— 0 

4 

— 1 

5 

+ 0 

5 

-0 

25 

-0 

6 

+ 0 

33 

— 0 16 

1 

27  

— 3 

28 

-0 

5 

-1 

25 

-0 

53 

— 1 

3 

-0 

48 

+ 0 

15 

— 0 30 

28  

-3 

3 

-0 

12 

— 1 

15 

-0 

35 

-0 

40 

— 0 

29 

+ 0 

3 

— 0 35 

29  

— 2 

30 

-0 

18 

-0 

52 

— 0 

31 

-0 

33 

-0 

27 

-0 

2 

— 0 32 

30  

— 2 

1 

-0 

31 

— 0 

20 

-0 

21 

— 0 

27 

— 0 

26 

-0 

10 

-0  29 

31  

— 1 

12 

-0 

28 

-0 

27 

-0 

49 

-0 

2 

-0 

7 

— 0 

16 

-0  23 

0 

+ 0 

24 

o 

+ 0 

32 

o 

+ 0 

34 

o 

+ 0 

35 

! Quad  ran  tal  coefficients  ...V 

— 0 

23 

-0 

24 

-0 

36 

-0 

38 

+ 0 

23 

+ 0 

20 

+ 0 

34 

+ 0 

34 

; 

- 0 

20 

-0 

36 

-0 

30 

-0 

33 

j Mean  quadrantal  coefficient 

+ 0 

23 

+ 0 

28 

j 

+ 0 

34 

4-0 

35 

True  modulu 

s 

•069 

-033 

i -008 

1 

•020 

True  starboard  angle 

O 

o 

0'’-92 

1 

r 

•86 

14'’-99 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS 


67 


i No. 


5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


Ship’s  name 


Erebus. 


Bloodhound. 


Place  of  observation  

Kerguelen’s  Land. 

Plymouth. 

Constantinople. 

Piraeus.  j 

Time  of  observation  

1 1845. 

1846. 

Index  correction  

0° 

0' 

-0° 

27' 

-0°  6' 

— 0 

9' 

Approximate  modulus  

•067 

•259 

•185 

•I6l 

Approx,  starboard  angle  ... 

15'’-81 

31'’-15 

30'’-91 

30" 

•70 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 
deviation 
u 11  cor- 
rected. 

Residual 

error. 

P 

r 0 

O 

+ 0 

8 

( 0 

0) 

i 

o 

— ] 

0 

O 

( + 1 

0) 

— 4 

20 

o 

(-2 

10) 



0 

1 

45 

( + 0 26) 

1 

— 0 

22 

+ 0 

15 

+ 3 

20 

+ 2 

26 

+ 0 

20 

+ 0 

26 

+ 

0 

15 

+ 0 

39 

2 

— 1 

1 

+ 0 

20 

+ 7 

15 

+ 3 

28 

+ 4 

0 

+ 2 

1 

+ 

2 

55 

+ 1 

30 

3 

— 1 

31 

+0 

31 

: +10 

50 

+ 4 

18 

+ 7 

0 

+ 3 

1 

+ 

7 

15 

+ 4 

4 ! 

4 

— 2 

9 

+ 0 

29 

i + 13 

20 

+ 4 

15 

+ 9 

0 

+ 3 

9 

+ 

8 

35 

+ 3 

46 

5 

— 2 

13 

+ 0 

54 

: + 14 

40 

+ 3 

22 

+ 10 

20 

+ 2 

50 

+ 10 

20 

+ 4 

3 

6 

— 3 

1 

+ 0 

30 

-1-15 

0 

+ 1 

53 

+ 11 

20 

+ 2 

29 

+ 11 

0 

+ 3 

30 

7 

— 3 

31 

+ 0 

14 

+ 15 

0 

+ 0 

33 

+ 11 

50 

+ 1 

55 

+ 

9 

55 

+ 1 

26 

8 

— 3 

48 

( + 0 

3) 

+ 14 

0 

(-1 

14) 

-f  12 

50 

( + 2 

17) 

+ 

9 

15 

( + 0 

9) 

9 

-3 

53 

— 0 

4 

+ 13 

20 

— 2 

6 

+ 10 

30 

-0 

17 

+ 

8 

5 

— 1 

17  1 

o 

10  

— 4 

12 

— 0 

35 

+ 11 

50 

— 3 

13 

+ 9 

0 

— 1 

39 

+ 

6 

35 

-2 

44 

x/x 

11  

-3 

51 

— 0 

33 

+ 10 

20 

— 3 

47 

+ 6 

50 

-3 

13 

+ 

5 

35 

— 3 

19 

12  

— 3 

20 

-0 

30 

+ 9 

20 

-3 

17 

+ 5 

30 

-3 

35 

+ 

4 

15 

-3 

52 

13  

-2 

50 

-0 

34 

+ 7 

50 

— 2 

50 

+ 3 

0 

— 4 

47 

+ 

3 

15 

-3 

48 

O 

14  

-2 

4 

-0 

28 

+ 6 

20 

— 2 

1 

+ 2 

50 

— 3 

20 

+ 

2 

55 

-2 

48 

15  

— 1 

10 

— 0 

16 

+ 4 

20 

— 1 

23 

+ 2 

40 

— 1 

41 

+ 

2 

35 

— 1 

35 

a 

16  

-0 

21 

(-0 

13) 

+ 2 

40 

(-0 

14) 

+ 2 

20 

(-0 

2) 

+ 

2 

45 

( + 0 

16) 

17  

+ 0 

44 

+ 0 

7 

+ 1 

20 

+ 1 

20 

+ 1 

30 

+ 1 

12 

+ 

1 

15 

+0 

33 

18  

+ 1 

53 

+ 0 

32 

— 0 

50 

+ 2 

3 

+ 0 

40 

+ 2 

27 

+ 

1 

25 

-1-2 

32 

19  

+ 2 

33 

+ 0 

31 

— 2 

40 

+ 2 

58 

- 0 

10 

+ 3 

37 

+ 

1 

35 

+ 4 

28 

u 

20  

+ 3 

23 

+ 0 

45 

— 5 

20 

+ 2 

51 

— 2 

40 

+ 2 

59 

— 

0 

5 

+ 4 

26  1 

Ph 

P4 

21  

+ 3 

46 

+ 0 

39 

- 7 

10 

+ 3 

14 

— 4 

0 

+ 3 

18 

— 

1 

55 

+ 4 

4 1 

22  

+ 4 

5 

+ 0 

34 

- 9 

50 

+ 2 

23 

- 6 

0 

+ 2 

39 

— 

3 

45 

+ 3 

27 

23  

+ 3 

56 

+ 0 

11 

— 11 

10 

+ 2 

23 

- 7 

30 

+ 2 

13 

— 

7 

5 

+ 1 

6 i 

24  

+ 3 

40 

(-0 

11) 

— 13 

0 

('  +1 

20) 

-10 

0 

(+0  21) 

— 

9 

5 

(-0 

17): 

25  

+ 3 

35 

-0 

14 

— 15 

50 

— 1 

18 

— 11 

20 

— 0 

45 

— 

11 

45 

— 2 

41 

26  

+ 3 

11 

-0 

26 

-16 

40 

— 2 

31 

— 12 

30 

2 

3 

— 

13 

5 

-4 

4 I 

27  

+ 2 

37 

-0 

41 

-16 

40 

— 3 

27 

— 11 

20 

—1 

29 

— 

12 

25 

— 3 

49  ' 

28  

+ 2 

1 

-0 

49 

— 15 

30 

— 3 

47 

-12 

30 

— 3 

37 

— 

10 

45 

-2 

56  ' 

29  

+ 2 

7 

— 0 

9 

— 13 

30 

— 3 

44 

— 11 

0 

-3 

25 

— 

9 

30 

— 2 

45 

30  

+ 1 

9 

-0 

27 

— 11 

20 

— 3 

53 

— 8 

30 

— 2 

32 

— 

8 

45 

— 3 

20 

31  

+ 0 

26 

— 0 

28 

- 6 

0 

— 1 

11 

- 6 

20 

— 2 

11 

— 

5 

0 

— 1 

8 

Quadrantal  coefficients  "‘*1^ 

o 

+ 0 
— 0 
+ 0 
-0 

39 

36 

40 

39 

O 

+ 4 
-3 
+ 3 
-3 

3 

43 

26 

58 

o 

+ 3 

— 3 
+ 3 

— 3 

10 

42 

41 

16 

o 

+ 3 

— 3 
+ 4 

— 4 

48 

53 

7 

9 

i 

Mean  quadrantal  coefficient 

+ 0 

38 

+ 3 

48 

+ 3 27 

+ 3 59 

True  modulus  

•068 

•264 

•189 

•164 

True  starboard  angle 

15'’ 

•82 

31‘’-22 

30" 

99 

30"-82  1 

1 

68 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


No 

1 9- 

1 

10, 

! 

12. 

Ship’s  name  

Jackal. 

1 Trident. 

Place  of  observation  

Plymouth. 

Tagus. 

Pireeus. 

Greenhithe. 

Time  of  observation  

1845. 

1847. 

1846. 

1846. 

Index  correction  

— 0°  12' 

+ 0°  4' 

-0°  4' 

— 0°  37' 

Approximate  modulus  

•297 

•216 

•182 

1 -366 

Approx,  starboard  angle  ... 

31‘’-40 

31'’-10 

31-'’58 

1 0‘’-32 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Ot)served 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Apparent  azimuth  of  ship’s  head. 

P 

r 0 

] 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10  

11  

12  

13  

14  

15  

16  

17  

18  

19  

20  

21  

22  

23  

24  

25  

26  

27  

28  

29  

30  

31  

O t 

— 2 15 

-b  2 40 
+ 8 58 
+ 13  7 

+ 13  18 
+ 17  15 
+ 18  7 
+ 17  47 
+ 15  35 
+ 14  38 
+ 13  22 
+ 11  40 
+ 9 55 
+ 85 
+ 5 35 
+ 4 12 
+ 2 20 

— 0 12 

— 2 32 

— 4 55 

— 6 30 

— 8 45 

— 10  52 

— 13  30 

— 15  45 

— 17  25 

— 18  25 

— 18  25 

— 17  15 

— 15  45 

— 11  55 

— 7 25 

(-0  27) 
+ 1 8 
+ 4 8 

+ 5 9 
+ 4 29 
+ 3 59 
+ 2 33 
+ 1 9 

(-1  54) 
-2  49 

— 3 28 

— 3 54 

— 3 48 

— 3 15 
-2  59 
-1  16 

( + 0 8) 
-1-0  56 
+ 1 34 
+ 2 39 
+ 3 55 
+ 4 7 
+ 3 58 
+ 2 24 
( + 1 14) 

— 0 22 
-1  59 

— 3 15 

— 3 56 
-4  49 

— 3 45 

— 2 21 

o / 

— 1 0 
+ 30 
+ 6 40 
+ 9 20 
+ 11  20 
+ 12  20 
+ 12  0 
+ 12  0 
+ 11  40 
+ 10  20 
+ 9 20 
+ 90 
+ 5 40 
+ 4 40 
+ 3 20 
+ 2 40 
+ 20 
+ 1 20 
— 1 0 
- 1 0 

— 3 40 

— 4 0 

— 7 40 
-10  0 

— 12  40 

— 13  20 

-15  20 
-15  0 

— 14  40 

— 14  40 

— 9 20 

— 5 40 

(+1  14) 
+ 2 49 
+ 4 5 

+ 4 27 
+ 4 19 
+ 3 27 
+ 1 36 
+ 0 30 
(-0  31) 

— 2 3 

— 2 45 

— 2 20 

— 4 27 
-3  49 

— 3 17 

— 1 46 
(-0  6) 

+ 1 39 
+ 1 43 
+ 4 1 

+ 3 29 
+ 3 1 

+ 2 52 
+ 1 38 
(-0  21) 
-0  49 
-3  7 

— 3 32 

— 4 25 

— 6 3 

— 2 35 
-1  6 

— 6 40 

+ 30 
+ 6 30 
+ 8 20 
-blO  40 
+ 11  20 
+ 12  20 
+ 10  30 
+ 10  0 
+ 90 
+ 80 
+ 6 15 
-1-4  0 

-b  3 15 
+ 30 
+ 1 20 
-b  0 40 

— 1 0 
— 1 20 

— 2 40 

— 2 40 

— 4 40 

— 5 40 

— 8 20 

- 9 40 

— 11  20 
— 12  0 

— 12  40 

— 11  5 

- 9 40 

- 8 0 
— 4 30 

(+0  9) 
-bl  44 
+ 3 14 
+ 3 11 
+ 3 50 
+ 3 4 

+ 2 56 
+ 0 20 
( — 0 33) 

— 1 30 

-2  5 

-2  59 
-4  4 

— 3 20 

— 1 51 
-1  37 

(-0  17) 
+ 0 8 
+ 1 48 
-b2  21 
-b4  2 

-b3  28 
4-3  36 
-bl  42 
( + 0 45) 

— 0 58 

-2  3 

— 3 34 
-3  9 

— 3 13 

— 3 17 

— 1 41 

+ 3 12 
+ 8 25 
+ 13  44 
+ 18  37 
4-21  7 
+ 21  45 
+ 22  15 
+ 22  26 
+ 20  18 
+ 18  50 
+ 16  30 
+ 13  0 

+ 11  0 
+ 7 30 
+ 60 
+ 2 20 
- 0 6 

— 2 45 

— 5 58 

— 8 42 

— 10  55 

— 13  25 

— 17  10 
-19  17 
-20  35 

— 21  22 
— 21  12 
-19  40 

— 18  15 

— 14  40 

— 9 38 

— 3 50 

( + i 17) 
+ 2 26 
+ 3 52 
+ 5 10 
+ 4 35 
+ 2 41 
+ 1 22 
+ 0 32 
(-1  46) 
-2  31 
—3  19 
-4  32 
-3  38 

— 3 43 

— 1 26 

-1  5 

( + 0 35) 
+ 2 0 
+ 2 40 
+ 3 31 
+ 4 23 
+ 4 25 
+ 2 29 
+ 1 23 
(+0  15) 

— 1 15 
-2  37 

— 3 22 

— 4 51 

— 4 41 
-3  26 
-1  39 

r 

Quadrantal  coefficients 

o / 

+ 4 35 

— 4 18 
+ 3 59 

— 4 5 

+ 4 15 
— 4 5 
+ 4 5 
-4  19 

+ 3 40 
-3  29 
+ 3 25 
-3  35 

O / 

+ 4 8 

— 4 3 

+ 4 10 
-4  22 

Mean  quadrantal  coefficient 

+ 4 14 

+ 4 11 

+ 3 32 

+ 4 11 

True  modulus  

•305 

•220 

•186 

•375 

True  starboard  angle  

31‘’-46 

31‘’-19 

3P-61 

0-P29 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS 


69 


No 

13.* 

14. 

15. 

16. 

Ship’s  name  

Trident. 

Pandora. 

Maeander. 

Place  of  observation  

Malta. 

Plymouth. 

Auckland. 

Sheerness. 

Time  of  observation  

1847. 

1851,  February. 

1853,  January. 

1852,  September. 

Index  correction  

— 0°  38' 

+ 0°  47' 

+ 0°  43' 

+ 0”  15' 

Approximate  modulus  

•240 

•043 

•045 

•021 

Approx,  starboard  angle  ... 

31‘’-64 

0'’-28 

14P-50 

2P-33 

Obsei'ved 
deviation 
nn  cor- 
rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Apparent  azimuth  of  ship’s  head. 

_ _ 

P 

r 0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10  

11  

12  

13  

14  

15  

16  

17  

18  

19  

20  

21  

22  

23  

24  

25  

26  

27  

28  

29  

30  

31  

o / 

+ 1 19 
+ 4 29 
+ 6 59 
+ 11  19 
+ 14  9 
+ 14  59 
+ 15  29 
+ 14  29 
+ 13  19 
+ 12  9 
+ 10  9 
+ 99 
+ 79 
+ 69 
+ 4 59 
+ 3 39 
+ 2 29 
+ 0 19 
— 1 21 

— 2 51 

— 5 1 

— 7 21 

— 9 31 

— 10  41 
-12  51 

— 14  21 

— 14  21 

— 15  1 

— 14  21 

— 11  31 

— 8 41 

— 4 21 

(+1  40) 
+ 2 8 
+ 2 0 
+ 3 52 
+ 4 29 
+ 3 26 
+ 2 28 
+ 0 29 
(-1  9) 

— 2 15 

— 3 38 
-3  29 
-3  55 

— 2 56 
-1  47 

— 0 37 

( + 0 52) 
+ 1 24 
+ 2 22 
-rS  20 
+ 3 23 
+ 2 56 
+ 2 14 
+ 2 3 

(+0  21) 
-1  13 
-1  50 
-3  39 

— 4 33 

— 3 42 
-3  11 

— 1 21 

o / 

+ 0 10 
+ 0 30 
+ 0 50 
+ 0 50 
+ 1 45 
+ 1 20 
+ 1 50 
+ 1 55 
+ 2 5 

+ 2 0 
+ 1 20 
+ 0 50 

— 0 25 

— 1 10 

— 0 20 
-0  40 
-0  45 
-1  25 
— 1 0 
-1  50 
-2  0 
-2  10 
-2  40 
-3  0 

-3  40 

— 4 17 
-3  50 
-3  50 

— 2 30 

— 2 40 
-1  20 

— 0 50 

( + 6 48) 
+ 0 40 
+ 0 32 
+ 0 7 
+ 0 41 
-0  1 
+ 0 16 
+ 0 15 
( + 0 24) 
+ 0 23 
-0  7 
— 0 22 
-1  18 
-1  39 
-0  23 
-0  15 
( + 0 11) 
-0  1 
+ 0 52 
+ 0 27 
+ 0 38 
+ 0 45 
+ 0 28 
+ 0 14 
(-0  25) 
-1  6 
-0  49 

— 1 4 

— 0 3 

— 0 37 
+ 0 17 
+ 0 19 

o / 

0 0 
-0  4 

— 0 45 
-1  33 

— 1 30 

— 1 56 

— 1 50 

— 2 35 

— 2 40 

— 3 27 

— 3 25 

— 3 45 
-3  23 
-3  28 
-2  50 

— 2 16 

— 1 35 
-0  36 
+ 0 20 
+ 0 50 
+ 1 26 
+ 1 0 
+ 1 10 
+ 0 55 
+ 1 40 
+ 2 36 
+ 1 35 
+ 0 47 
+ 0 30 
+ 0 45 
+ 0 5 

+ 1 5 

(-0  2) 
+ 0 24 
+ 0 13 

— 0 5 

+ 0 21 
+ 0 26 
+ 0 52 
+ 0 23 

( + 0 31) 
-0  11 
-0  9 

— 0 34 

— 0 25 

— 0 46 
-0  28 

— 0 20 
(-0  7) 

+ 0 22 
+ 0 48 
+ 0 48 
+ 1 1 
+ 0 4 

-0  6 

— 0 37 

(-0  5) 

+ 0 46 

— 0 15 
-0  58 
-1  2 
-0  31 
-0  51 
+ 0 40 

+ 6 30 
+ 0 45 
+ 0 35 
+ 0 30 
+ 0 45 
+ 0 55 
+ 1 0 
+ 1 0 
+ 0 30 
+ 0 30 
+ 0 30 
+ 0 30 
-hO  20 
+ 0 25 

0 0 

0 0 
-0  10 

— 0 35 
-1  40 

— 1 40 
-2  10 
-2  0 
-1  40 

— 1 30 

— 1 30 

— 1 25 

— 0 40 
-0  40 

— 0 20 
— 0 20 
-0  20 
— 0 15 

( + 0 14) 
+ 0 18 
-0  3 

— 0 16 
-0  7 

0 0 
+ 0 4 

+ 0 6 
(-0  19) 
— 0 11 
— 0 2 
+ 0 9 
+ 0 12 
+ 0 31 
+ 0 19 
+ 0 33 
( + 0 36) 
+ 0 22 

— 0 32 

-0  24 
-0  48 
-0  35 
-0  4 

-0  6 

(-0  11) 

— 0 14 

+ 0 32 
+ 0 21 
+ 0 18 
+ 0 4 

-0  9 
-0  28 

Quadrantal  coefficients 

L 

+ 3 46 
-3  43 
+ 3 32 
-3  54 

+ 0 30 
— 0 44 
+ 0 41 
-0  37 

o t 

+ 0 31 
— 0 35 
+ 0 28 
-0  26 

O / 

0 0 
+ 0 18 
— 0 25 
+ 0 5 

Mean  quadrantal  coefficient 

+ 3 44  i 

+ 0 38 

+ 0 30 

-0  12 

True  modulus  

•245 

•044 

•045 

•021 

True  starboard  angle 

31'’-67 

OP-27 

14P-52 

2P-32  • 

70 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


No 

17. 

18. 

19. 

£0. 

Ship’s  name  

Maeander. 

Virago. 

Plumper. 

Place  of  observation 

Simon’s  Bay. 

Plymouth. 

Valparaiso. 

Portsmouth. 

Time  of  observation 

1853,  March. 

1851,  September. 

185£,  September. 

1853,  September. 

Index  correction  

+ 0°  £3' 

— 0°  19' 

4-0^  9' 

4-0°  £7' 

Approximate  modulus  

•044 

•1£9 

•012 

•106 

Approx,  starboard  angle  ... 

15‘’-80 

0'’-58 

6‘‘-£5 

0'’-90 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 
deviation 
un  cor- 
rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

un  cor- 
rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Apparent  azimuth  of  ship’s  head. 

P 

r 0 

1 

£ 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10  

11  

1£  

13  

14  

15  

16  

17  

18  

19  

£0  

£1  

££  

£3  

£4  

£5  

£6  

£7  

£8  

£9  

30  

[_  31  

O ! 

-1  0 
-1  0 
— 1 0 
-1  10 

— £ 40 

— £ 40 

— 3 1£ 

— £ 40 

( — £ 55) 

— 3 10 
-£  55 

— £ £5 
-£  10 

— 1 50 
-1  0 

— 0 10 
— 0 50 

0 0 
+ 0 50 
+ 1 0 
+ 0 50 
+ 1 £0 
+ 1 50 
+ £ 0- 
+ £ 0 
+ £ 40 
+ 1 40 
+ 1 57 
+ 1 50 
+ 1 £0 
+ 1 10 

0 0 

(-6  4.3) 

— 0 13 
+ 0 16 
+ 0 3£ 
-0  34 

— 0 15 
-0  3£ 

+ 0 10 

(-0  1) 
-0  18 
-0  11 
+ 0 7 
+ 0 4 

+ 0 £ 

+ 0 £6 
+ 0 48 
(-0  £1) 
-0  1 
+ 0 £0 
+ 0 4 

-0  30 
-0  19 
-0  4 

— 0 4 

(-0  8) 

+ 0 34 
-0  18 
+ 0 11 
+ 0 ££ 

+ 0 14 
+ 0 30 
-0  1£ 

+ 1 6 
+ £ 50 
-f  4 0 

-+5  0 

+ 6 30 
+ 8 0 
+ 9 40 
+ 9 40 
4-8  40 
+ 7 20 
+ 6 40 
+ 4 30 
+ 3 0 

+ £ 0 
+ 1 0 
-fO  40 
-0  50 
-1  £0 
-£  £0 

— 3 0 

— 3 35 
-5  £0 
-6  30 
-7  10 

— 8 £0 
— 8 £0 
-7  40 
— 6 £0 
-6  0 
-3  £0 
-0  50 
+ 0 40 

(-6  10) 
-f-O  15 
-f  0 5 

-0  7 
4-0  £3 
4-1  5 

4-2  13 
4-1  58 
(-fO  59) 
-0  3 

-0  8 
-1  29 
-1  57 

— 1 43 

— 1 ££ 
-0  17 

(-0  18) 
+ 0 37 
+ 0 57 
4-1  29 
4-1  54 
4-0  57 
+ 0 19 
-0  6 
(-1  17) 
-1  35 

— 1 30 
-0  59 

— 1 41 

— 0 15 
4-0  54 
4-0  59 

o / 

-f  1 0 

4-1  40 
4-£  £0 
-|-£  £0 
4-2  20 
-|-£  30 
-|-£  £0 
4-0  £0 
-0  30 
-1  0 
— 1 £0 
— £ 0 
— £ 10 
-£  40 
-£  40 
— 1 £0 
-0  10 
-0  10 

0 0 
4-0  50 
4-0  50 
-1  30 
4-0  50 
4-0  £0 
-0  £0 
-1  0 
-1  0 

— 1 30 

— 1 0 
-1  0 
— 1 0 
-0  10 

(4-0  31) 
+ l 9 
4-1  49 
4-1  50 
4-1  5£ 
-|-£  6 
4-2  1 
4-0  8 
(-0  35) 

— 0 57 
-1  9 

— r 4£ 

— 1 43 
-£  7 
-£  1 
-0  37 

(4-0  37) 
4-0  39 
+ 0 49 
4-1  38 
4-1  36 
-0  48 
-fi  27 
4-0  50 
( + 0 3) 
-0  45 
-0  53 
-1  30 
-1  9 

— 1 15 

— 1 £1 
— 0 35 

4-0  35 
4-£  20 
4-3  40 
4-5  0 

4"  5 55 
4-6  45 
4-6  35 
+ 6 0 
+ 5 45 
4-4  40 
4-3  45 
+ £ 50 
( + 1 45) 
(4-0  40) 
(-0  £5) 

— 1 30 
-1  45 

— 1 50 

— £ 40 
-3  40 

— 4 £5 

— 4 35 

— 4 55 

— 5 35 

— 6 15 
-6  35 
-6  £5 
-6  0 
—5  30 

(-4  £0) 

— 3 10 

-1  5 

(-6  £) 
4-0  33 
4-0  50 
4-1  14 
4-1  £3 
4-1  38 
+ 1 5 

4-0  £3 
(4-0  13) 

— 0 33 
-0  56 
-1  6 
-1  17 
-1  £0 
-1  17 
-1  11 

(-0  16) 
+ 0 49 
4-1  £ 

4-0  58 
4-0  59 
4-1  24 
4-1  27 
4-0  54 
(■fO  9) 
-0  30 

— 0 5£ 

— 1 1£ 

— 1 36 

— 1 £8 
— 1 £6 
-0  3£ 

Qiiadrantal  coefficients 

o / 

-0  9 
+ 0 10 
-0  9 
+ 0 14 

o / 

4-1  10 
— 1 £4 
+ 1 13 
-0  49 

-|-£  11 
-£  3 

4-1  14 
— 1 30 

4-1  £5 

— 1 3£ 

4-1  31 

— 1 31 

xMean  quadrantal  coefficient 

-0  11 

+ 1 9 

4-1  44 

4-1  30 

T rue  modulus  

•044 

•130 

•01£ 

•106 

True  starboard  angle  

' 15P-80 

0'’-56 

e^-is 

0'’-87 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS, 


71 


No 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

Ship’s  name  

Plumper. 

Spy. 

Trident. 

Place  of  observation 

St.  Catherine’s. 

Sheerness. 

St.  Paul’s  Loando. 

Greenhithe. 

Time  of  observation 

1852,  April. 

1854,  August. 

1852,  December. 

1852,  September. 

Index  correction  

-0°  3' 

-hl°  35' 

-h0°  15' 

— 0°  2' 

Approximate  modulus  

•048 

•040 

•077 

•345 

Approx,  starboard  angle  ... 

l‘’-55 

27‘’-56 

31'’-93 

31‘’-27 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

rected. 

Re.sidual 

error. 

Observed 

deviation 

uncor- 

reeted. 

Residual 

error. 

Observed 
deviation 
u 11  cor- 
rected. 

Residual 

error. 

P 

r 0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

'i  9 

^ 10  

M 11  

12 

« 13  

"s  14  

J 15  

1 i 16  

.§  17  

18  

^ 19  

2 20  

21  

^ 22  

23  

24  

25  

26  

27  

28  

29  

30  

1^  31  

O ^ 

+ 1 0 
+ 2 30 
+ 3 20 
+ 3 20 
+ 3 40 
+ 4 0 

+ 4 10 
+ 3 20 
+ 2 30 
+ 1 40 
+ 0 40 
+ 0 30 
-0  20 

— 0 45 
-0  45 
-0  50 

— 0 50 

— 0 40 

— 0 20 
-0  40 
-0  30 
— 1 0 
— 1 20 
— 2 0 
-2  30 

— 3 0 

-3  20 
-3  30 
-3  0 

-2  0 

— 1 30 

0 0 

( + 0 7) 
+ 1 7 
-hi  30 
+ 1 8 
+ 1 11 
-hi  18 
-hi  22 
-hO  33 
(-0  11) 

— 0 47 

— 1 30 

— 1 17 
-1  40 
-1  34 
-1  2 
-0  35 

(-0  3) 

+ 0 37 
+ 1 24 

H-  1 26 
+ 1 53 
-hi  36 
-hi  22 
-fO  41 
( + 0 5) 

-0  39 
-1  16 
-1  49 

— 1 46 
-1  17 
-1  19 
-0  21 

O f 

— 5 0 

— 5 0 

— 3 0 

! 0 0 

-fl  20 
-hO  15 
-hO  10 
-hO  40 

0 0 
-hO  40 
-hO  20 
-hO  10 

-t  0 10 

-hO  10 
-hO  10 

— 1 0 

— 1 40 

- ] 0 

— 0 40 
-0  30 

0 0 
-1  30 
-2  30 

— 1 30 

— 2 10 

-3  0 

— 1 30 

— 3 20 
-5  30 

— 5 0 

-5  50 
-5  0 

(-1  41) 
— 2 0 
— 0 22 
-h2  14 
+ 3 7 
-hi  35 
+ 1 3 

+ 1 9 
( + 0 7) 
+ 0 29 

— 0 5 

— 0 25 
-0  30 
-0  29 

— 0 24 
-1  23 

(-1  49) 
-0  50 
-0  8 
-hO  26 
-hi  23 
H-O  20 
-0  13 
-hi  11 
(-hO  53) 
-hO  21 
-h2  5 

-hO  25 

— 1 40 

— 1 11 
— 2 6 
— 1 27 

o / 

— 0 40 
-hO  20 
-hi  20 
+ 2 20 
-h3  10 
-h3  40 
-h2  50 
-h3  30 
-h4  10 
-h4  30 
-h4  40 
4-3  30 
4-3  20 
4-2  0 
4-1  30 
4-0  20 

0 0 
-1  0 

— 1 50 

— 3 10 

— 3 50 

— 4 10 

— 4 10 
-4  50 
-4  30 

— 4 25 

— 4 10 

-4  0 

-3  0 

— 2 40 

— 1 40 
-1  0 

( — 6 21) 

— 0 13 

-0  3 

-hO  10 
4-0  19 
4-0  16 
-1  0 

— 0 35 
(-0  1) 

+ 0 23 
-t-0  48 
+ 0 1 
4-0  24 
-0  16 
-fO  1 
-0  20 
(4-0  11) 
4-0  3 

4-0  3 

-0  30 
-0  29 

— 0 16 
4-0  10 
-0  15 

(+0  11) 
-hO  12 
4-0  12 
-0  1 
4-0  26 
4-0  6 
4-0  19 
-hO  10 

— 2 55 

-h  3 40 
4-  9 13 
4-12  32 
4-15  50 
+ 17  40 
+ 19  30 
+ 19  5 

+ 18  40 
+ 17  15 
+ 15  50 
4-14  10 
+ 12  30 
+ 11  30 
+ 9 20 
+ 5 55 
+ 2 30 

0 0 

— 2 30 

— 5 50 

— 9 10 
-11  52 
-14  35 
— 16  47 
-19  0 
-20  22 
-21  45 
— 22  10 
— 20  0 

— 16  30 

-13  0 

- 7 32 

(-0  7) 
+ 2 35 
+ 4 20 
+ 3 57 
+ 3 52 
+ 2 46 
+ 2 12 
+ 0 3 

(-1  21) 

— 2 57 

— 3 45 

— 4 1 

-3  35 

— 1 53 

— 0 51 

— 0 44 
(-0  22) 

+ 1 1 
+ 2 21 
+ 2 41 
+ 2 44 
+ 2 58 
+ 2 39 
+ 2 11 
( + 0 57) 

— 0 14 

— 2 14 

— 4 3 

-3  59 
-3  11 
-2  53 
-0  57 

Quadrantal  coefficients  ...<|^ 

1 

L 

-hi  38 

— 1 41 
-hi  48 

— 1 41 

-hi  21 

— 0 33 
-hO  26 

— 0 43 

o / 

— 0 13 

4-0  12 
-0  15 

4-0  17 

+ 3 57 
- 3 33 
+ 3 19  : 

-3  30  i 

Mean  quadrantal  coefficient 

-hi  42 

-hO  46 

— 0 14 

-j-  3 35  1 

True  modulus  .; ' ‘049 

•040 

•077 

•352 

True  starboard  angle  ' l'’*49 

27'’-60 

31  ”•93 

31‘’-33 

72 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


26. 

27. 

Vulcan. 

Portsmouth. 

Simon’s  Bay. 

1852,  July. 

1853,  February. 

+ 0° 

13' 

-1 

D g, 

•155 

•271 

15-’ 

•58 

15' 

•73 

Observed 

Observed 

deviation 

Residual 

deviation 

Residual 

uncor- 

error. 

uncor- 

error. 

rected. 

rected. 

— 0 45 

(-1  16) 

+ 3 20 

(+1  2.3) 

- 0 55 

+ 0 19 

+ 30 

+ 4 5 

— 1 5 

+ 1 51 

+ 20 

+ 6 3 

— 1 22 

+ 3 9 

+ 0 35 

+ 7 25 

— 1 40 

+ 4 19 

— 3 5 

+ 6 13 

- 3 22 

+ 3 49 

- 8 0 

+ 3 24 

— 5 4 

+ 3 5 

— 13  10 

-0  9 

- 6 46 

+ 2 0 

— 18  35 

— 4 30 

— 8 30 

( + 0 36) 

-17  49 

(-3  16). 

- 9 47 

-0  43 

— 16  40 

-2  15 

— 11  5 

— 2 23 

-15  15 

— 1 .35 

— 10  32 

— 2 32 

— 15  10 

— 2 51 

— 10  0 

-3  0 

— 14  20 

— 3 51 

— 8 50 

— 3 4 

— 12  55 

— 4 42 

— 7 40 

-3  23 

— 7 30 

— 1 56 

- 5 0 

— 2 20 

— 5 20 

-2  37 

— 2 20 

(— 1 23) 

+ 0 55 

( + 0 36) 

+ 1 25 

+ 0 37 

+ 4 35 

+ 1 14 

+ 5 10 

+ 2 40 

+ 8 10 

+ 1 51 

+ 7 20 

+ 3 15 

+ 12  30 

+ 3 24 

+ 9 30 

+ 4 0 

+ 14  35 

+ 3 1 

+ 10  5 

+ 3 20 

+ 16  55 

+ 3 15 

+ 10  40 

+ 2 57 

+ 20  30 

+ 5 13 

+ 9 55 

+ 1 35 

+ 17  50 

+ 1 29 

+ 9 10 

( + 0 30) 

+ 17  30 

( + 0 41) 

+ 7 40 

-0  58 

+ 16  30 

-0  11 

+ 6 10 

— 2 6 

+ 12  0 

— 3 56 

+ 4 40 

~2  54 

+ 10  25 

— 4 10 

+ 3 10 

— 3 24 

+ 8 30 

— 4 15 

+ 22 

— 3 18 

+ 6 50 

-3  39 

+ 0 55 

— 2 56 

+ 40 

—3  50 

+ 0 5 

-2  9 

+ 3 40 

-1  19 

+ 3 42 

o * 

+ 4 30 

— S 

29 

— 3 

57 

+ 3 41 

+ 3 53 

2 

33 

— 4 

16 

+ 3 36 

+ 4 9 

•158 

•277 

15 

'•62 

15 

’•76 

No. 


Ship’s  name 


Place  of  observation 


Time  of  observation 


Index  correction 


25. 


Trident. 


Rio  Janeiro. 


1852,  November. 


+ 0°  8' 


Approximate  modulus 


Approx,  starboard  angle 


•216 


3P-22 


Observed 

deviation 

uiicor- 

rected. 


cS 

o 

rO 


■§ 


-(j 


P 

o / 

0 

- 1 0 

( + 0 59) 

1 

+ 20 

+ 1 35 

2 

+ 50 

+ 2 11 

3 

+ 8 30 

+ 3 24 

4 

+ 11  0 

+ 3 47 

5 

+ 13  0 

+ 3 59 

6 

+ 13  40 

+ 3 10 

7 — 

+ 13  20 

+ 1 47 

8 

+ 12  0 

(-0  12) 

9 

+ 11  0 

-1  19 

10  

+ 90 

— 2 58 

11  

+ 80 

-3  9 

12  

+ 6 30 

— 3 23 

13  

+ 40 

— 4 15 

14  

+ 3 10 

-3  8 

15  

+ 30 

-1  6 

16  

+ 1 20 

(-0  23) 

17  

0 0 

+ 0 41 

18  

- 0 24 

+ 2 41 

19  

— 2 20 

+ 3 2 

20  

- 4 0 

+ 3 29 

21  

- 6 0 

+ 3 17 

22  

— 7 40 

+ 3 6 

23  

- 9 40 

+ 2 9 

24  

— 11  20 

( + 1 8) 

25  

-13  20 

— 0 45 

26  

— 15  0 

— 2 46 

27  

— 15  0 

— 3 35 

28  

— 16  0 

— 5 51 

29  

— 12  0 

-3  29 

30  

-90 

— 2 26 

31  

-60 

— 1 38 

Residual 

error. 


Quadraiital  coefficients 


Mean  quadraiital  coefficient 


True  modulus 


True  starboard  angle 


+ 3 59 
-3  52 
+ 3 41 
-4  6 


+ 3 54 


•221 


3 P-29 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS 


No 

28. 

29. 

Ship’s  name  

Simoom. 

Place  of  observation 

Portsmouth. 

Simon’s 

Town. 

Time  of  observation 

1852,  September. 

1853,  October. 

Index  correction  

+ 0 

0 yi 

+ 1° 

47' 

Approximate  modulus  

•368 

•235 

Approx,  starboard  angle  ... 

30>’ 

•20 

31P-03 

Observed 

Observed 

deviation 

Residual 

deviation 

Residual 

uncor- 

error. 

uncor- 

error. 

rected. 

rected. 

P 

r 0 

O / 

— 7 40 

(-6  14) 

O / 

— 4 0 

( + 6 20) 

1 

— 1 35 

+ 1 50 

+ 0 10 

+ 1 53 

2 

+ 4 30 

+ 3 47 

+ 5 30 

+ 4 36 

3 

+ 9 20 

+ 4 31 

+ 8 30 

+ 5 4 

4 

+ 13  15 

+ 4 31 

+ 10  40 

+ 4 53 

5 

+ 17  10 

+ 4 47 

+ 11  0 

+ 3 10 

6 

+ 18  10 

+ 2 38 

+ 11  20 

+ 1 49 

7 

+ 19  15 

+ 1 6 

+ 11  45 

+ 0 58 

8 

+ 20  20 

( + 0 16) 

+ 10  30 

(-1  3) 

ns 

9 

+ 19  45 

-1  26 

+ 8 55 

— 2 53 

10  

+ 19  10 

-1  40 

+ 7 25 

-4  6 

09 

11  

+ 16  50 

— 4 0 

+ 6 30 

— 4 13 

12  

+ 14  50 

— 4 34 

+ 5 15 

— 4 11 

•i 

13  

+ 12  50 

— 4 22 

+ 4 45 

— 2 47 

o 

14  

4-10  45 

—3  36 

+ 4 30 

-1  10 

15  

+ 8 40 

-2  17 

+ 1 45 

— 1 33 

■s  ^ 

16  

+ 7 20 

( + 0 8) 

+ 0 50 

( + 0 4) 

17  

+ 4 20 

+ 1 9 

- 1 0 

+ 0 51 

ci 

18  

+ 1 20 

+ 2 17 

- 2 5 

+ 2 23 

-s 

19  

— 1 40 

+ 3 23 

— 4 10 

+ 2 50 

20  

— 4 40 

+ 4 18 

— 5 40 

+ 3 42 

P4 

21  

- 8 10 

+ 4 27 

— 7 40 

+ 3 44 

P4 

22  

— 11  40 

+ 4 6 

- 9 20 

+ 3 45 

23  

-16  10 

+ 2 13 

— 11  20 

+ 3 1 

24  

— 20  20 

(-0  2) 

— 15  20 

(-0  13) 

25  

— 22  17 

— 0 52 

-16  30 

-1  8 

26  

— 24  15 

-3  11 

— 17  0 

— 1 55 

27  

-25  10 

-4  6 

— 19  0 

— 4 43 

28  

— 24  50 

— 5 12 

— 18  20 

-5  20 

29  

— 22  20 

— 4 54 

-16  20 

— 5 14 

30  

— 18  30 

— 3 55 

— 11  15 

— 2 1 

31  

— 12  30 

-1  19 

— 7 40 

— 0 48 

Quadrantal  coefficients  ...■ 


+ 4 38 

— 4 23 
+ 4 23 

— 4 42 


+ 4 29 

— 4 11 

+ 4 3 

— 4 14 


Mean  quadrantal  coefficient 


+ 4 31 


+ 4 14 


True  modulus 


175 


•240 


True  starboard  angle 


30>’-37 


3P*12 


MDCCCLVI 


L 


74 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


I shall  first  proceed  to  consider  the  qnadrantal  deviations  in  these  ships.  It  will 
be  remembered  that,  according  to  theory,  the  coefficient  of  qnadrantal  deviation  in 
each  ship  ought  to  be  sensibly  the  same  in  all  localities ; but  that  the  coefficient  in 
one  ship  may  differ  in  any  degree  from  that  in  another  ship. 


Coefficients  of  Quadrantal  Deviation. 
1.  Wood-built  sailing-ships. 


In  the  Erebus,  at 

. Gillingham  (No.  1)  . . . . 

+ 0 23 

Porto  Piaya  (No.  2)  . . . . 

+ 0 28 

St.  Helena  (No.  3)  . . . . 

H-O  34 

Cape  of  Good  Hope  (No.  4)  . 

+0  35 

Kerguelen’s  Land  (No.  5)  . . 

+ 0 38 

In  the  Pandora,  at 

Plymouth  (No.  14)  . . . . 

-fO  38 

Auckland  (No.  15)  . . . . 

+ 0 30 

In  the  Mseander,  at 

. Sheerness  (No.  16)  .... 

— 0 12 

Simon’s  Bay  (No.  17)  . . . 

— 0 11 

In  the  Spy,  at  . . 

. Sheerness  (No.  22)  .... 

-1-0  46 

St.  Paul’s  Loando  (No.  23) 

— 0 14 

The  accordance  of  the  numbers  in  the  three  first  instances 

is 

very  remarkable ; 

and  the  more  so  because  the  compound  polar  magnetism  has  changed  considerably. 
In  the  Spy  there  is  a discordance,  but  not  important  in  nautical  experiments.  It 
will  be  seen,  on  referring  to  the  columns  of  Residual  Error  for  the  Spy,  that  there  is 

general  irregularity. 

2.  Wood-built  steamers. 

In  the  Virago,  at  . 

. Plymouth  (No.  18)  .... 

O i 

+ 1 9 

Valparaiso  (No.  19)  . . . . 

• 

-1-1  44 

In  the  Plumper,  at 

. Portsmouth  (No.  20)  . . . 

• 

-fl  3 0 

St.  Catherine’s  (No.  21)  . . 

• 

-fl  42 

The  agreement  is  sufficiently  close. 

3.  Iron-built  steamers. 

In  the  Bloodhound,  at  Plymouth  (No.  6)  . . . 

O t 

+3  48 

Constantinople  (No.  7)  • • 

+ 3 27 

Piraeus  (No.  8) 

-1-3  59 

In  the  Jackal,  at  . 

. Plymouth  (No.  9)  .... 

-1-4  14 

Lisbon  (No.  10) 

-f4  11 

Piraeus  (No.  1 1) 

-1-3  32 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


75 


In  the  Trident,  at 

. Greenhithe  (No.  12).  . 

O 1 

...  -1-4  11 

Malta  (No.  13)  . . . 

...  -1-3  44 

Greenhithe  (No.  24).  . 

...  -1-3  35 

Rio  de  Janeiro  (No.  25) 

. . . -1-3  54 

In  the  Vulcan,  at . 

. Portsmouth  (No.  26) 

. . . -1-3  36 

Simon’s  Bay  (No.  27)  . 

...  -1-4  9 

In  the  Simoom,  at 

. Portsmouth  (No.  28) 

...  -1-4  31 

Simon’s  Town  (No.  29) 

...  -1-4  14 

The  general  accordance  here  is  extremely  good.  The  petty  discordances  appear  to 
be  purely  accidental.  It  is  evident,  at  least,  that  they  are  not  dependent  on  the 
geographical  locality.  Thus  at  (8)  the  Piraeus  produces  the  largest  and  at  (11)  the 
smallest  in  the  group;  at  (12)  Greenhithe  produces  the  largest  and  at  (24)  the 
smallest;  at  (27)  Simon’s  Bay  produces  the  larger  and  at  (29)  the  smaller.  Nor 
have  I been  able  to  connect  these  differences  with  any  other  law.  Regarding  their 
accidental  character  as  established,  they  give  a measure  of  the  range  of  accident  in 
these  observations,  and  they  show  that  that  in  the  Spy,  though  large,  is  not  excessive. 

1 think  it  therefore  certain  that  this  part  of  the  theory  is  entirely  supported  by  the 
observations;  and  therefore  that  this  quadrantal  deviation  may  be  perfectly  neutral- 
ized in  all  localities  by  a mass  of  soft  iron  placed  in  the  manner  described  at  the 
beginning  of  this  paper,  leaving  only  a deviation  which  follows  accui’ately  in  every 
place,  separately  considered,  the  laws  of  polar-magnet-deviation,  and  which  therefore 
in  every  place,  separately  considered,  may  be  neutralized  by  the  application  of 
permanent  steel  magnets. 

I shall  now  proceed  to  consider  the  deductions  from  the  two  elements  of  polar- 
magnet-deviation,  namely  the  starboard  angle  of  the  polar-magnet-force  and  the 
modulus.  For  this  purpose,  I premise  the  following  elements  of  terrestrial  mag- 
netism. The  forces  are  expressed  in  Gauss’s  method,  adopting  as  units  the  English 
foot  and  the  English  grain.  For  some  of  the  elements  I am  indebted  to  the  kindness 
of  Colonel  Sabine  : others  were  obtained  from  other  sources.  None  were  furnished 
to  me  precisely  in  the  form  in  which  they  are  here  exhibited,  and  some  calculation 
therefore  has  been  required  to  adapt  them  to  my  wants.  It  is  possible  that  they 
may  be  affected  by  trifling  inaccuracies. 


Horizontal  Force. 

Vertical  Force. 

1.  Gillingham  . . . 

. 3*78  . . 

. . + 9-94 

2.  Porto  Praya  . . . 

. 6*26  . . 

. . -f  6-38 

3.  St.  Helena  .... 

. 5-97  . . 

. . — 1-97 

4.  Cape  of  Good  Hope  . 

. 4-56  . . 

. . — 6-08 

5.  Kerguelen’s  Land 

. 3-88  . . 

. . —10*68 

6.  Plymouth  . . . . 

. 3'82  . . 

. . -1-  9*67 

L 2 


76 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Horizontal  Force. 

Vertical  Force. 

7. 

Constantinople 

• 

5-63 

• 

. -P  7-34 

8. 

Piraeus  . . . 

• 

5-85 

. • 

. + 6-85 

9. 

Plymouth  . 

• 

3'82 

• 

. + 9-67 

10. 

Lisbon  . . 

4*62 

* 

. + 919 

11. 

Piraeus  . . . 

. 

5-85 

« • 

. + 6-85 

12. 

Greenhithe . . 

. • 

3'79 

• 

. + 9'66 

13. 

Malta  . . . 

• • 

5'74 

• 

. + 7*03 

14. 

Plymouth  . . 

• 

3'82 

. + 9-67 

15. 

Auckland  . . 

• • 

6-32 

• * 

. -11*32 

16. 

Sheerness  . . 

• 

3'78 

. • 

. + 9*67 

17. 

Simon’s  Bay  . 

• 

4-46 

• • 

. — 6*19 

18. 

Plymouth  . . 

3-82 

• • 

. + 9-67 

19. 

Valparaiso  . . 

7-17 

. 

. — 5*23 

20. 

Portsmouth 

• • 

3*83 

• • 

. -f  9*63 

21. 

St.  Catherine’s 

• • 

6-48 

• 4 

. - 2*54 

22. 

Sheerness  . . 

• « 

3'78 

• 

. + 9*67 

23. 

St.  Paul’s  Loando 

• • 

5-57 

. — 3*09 

24. 

Greenhithe . . 

• • 

3'79 

• • 

. + 9-66 

25. 

Rio  de  Janeiro 

. * 

6-49 

* . 

. — 1*49 

26. 

Portsmouth 

» • 

3-83 

• • 

. + 9*63 

27. 

Simon’s  Bay  . 

* 

4'46 

• 

. — 6*19 

28. 

Portsmouth 

. 

3'83 

• 

. + 9-63 

29. 

Simon’s  Town  . 

. 

4-46 

. . 

. — 6*19 

From  these,  with  the  starboard  angle  and  the  modulus,  the  resolved  polar-magnet- 
force  in  the  two  directions  of  “ headward”  and  “ starboard”  are  formed  by  the  rules 
given  above.  It  will  be  remembered  that  H is  the  ship’s  subpermanent  magnetism 
headward,  8 the  subpermanent  magnetism  to  the  starboard  side,  and  N a constant 
of  capacity  for  induced  magnetism  peculiar  to  each  ship.  As  the  total  directive  force 

at  Greenhithe  is  3*79,  a,  change  of  disturbing  force  represented  by-^,  or  '066  nearly. 


Avould  produce  at  Greenhithe  a change  of  disturbance  whose  maximum  is  1°  nearly; 
and  so,  mutatis  mutandis,  at  other  places. 


1 . Wood-built  Sailing  Ships. 
The  Erebus. 


1. 

H + Nx 

9*94  = + 0'261 

S=  + 0-020 

2. 

H + Nx 

6-38= +0-202 

S= +0-037 

3. 

H-Nx 

1-97= +0-043 

S=+o-oi7 

4. 

H-Nx 

608= -0-090 

S=+0-018 

5. 

H — Nx  10-68  = — 0*262  - 

S=+0'0I0 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


77 


H and  S have  small  positive  values,  but  so  small  that  their  combination  would  not 
produce,  in  the  Thames,  an  error  of  half  a degree.  N has  a well-marked  positive 
value.  In  this  ship  the  magnetism  would  be  sensibly  corrected,  by  placing  (by  trial) 
a mass  of  soft  iron  abaft  the  compass  and  at  a lower  level,  in  such  a position  as  to 
correct  the  deviation  with  head  east  and  head  west,  and  then  placing  a mass  of  soft 
iron  at  the  level  of  the  compass,  starboard  or  larboard,  so  as  to  correct  the  com- 
bination of  the  original  quadrantal  deviation  and  the  new  quadrantal  deviation  pro- 
duced by  the  first  corrector ; and  this  would  be  sensibly  effective,  without  change, 
in  all  localities.  Or,  permanent  magnets  might  be  applied  to  neutralize  the  errors 
at  the  cardinal  points,  and  soft  iron  at  the  level  of  the  compass,  starboard  or  larboard, 
to  correct  the  quadrantal  deviation  ; the  soft  iron  would  then  be  effective  in  all 
latitudes,  but  one  of  the  magnets  would  require  alteration  in  different  latitudes,  and 
would  require  reversion  in  opposite  hemispheres. 

The  Pandora. 

14.  H-fNX  9-67=+0T66  S = -f0-009 

15.  H-Nx  11-32  = — 0-272  S=+0-082 

S has  changed  suflSciently  to  produce  at  Auckland  (No.  15)  a disturbance  whose 
maximum  is  40'.  If  this  be  neglected,  the  compass  may  be  sensibly  corrected  in  the 
same  manner  as  for  the  Erebus.  H is  small. 

The  Mseander. 

16.  H-f-Nx  9-67= +0-070  S= +0-034 

17.  H — Nx6-19=  — 0-195  S=+0-008 

H would  appear  to  have  a value  of  —0-091,  which  at  Sheerness  would  produce  a 
deviation  of  1°  20'.  S is  practically  insensible.  This  ship  would  require  for  perfect 
correction  a weak  magnet  with  its  marked  end  towards  the  stern,  in  addition  to  the 
soft  iron  as  in  the  Erebus  and  Pandora.  It  will  probably  be  better  to  use,  for  the 
polar-magnet-correction,  a magnet  alone,  adjusting  or  reversing  it  as  may  be 
necessary. 

The  Spy. 

22.  H+Nx  9-67= +0-097  S=— 0-113 

23.  H — Nx3-09=  + 0-431  S=— 0-006 

If  the  headward  subpermanent  magnetism  has  not  changed,  II  is  positive  and  N is 
negative.  These  forces  would  requii-e  correctors  in  positions  opposite  to  those  of  the 
Mseander.  S seems  to  have  changed,  to  an  amount  which  would  produce  at  Sheer- 
ness a deviation  of  1°  30'.  It  will  probably  be  best  to  correct  the  polar-magnet- 
deviation  by  adjustible  magnets. 


78 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


2.  Wood-built  Steamers. 

The  Virago. 

18.  H+Nx  9-67= +0-493  S= +0-05.5 

19.  H—Nx  5-23= +0-029  S=  + 0-079 

S presents  no  sufficient  evidence  of  change.  H and  N are  both  positive:  and 
the  correction  of  polar-magnet-deviation  would  be  made,  either  by  a magnet  with 
marked  end  towards  the  head,  and  soft  iron  as  is  described  for  the  Erebus,  or  by  an 
adjustible  magnet. 

The  Plumper. 

20.  H+Nx'9-63= +0-402  S= +0-069 

21.  H — Nx2-54  = + 0-301  S=+0-091 

The  remarks  on  the  Virago  apply  also  to  the  Plumper. 


3.  Iron-huilt  Steamers. 


The  Bloodhound. 

6. 

H + Nx9-67=+0-997 

S=— 0-153 

/• 

H+Nx  7*34= + 1-043 

S=— 0-209 

8. 

H+Nx  6-85  = +0-931 

S=— 0-220 

The  evidence  for  a distinct  value  of  N is  not  very  clear.  There  seem  to  have  been 
changes  in  the  values  of  H and  S (subpermanent  magnetism)  which  on  the  whole 
would  produce,  at  the  stations  Nos.  7 and  8,  a maximum  deviation  of  nearly  1°.  The 
correction  of  polar-magnet-deviation  should  be  made  by  adjustible  magnets. 


The  Jackal. 

9.  H + Nx9-67=  + l-157  S=— 0-123 

10.  H+Nx9-19=  + l-005  S=— 0-162 

11.  H+Nx  6-85  = + 1-084  S= -0-082 

The  remarks  on  the  Bloodhound  will  nearly  apply  to  the  Jackal.  The  changes  in 
H and  S would  produce  at  the  stations  Nos.  10  and  11  a maximum  deviation  of  a 
little  more  tlian  1°. 


The  Trident. 

12. 

H + Nx9-66  = + 1-419 

S= +0-080 

13. 

H+Nx7'03  = + 1-402 

S=— 0-091 

24. 

H + Nx  9-66  = + 1-323 

S= -0-175 

25. 

H-Nx  l-49=  + l-418 

S=— 0-198 

There  seems  to  be  good  reason  for  thinking  that  N is  insensible,  that  H has  not 
sensibly  changed,  but  that  S has  changed  gradually,  in  the  course  of  several  years, 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


79 


by  a quantity  which  at  station  No.  25  would  produce  a maximum  effect  of  2°.  The 
change  in  the  voyage  between  No.  24  and  No.  25  is  nearly  insensible. 

The  Vulcan. 

26.  H+NX  9-63= -0-603  8=4-0-046 

27.  H — Nx6-19=— 1-236  8=4-0059 

In  this  instance,  as  in  some  others,  we  feel  greatly  the  want  of  observations  after 
the  ship’s  return,  to  inform  us  whether  the  ship’s  subpermanent  magnetism  has  really 
undergone  a change.  Assuming  that  it  has  not  (and  it  is  certain  that  8 has  not 
sensibly  changed),  then  H has  a sensible  negative  value  and  N a sensible  positive 
value:  and  the  correction  for  all  stations  would  be  effected  by  magnets  and  masses 
of  iron  as  has  been  described  for  the  Mseander.  But  it  would  probably  be  better  to 
rely  solely  on  adjustible  magnets  for  the  correction  of  the  polar-magnet-disturbance. 

The  Simoom. 

28.  H4-Nx  9-63=  4- 1*364  S=-0-451 

29.  H-Nx6-19  = 4-l-055  S=— 0-184 

The  change  in  the  value  of  8 would  produce  at  the  station  No.  29  a maximum 
error  of  about  3°  40'.  If  the  whole  change  in  the  compound  headward  force  depended 
upon  H,  that  change  would  also  produce  an  error  of  nearly  the  same  magnitude  ; and 
the  combination  of  the  two  would  produce,  as  the  total  result  of  the  change  of  sub- 
permanent magnetism,  an  error  of  about  5°  30'.  But  it  is  probable  that  N has  some 
positive  value,  and  that  the  change  of  H is  not  so  great. 


I shall  now  state  what  appear  to  be  the  just  practical  inferences  from  the  preceding 
investigations. 

1.  At  any  place,  the  deviation  of  the  compass  in  any  ship,  whether  wood-built  or 
iron-built,  may  be  accurately  represented  as  the  effect  of  the  combination  of  two 
forces,  of  which  one  alone  would  produce  a disturbance  following  the  law  of  polar- 
magnet-deviation,  and  the  other  alone  vmuld  produce  a disturbance  following  the  law 
of  quadrantal  deviation. 

2.  Consequently,  at  any  place  the  deviation  of  the  compass  may  be  accurately 
corrected  by  well-known  mechanical  methods ; namely  by  a magnet  in  the  athwart- 
ship  direetion,  fixed  at  a distance  determined  by  trial,  for  correcting  the  deviation 
when  the  ship’s  head  is  N.  or  8.;  by  a magnet  in  the  head-and-stern  direction,  also 
at  a distance  determined  by  trial,  for  correcting  the  deviation  when  the  ship’s  head 
is  E.  or  W. ; and  by  a mass  of  unmagnetized  iron,  at  the  same  level  as  the  compass, 
in  the  athwart-ship  line  or  in  the  head-and-stern  line  according  to  circumstances 
(usually  in  the  former),  also  at  a distance  determined  by  trial,  for  correcting  the 
deviation  when  the  ship’s  head  is  N.E.,  8.E.,  8.W.  or  N.W. 


80 


mr:  airy  on  the  observed  deviations  of  the  compass 


3.  For  the  same  ship,  the  mass  of  unmagnetized  iron,  if  adjusted  at  one  port,  will 
produce  its  due  effect  at  all  parts  of  the  world,  without  ever  requiring  change  or 
adjustment.  The  quadrantal  deviation  may  thus  be  accurately  corrected  without 
difficulty,  leaving  only  the  polar-magnet-deviation  uncorrected. 

4.  The  elements  of  polar-magnet- deviation  are  liable  to  changes,  but  of  very 
different  amounts  in  different  ships.  In  some  (as  the  Trident),  even  in  the  voyage 
of  an  iron  steamer  from  the  Thames  to  Rio  Janeiro,  the  ship’s  subpermanent  mag- 
netism is  so  little  altered,  that,  if  the  compass  were  rigorously  corrected  in  the 
Thames,  it  would  (as  to  sense)  be  rigorously  correct  at  Rio  Janeiro ; in  others  there 
is  such  a change,  in  going  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  that  the  compass  might  be  in 
error  5°  or  6°.  This  is  nearly  the  greatest  error  that  appears  in  the  observations 
discussed  above. 

5.  It  is  therefore  imperatively  the  duty  of  every  captain  of  a ship,  particularly  of 
an  iron-built  ship,  to  examine  the  state  of  the  compasses  at  every  opportunity.  For 
the  correctness  of  the  compasses  may  be  vitiated,  not  only  by  the  changes  in  the 
polar-magnetism  of  the  ship,  but  also  by  changes  in  the  intensity  of  the  magnets  used 
for  the  correction.  But  as  the  correction  of  the  quadrantal  deviation  is  not  liable  to 
any  doubt  whatever,  it  is  sufficient,  for  ascertaining  the  existence  and  recording  the 
anjount  of  error  of  the  polar-magnet-deviation,  to  observe  the  error  when  the  ship’s 
head  is  N.  or  S.,  and  when  it  is  E.  or  W. 

6.  From  whatever  cause  the  changes  in  the  elements  of  polar-magnet-deviation 
arise  (whether  from  a real  change  in  the  subpermanent  magnetism  of  the  ship,  or 
from  the  variation  of  that  part  of  induced  magnetism  which  is  similar  to  polar- 
magnetism  but  which  changes  in  different  magnetic  latitudes),  they  may  be  pre- 
cisely corrected  by  readjusting  the  position  of  the  magnets,  leaving  the  unmagnet- 
ized iron  undisturbed.  And  the  change  (if  there  is  any)  in  the  intensity  of  the 
correcting  magnets  will  also  be  corrected,  as  to  its  effect  on  the  compass,  by  the  same 
readjustment  of  position. 

7.  It  is  therefore  highly  desirable  that  the  magnets  should  be  mounted  in  such  a 
manner  that  their  distance  from  the  compass  can  be  delicately  changed.  And,  as 
the  easiest  way  of  preserving  a register  of  the  ship’s  magnetism,  it  is  desirable  that 
there  should  be  means  of  registering  the  positions  of  the  magnets. 

8.  In  a ship’s  first  voyage,  there  are  no  means  of  correcting  the  errors  of  the 
compass  at  different  parts  of  the  earth,  except  by  such  adjustment  of  the  distances 
of  the  magnets.  But  if,  on  the  ship’s  return  to  England,  her  subpermanent  mag- 
netism is  found  to  be  unaltered  (which  affords  presumption  that  it  has  been  unaltered 
during  the  voyage),  and  if  the  elements  of  magnetism  have  been  registered  either  by 
record  of  the  positions  of  the  correcting  magnets  or  by  such  discussions  as  those 
which  occupy  this  Memoir,  then  it  will  be  possible  to  correct  by  magnets  that  part 
of  the  polar-magnet-deviation  which  is  due  to  subpermanent  magnetism  only  (and 
which,  alone,  would  be  sensible  at  the  magnetic  equator),  and  to  correct  the  remain- 


IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS. 


81 


ing  part  by  unmagnetized  iron,  as  is  described  above  for  the  Erebus;  and  then  the 
correction  would  be  complete  in  all  parts  of  the  earth. 

9.  But,  practically,  it  will  perhaps  always  be  easier  and  safer  to  readjust  the 
positions  of  the  magnets  (as  in  art.  6.)  whenever  the  directions  of  one  of  the  mag- 
netic points  N.  and  S.,  and  one  of  the  magnetic  points  E.  and  W.,  can  be  truly  ascer- 
tained. This  can  always  be  done  in  harbour,  in  a very  short  time.  Probably  this 
can  also  be  done  at  sea,  in  fine  weather,  by  reference  to  a compass  carried  high  up 
the  ships’  masts.  It  can  also  be  done  with  the  aid  of  astronomical  observations  and 
of  a knowledge  of  the  local  “ variation  ” or  “ declination.”  In  all  cases,  the  mere 
adjustment  of  the  magnets  is  an  extremely  rapid  process. 

10.  On  reviewing  the  results  of  the  preceding  examinations,  I think  that  I am  jus- 
tified in  denouncing  any  system  of  navigating  a ship  by  forming  a table  of  compass- 
deviations  at  the  starting  port,  and  using  that  table  until  means  of  correction  can  be 
obtained  from  observations,  as  dangerous ; and  I think  that  it  ought  to  be  at  once 
discontinued.  It  does  not  in  the  smallest  degree  provide  against  the  effects  of 
possible  change  in  the  ship’s  subpermanent  magnetism  during  the  interval  in  which 
no  observations  are  obtained  (which,  with  sometimes  a minute  change  in  the  powers 
of  the  magnets,  is  the  only  risk  to  which  the  method  of  mechanical  correction  is 
liable) ; and,  as  it  does  not  recognize  the  effect  of  the  variation  in  the  magnitude 
of  terrestrial  horizontal  magnetism  at  different  places  (which  alters  the  compass- 
deviation  by  changing  the  proportion  of  the  ship’s  subpermanent  magnetism  to 
the  terrestrial  horizontal  magnetism,  upon  which  proportion  the  compass-deviation 
depends),  it  gratuitously  introduces  a class  of  errors  which  are  entirely  avoided  by 
correcting  the  compass  by  magnets  and  soft  iron.  Thus,  in  the  instance  of  the  Tri- 
dent (24)  and  (25),  sailing  from  Greenhithe  to  Rio  Janeiro : suppose  that  there  had 
been  no  good  opportunity  of  making  observations  of  azimuth  on  the  voyage;  on  the 
ship’s  arrival  at  Rio  Janeiro,  the  table  of  deviations  formed  at  Greenhithe  would  have 
been  found  erroneous  by  6°  or  7°  in  one  direction  with  head  eastward,  and  erroneous 
by  8°  or  9°  in  the  opposite  direction  with  head  westward.  But  if  the  compass  had 
been  corrected  by  magnets  and  soft  iron  at  Greenhithe,  it  would  have  been  correct 
at  Rio  Janeiro  without  an  error  approaching  to  a single  degree.  The  change  of 
compass-deviation,  in  fact,  has  been  produced,  not  by  the  change  of  the  ship’s  sub- 
permanent magnetism  (which  has  been  sensibly  constant),  but  by  the  change  in  the 
magnitude  of  the  earth’s  directive  magnetism,  which  change  has  altered  the  proportion 
of  the  ship’s  invariable  magnetism  to  the  earth’s  variable  magnetism  ; and  if  this  pro- 
portion had  been  reduced  to  zero  by  neutralization  of  the  ship’s  magnetism  by  means 
of  magnets,  the  variation  of  the  proportion  as  depending  on  the  variation  of  the 
earth’s  magnetism  would  also  have  been  destroyed.  What  has  been  said  in  regard 
to  the  errors  arising  during  the  whole  voyage,  applies,  in  a proportionate  degree,  to 
the  errors  arising  during  a part  of  the  voyage : if  there  had  been  valid  observations 

MDCCCLVI.  M 


8-2 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS. 


after  making  half  the  voyage,  the  errors  perhaps  would  have  been  only  half  as  great ; 
but  these  errors  would  have  been  equally  gratuitous. 

In  other  instances,  such  as  that  of  the  Simoom,  in  which  the  change  of  subper- 
manent magnetism  is  real  and  unusually  great,  the  tabular  method  (supposing,  for 
illustration,  that  there  had  been  no  opportunity  of  sufficiently  investigating  the 
errors  during  the  whole  voyage)  would  have  united  the  gratuitous  errors  with  the 
errors  produced  by  the  real  change,  and  would  have  produced  at  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  an  error  of  11°;  whereas,  if  the  correction  by  magnets  had  been  used,  the 
error  would  have  been  under  6°.  At  intermediate  places,  as  the  neighbourhood  of 
St.  Helena,  where  the  earth’s  directive  force  differs  still  more  from  that  in  England, 
the  gratuitous  error  would  have  been  much  greater,  and  the  error  really  depending 
on  change  in  the  ship  would  probably  have  been  less,  as  occurring  in  an  earlier  part 
of  the  voyage. 

The  mere  comparison  of  magnitudes  of  errors,  however,  in  this  way,  does  not 
sufficiently  exhibit  the  disadvantage  of  the  method  of ‘^Tables  of  Deviations.”  It  is 
an  important  defect  that  no  good  new  table  can  be  formed,  without  observations  for 
the  error  on  numerous  points  of  azimuth  ; whereas  the  operations  for  readjustment 
of  magnets  require  observations  on  only  two  points  of  azimuth.  And,  I apprehend, 
that  the  necessity  of  using  a table  at  all  (that  is,  of  steering  by  one  nominal  course 
when  another  course  is  intended)  is,  especially  in  difficult  channels,  a very  serious 
evil,  from  which  the  method  of  steering  by  a corrected  compass  is  entirely  free. 

11.  I have  alluded  above  to  the  possible  changes  in  the  energy  of  the  correcting 
magnets ; but  I am  bound  to  state  that  these  changes  (when  ordinary  care  is  taken 
for  the  conservation  of  the  magnets)  are,  to  the  best  of  ray  knowledge,  extremely 
minute.  It  is  known,  as  a matter  of  experience,  that  the  diminution  of  the  subper- 
manent magnetism  of  a new  iron  ship,  though  small,  is  usually  greater  than  that  of 
the  magnets ; inasmuch  as  it  usually  becomes  necessary  to  increase  the  distance  of 
the  magnets  from  the  compass. 


I subjoin  the  Table  of  Polar  Magnet  Deviations,  which  has  been  used  in  the  pre- 
ceding investigations,  and  which  may  perhaps  be  useful,  in  future,  for  similar  investi- 
gations. 


TABLE 


OF 


POLAR-MAGNET-DEVIATIONS. 


84 


MR.  AIRV  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations, 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 

Modulus. 

•00 

•01 

•02 

•03 

•04 

•05 

•06 

•07 

• 

08 

•09 

•10 

Corresponding  Polar-Magnet-Deviation, 

in  degrees  and  minutes. 

+ 

+ 

— 

- 

1 

P 

P 

P 

P 

0 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

t 

o 

/ 

O / 

o 

/ 

0 

0-0 

16-0 

16-0 

32-0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 0 

0 0 

0-1 

15-9 

16-1 

31-9 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

2 

0 

3 

0 4 

0 

4 

0 

5 

0 

6 

0 7 

0 7 

0-2 

15-8 

16-2 

31-8 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

3 

0 

4 

0 

6 

0 7 

0 

8 

0 

10 

0 

11 

0 13 

0 14 

0-3 

15-7 

16-3 

31-7 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

4 

0 

6 

0 

9 

0 11 

0 

13 

0 

15 

0 

17 

0 19 

0 21 

0-4 

15-6 

16-4 

31-6 

0 

0 

0 

3 

0 

5 

0 

8 

0 

11 

0 14 

0 

16 

0 

19 

0 

22 

0 25 

0 27 

0-5 

15-5 

16*5 

31-5 

0 

0 

0 

4 

0 

7 

0 

10 

0 

14 

0 17 

0 

20 

0 

24 

0 

27 

0 31 

0 34 

0-6 

15-4 

16-6 

31-4 

0 

0 

0 

4 

0 

8 

0 

12 

0 

16 

0 20 

0 

24 

0 

28 

0 

32 

0 36 

0 40 

0-7 

15-3 

16-7 

31-3 

0 

0 

0 

5 

0 

9 

0 

14 

0 

19 

0 24 

0 

28 

0 

33 

0 

38 

0 43 

0 47 

0-8 

15-2 

16-8 

31-2 

0 

0 

0 

5 

0 

11 

0 

16 

0 

22 

0 27 

0 

32 

0 

38 

0 

43 

0 48 

0 53 

0-9 

15-1 

16-9 

31-1 

0 

0 

0 

6 

0 

12 

0 

18 

0 

24 

0 30 

0 

36 

0 

42 

0 

48 

0 54 

1 0 

1-0 

15-0 

17-0 

31*0 

0 

0 

0 

7 

0 

13 

0 

20 

0 

27 

0 34 

0 

40 

0 

47 

0 

54 

1 1 

1 7 

1-1 

14-9 

17-1 

30-9 

0 

0 

0 

8 

0 

15 

0 

22 

0 

30 

0 37 

0 

44 

0 

52 

0 

59 

1 7 

1 14 

12 

14-8 

17-2 

30-8 

0 

0 

0 

8 

0 

16 

0 

24 

0 

32 

0 40 

0 

48 

0 

56 

1 

4 

1 12 

1 20 

1-3 

14-7 

17*3 

30-7 

0 

0 

0 

9 

0 

17 

0 

26 

0 

35 

0 44 

0 

52 

1 

1 

1 

9 

1 18 

1 27 

1-4 

14-6 

17'4 

30-6 

0 

0 

0 

9 

0 

19 

0 

28 

0 

38 

0 47 

0 

56 

1 

6 

1 

15 

1 24 

1 33 

1-3 

14-5 

17-5 

30-5 

0 

0 

0 

10 

0 

20 

0 

30 

0 

40 

0 50 

1 

0 

1 

10 

1 

20 

1 30 

1 40 

1-6 

14*4 

17-6 

30-4 

0 

0 

0 

11 

0 

21 

0 

32 

0 

43 

0 54 

1 

4 

1 

15 

1 

25 

1 36 

1 46 

1-7 

14-3 

17-7 

30-3 

0 

0 

0 

11 

0 

22 

0 

34 

0 

45 

0 56 

1 

7 

1 

19 

1 

30 

1 41 

1 53 

1*8 

14-2 

17-8 

30-2 

0 

0 

0 

12 

0 

24 

0 

36 

0 

48 

1 0 

1 

11 

1 

23 

1 

35 

1 47 

1 59 

1-9 

14-1 

17*9 

30“1 

0 

0 

0 

13 

0 

25 

0 

38 

0 

50 

1 3 

1 

15 

1 

28 

1 

40 

1 53 

2 6 

2-0 

14*0 

18-0 

30-0 

0 

0 

0 

13 

0 

26 

0 

40 

0 

53 

1 6 

1 

19 

1 

32 

1 

45 

1 59 

2 12 

2-1 

13-9 

18-1 

29-9 

0 

0 

0 

14 

0 27 

0 

41 

0 

55 

1 9 

1 

22 

1 

36 

1 

50 

2 4 

2 18 

2-2 

13-8 

18-2 

29-8 

0 

0 

0 

15 

0 

29 

0 

44 

0 

58 

1 12 

1 

26 

1 

41 

1 

55 

2 10 

2 24 

2-3 

13*7 

18-3 

29‘7 

0 

0 

0 

15 

0 

30 

0 

45 

1 

0 

1 15 

1 

30 

1 

45 

2 

0 

2 15 

2 30 

2-4 

13-6 

18*4 

29'6 

0 

0 

0 

16 

0 

31 

0 

47 

1 

3 

1 19 

1 

34 

1 

50 

2 

5 

2 21 

2 36 

2-5 

13-5 

18-5 

29-5 

0 

0 

0 

16 

0 

32 

0 

49 

1 

5 

1 21 

1 

37 

1 

54 

2 

10 

2 26 

2 42 

2-6 

13-4 

18-6 

29-4 

0 

0 

0 

17 

0 

34 

0 

51 

1 

8 

1 25 

1 

41 

1 

58 

2 

15 

2 32 

2 48 

2-7 

13-3 

18-7 

29-3 

0 

0 

0 

18 

0 

35 

0 

53 

1 

10 

1 27 

1 

44 

2 

2 

2 

19 

2 37 

2 54 

2-8 

13-2 

18-8 

29-2 

0 

0 

0 

18 

0 

36 

0 

54 

1 

12 

1 30 

1 

48 

2 

6 

2 

24 

2 42 

3 0 

2-9 

13-1 

18-9 

29-1 

0 

0 

0 

19 

0 

37 

0 

56 

1 

15 

1 34 

1 

52 

2 

11 

2 

29 

2 48 

3 6 

3-0 

13-0 

19-0 

29-0 

0 

0 

0 

19 

0 

38 

0 

58 

1 

17 

1 36 

1 

55 

0 

14 

2 

33 

2 52 

3 11 

3-1 

12-9 

19*1 

28-9 

0 

0 

0 

20 

0 

39 

0 

59 

1 

19 

1 39 

1 

58 

2 

18 

2 

37 

2 57 

3 17 

3-2 

12-8 

19-2 

28-8 

0 

0 

0 

20 

0 

40 

1 

1 

1 

21 

1 41 

2 

1 

2 

22 

2 

42 

3 2 

3 22 

3-3 

12-7 

19-3 

28-7 

0 

0 

0 

21 

0 

41 

1 

0 

1 

23 

1 44 

2 

4 

2 

25 

2 

46 

3 7 

3 28 

3-4 

12-6 

19-4 

28-6 

0 

0 

0 

21 

0 

42 

1 

4 

1 

25 

1 46 

2 

7 

2 

29 

50 

3 12 

3 33 

3-5 

12-5 

19'o 

28-5 

0 

0 

0 

22 

0 

44 

1 

6 

1 

28 

1 50 

2 

11 

2 

33 

2 

55 

3 17 

3 39 

3-6 

12-4 

19-6 

28-4 

0 

0 

0 

23 

0 

45 

1 

8 

1 

30 

1 52 

2 

14 

2 

37 

2 

59 

3 22 

3 44 

.3-7 

12-3 

19*7 

28-3 

0 

0 

0 

23 

0 

46 

1 

9 

1 

32 

1 55 

2 

17 

2 

40 

3 

3 

3 26 

3 49 

3-8 

12-2 

19-8 

28-2 

0 

0 

0 

24 

0 

47 

1 

11 

1 

34 

1 57 

o 

20 

2 

44 

3 

7 

3 31 

3 54 

3-9 

12-1 

19-9 

28-1 

0 

0 

0 

24 

0 

48 

1 

12 

1 

36 

2 0 

2 

23 

2 

47 

3 

11 

3 35 

3 59 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28*0 

0 

0 

0 

24 

0 

49 

1 

13 

1 

38 

2 2 

2 

26 

2 

51 

3 

15 

3 39 

4 4 

+ 

+ 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IKON-BUILT  SHIPS 


85 


for  Azimuths  referred  to  the  Disturbed  Compass. 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


Modulus. 


•00 


•01 

•02 

•03 

•04 

•05 

•06 

•07 

CO 

O 

•09 

Corresponding  Polar- Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 


•10 


+ 

+ 

- 

- 

P 

P 

P 

P 

0 

/ 

o 

/ 

0 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

0 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

40 

120 

20-0 

28-0 

0 

0 

0 

24 

0 

49 

1 

13 

1 

38 

2 

2 

2 

26 

2 

51 

3 

15 

3 

39 

4 

4 

41 

11-9 

20-1 

27-9 

0 

0 

0 

25 

0 

50 

1 

15 

1 

40 

2 

4 

2 

29 

2 

54 

3 

19 

3 

44 

4 

9 

4-2 

11-8 

20-2 

27-8 

0 

0 

0 

25 

0 

51 

1 

16 

1 

41 

2 

6 

2 

32 

2 

57 

3 

22 

3 

48 

4 

13 

4-3 

11-7 

20-.8 

27-7 

0 

0 

0 

26 

0 

52 

1 

17 

1 

43 

2 

9 

2 

35 

3 

0 

3 

26 

3 

52 

4 

18 

4-4 

11-6 

20-4 

27-6 

0 

0 

0 

26 

0 

52 

1 

18 

1 

44 

2 

11 

2 

37 

3 

3 

3 

29 

3 

55 

4 

22 

4-5 

11-5 

20-5 

27-5 

0 

0 

0 

26 

0 

53 

1 

19 

1 

46 

2 

13 

2 

40 

3 

6 

3 

33 

3 

59 

4 

26 

4-6 

11-4 

20-6 

27-4 

0 

0 

0 

27 

0 

54 

1 

21 

1 

48 

2 

15 

2 

42 

3 

9 

3 

36 

4 

3 

4 

30 

4-7 

11-3 

20-7 

27-3 

0 

0 

0 

27 

0 

55 

1 

22 

1 

50 

2 

17 

2 

45 

3 

12 

3 

40 

4 

7 

4 

35 

4-8 

1D2 

20-8 

27-2 

0 

0 

0 

28 

0 

56 

1 

23 

1 

51 

2 

19 

2 

47 

3 

15 

3 

43 

4 

11 

4 

39 

4-9 

11-1 

20-9 

27*1 

0 

0 

0 

28 

0 

57 

1 

24 

1 

53 

2 

21 

2 

50 

3 

18 

3 

46 

4 

14 

4 

43 

5-0 

11-0 

21-0 

27-0 

0 

0 

0 

28 

0 

57 

1 

25 

1 

54 

2 

23 

2 

52 

3 

21 

3 

49 

4 

18 

4 

47 

3-1 

10-9 

21-1 

26-9 

0 

0 

0 

29 

0 

58 

1 

27 

1 

56 

2 

25 

2 

55 

3 

24 

3 

53 

4 

22 

4 

51 

5-2 

10'8 

21-2 

26-8 

0 

0 

0 

29 

0 

59 

1 

28 

1 

58 

2 

26 

2 

57 

3 

26 

3 

56 

4 

25 

4 

54 

5-3 

10-7 

21-3 

26-7 

0 

0 

0 

29 

0 

59 

1 

28 

1 

58 

2 

28 

2 

58 

3 

28 

3 

58 

4 

27 

4 

57 

5-4 

10-6 

21*4 

26-6 

0 

0 

0 

30 

1 

0 

1 

30 

2 

0 

2 

30 

3 

0 

3 

30 

4 

0 

4 

30 

5 

0 

5-5 

10-5 

21-5 

26-5 

0 

0 

0 

30 

1 

1 

1 

31 

2 

1 

2 

31 

3 

2 

3 

32 

4 

3 

4 

33 

5 

4 

5"6 

10-4 

21-6 

26-4 

0 

0 

0 

30 

1 

1 

1 

31 

2 

2 

2 

33 

3 

4 

3 

34 

4 

5 

4 

36 

5 

7 

5-7 

10-3 

21-7 

26-3 

0 

0 

0 

31 

1 

2 

1 

32 

2 

4 

2 

35 

3 

6 

3 

37 

4 

8 

4 

39 

5 

10 

5-8 

10-2 

21-8 

26-2 

0 

0 

0 

31 

1 

3 

1 

34 

2 

5 

2 

37 

3 

8 

3 

39 

4 

10 

4 

41 

5 

13 

5-9 

10-1 

21-9 

26-1 

0 

0 

0 

31 

1 

3 

1 

34 

2 

6 

2 

38 

3 

10 

3 

41 

4 

13 

4 

44 

5 

16 

6-0 

10-0 

22-0 

26-0 

0 

0 

0 

32 

1 

4 

1 

35 

2 

7 

2 

39 

3 

11 

3 

43 

4 

15 

4 

46 

5 

18 

6-1 

9-9 

22-1 

25-9 

0 

0 

0 

32 

1 

4 

1 

36 

2 

8 

2 

40 

3 

13 

3 

45 

4 

17 

4 

49 

5 

21 

6^2 

9-8 

22-2 

25-8 

0 

0 

0 

32 

1 

5 

1 

37 

2 

9 

2 

41 

3 

14 

3 

46 

4 

18 

4 

50 

5 

23 

6-3 

9*7 

22-3 

25-7 

0 

0 

0 

32 

1 

5 

1 

37 

2 

10 

2 

42 

3 

15 

3 

47 

4 

20 

4 

52 

5 

25 

6-4 

9-6 

22-4 

25-6 

0 

0 

0 

32 

1 

5 

1 

38 

2 

11 

2 

44 

3 

16 

3 

48 

4 

21 

4 

54 

5 

27 

6-5 

9-5 

22-5 

25-5 

0 

0 

0 

33 

1 

6 

1 

39 

2 

12 

2 

45 

3 

18 

3 

50 

4 

23 

4 

56 

5 

29 

6-6 

9-4 

22-6 

25-4 

0 

0 

0 

33 

1 

6 

1 

39 

2 

12 

2 

45 

3 

19 

3 

52 

4 

25 

4 

58 

5 

31 

6-7 

9-3 

22-7 

25-3 

0 

0 

0 

33 

1 

7 

1 

40 

2 

13 

2 

46 

3 

20 

3 

53 

4 

26 

4 

59 

5 

33 

6-8 

9-2 

22-8 

25-2 

0 

0 

0 

33 

1 

7 

1 

40 

2 

14 

2 

47 

3 

21 

3 

54 

4 

28 

5 

1 

5 

35 

6-9 

9*1 

22-9 

25-1 

0 

0 

0 

33 

1 

7 

1 

40 

2 

14 

2 

48 

3 

22 

3 

55 

4 

29 

5 

3 

5 

37 

7-0 

9-0 

23-0 

25-0 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

8 

1 

41 

2 

15 

2 

49 

3 

23 

3 

56 

4 

30 

5 

4 

5 

38 

7-1 

8-9 

23-1 

24-9 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

8 

1 

41 

2 

15 

2 

49 

3 

23 

3 

57 

4 

31 

5 

5 

5 

39 

7-2 

8-8 

23-2 

24-8 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

8 

1 

42 

2 

16 

2 

50 

3 

24 

3 

58 

4 

32 

5 

6 

5 

40 

7-3 

8-7 

23-3 

24-7 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

8 

1 

42 

2 

16 

2 

50 

3 

25 

3 

59 

4 

33 

5 

7 

5 

41 

7-4 

8-6 

23-4 

24-6 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

8 

1 

42 

2 

16 

2 

50 

3 

25 

3 

59 

4 

33 

5 

7 

5 

42 

7-5 

8-5 

23-5 

24-3 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

8 

1 

42 

2 

17 

2 

51 

3 

25 

3 

59 

4 

33 

5 

7 

5 

42 

7-6 

8-4 

23-6 

24-4 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

9 

1 

43 

2 

17 

2 

51 

3 

26 

4 

0 

4 

34 

5 

8 

5 

43 

7-7 

8-3 

23-7 

24-3 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

9 

1 

43 

2 

17 

2 

51 

3 

26 

4 

0 

4 

34 

5 

8 

5 

43 

7-8 

8-2 

23-8 

24-2 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

9 

1 

43 

2 

18 

2 

52 

3 

26 

4 

0 

4 

35 

5 

9 

5 

44 

7-9 

8-1 

23-9 

24-1 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

9 

1 

43 

2 

18 

2 

52 

3 

26 

4 

1 

4 

35 

5 

9 

5 

44 

8-0 

8-0 

24-0 

24-0 

0 

0 

0 

34 

1 

9 

1 

43 

2 

18 

2 

52 

3 

26 

4 

1 

4 

35 

5 

10 

5 

44 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

Mean 

0 

0 

0 

22 

0 

44 

1 

6 

1 

28 

1 

49 

o 

11 

o 

33 

O 

55 

9 

17 

3 

39 

86 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations, 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 

Modulus. 

• 

10 

• 

11 

• 

12 

•13 

14 

•15 

•16 

17 

18 

19 

•20 

Corr  espondlng  Polar-Magnet-Deviation, 

in  degrees  and  minutes. 

4* 

+ 

- 

- 

p 

P 

P 

P 

O 

/ 

0 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

y 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

o 

y 

O 

/ 

O 

y 

o 

y 

O 

/ 

0-0 

16-0 

16*0 

32-0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0-1 

15-9 

16-1 

31-9 

0 

7 

0 

8 

0 

9 

0 

9 

0 

10 

0 

10 

0 

11 

0 

12 

0 

12 

0 

13 

0 

14 

0-2 

15-8 

16*2 

31-8 

0 

14 

0 

16 

0 

17 

0 

18 

0 

19 

0 

20 

0 

22 

0 

23 

0 

24 

0 

26 

0 27 

0-3 

15-7 

16-3 

31-7 

0 

21 

0 

23 

0 

25 

0 

27 

0 

29 

0 

31 

0 

33 

0 

35 

0 

36 

0 

39 

0 

41 

0-4 

15-6 

16-4 

31*6 

0 

27 

0 

30 

0 

33 

0 

36 

0 

39 

0 

41 

0 

44 

0 

47 

0 

49 

0 

52 

0 

54 

0-5 

15-5 

16'3 

31-5 

0 

34 

0 

38 

0 

41 

0 

45 

0 

48 

0 

51 

0 

54 

0 

58 

1 

1 

1 

5 

1 

8 

0-6 

15-4 

16-6 

31-4 

0 

40 

0 

45 

0 

49 

0 

53 

0 

57 

1 

1 

1 

5 

1 

9 

1 

13 

1 

17 

1 

21 

0-7 

15-3 

16-7 

31-3 

0 

47 

0 

52 

0 

56 

1 

1 

1 

6 

1 

11 

1 

16 

1 

21 

1 

25 

1 

30 

1 

35 

0-8 

15-2 

16-8 

31-2 

0 

53 

0 

59 

1 

4 

1 

10 

1 

16 

1 

21 

1 

27 

1 

32 

1 

37 

1 

43 

1 

48 

0*9 

15-1 

16-9 

3M 

1 

0 

1 

6 

1 

12 

1 

19 

1 

25 

1 

31 

1 

37 

] 

43 

1 

49 

1 

55 

2 

1 

1-0 

15-0 

17-0 

31-0 

1 

7 

1 

14 

1 

20 

1 

27 

1 

34 

1 

41 

1 

48 

1 

55 

2 

1 

2 

8 

2 

14 

M 

14-9 

17-1 

30-9 

1 

14 

1 

21 

1 

28 

1 

36 

1 

43 

1 

51 

1 

59 

2 

6 

2 

13 

2 

21 

2 

28 

1-2 

14-8 

17-2 

30-8 

1 

20 

1 

28 

1 

36 

1 

45 

1 

53 

2 

1 

2 

10 

2 

18 

2 

26 

2 

34 

2 

41 

1-3 

14-7 

17-3 

30-7 

1 

27 

1 

36 

1 

44 

1 

53 

2 

2 

2 

11 

2 

20 

2 

29 

2 

38 

2 

46 

2 

54 

1-4 

14-6 

17-4 

30-6 

1 

33 

1 

43 

1 

52 

2 

2 

2 

11 

2 

20 

2 

30 

2 

40 

2 

49 

2 

58 

3 

7 

1-5 

14-5 

17*5 

30-5 

1 

40 

1 

50 

2 

0 

2 

10 

2 

20 

2 

30 

2 

41 

2 

51 

3 

1 

3 

11 

3 

20 

1-6 

14-4 

17-6 

30-4 

1 

46 

1 

57 

2 

8 

2 

19 

2 

29 

2 

40 

2 

51 

3 

2 

3 

12 

3 

23 

3 

33 

1*7 

14-3 

17-7 

30-3 

1 

53 

2 

5 

2 

16 

2 

28 

2 

39 

2 

50 

3 

1 

3 

12 

3 

23 

3 

35 

3 

46 

1-8 

14-2 

17-8 

30*2 

1 

59 

2 

11 

2 

23 

2 

36 

2 

48 

2 

59 

3 

11 

3 

23 

3 

34 

3 

46 

3 

58 

1-9 

14-1 

17-9 

30-1 

2 

6 

2 

19 

2 

31 

2 

44 

2 

56 

3 

9 

3 

21 

3 

33 

3 

45 

3 

58 

4 

10 

2-0 

14-0 

18-0 

30-0 

2 

12 

o 

25 

2 

38 

2 

51 

3 

4 

3 

18 

3 

31 

3 

44 

3 

57 

4 

10 

4 

23 

2-1 

13-9 

18*1 

29-9 

2 

18 

2 

32 

2 

46 

3 

0 

3 

13 

3 

27 

3 

41 

3 

55 

4 

8 

4 

22 

4 

35 

2-2 

13*8 

18-2 

29-8 

2 

24 

2 

39 

2 

53 

3 

8 

3 

22 

3 

36 

3 

50 

4 

5 

4 

19 

4 

34 

4 

48 

2-3 

13-7 

18-3 

29-7 

2 

30 

2 

45 

3 

0 

3 

15 

3 

30 

3 

45 

4 

0 

4 

15 

4 

30 

4 

45 

5 

0 

2‘4 

13-6 

18-4 

29-6 

2 

36 

2 

52 

3 

7 

3 

23 

3 

38 

3 

54 

4 

10 

4 

26 

4 

41 

4 

57 

5 

12 

2-5 

13-5 

18-5 

29-5 

2 

42 

2 

59 

3 

15 

3 

31 

3 

47 

4 

4 

4 

20 

4 

36 

4 

52 

5 

8 

5 

24 

2-6 

13-4 

18-6 

29*4 

2 

48 

3 

5 

3 

22 

3 

39 

3 

55 

4 

12 

4 

29 

4 

46 

5 

3 

5 

20 

5 

36 

2-7 

13-3 

18*7 

29-3 

2 

54 

3 

12 

3 

29 

3 

47 

4 

4 

4 

22 

4 

39 

4 

56 

5 

13 

5 

31 

5 

48 

2*8 

13-2 

18-8 

29*2 

3 

0 

3 

18 

3 

36 

3 

54 

4 

12 

4 

30 

4 

48 

5 

6 

5 

24 

5 

42 

6 

0 

2-9 

13*1 

18-9 

29-1 

3 

6 

3 

24 

3 

42 

4 

1 

4 

19 

4 

38 

4 

57 

5 

16 

5 

34 

5 

53 

6 

12 

.3-0 

13-0 

19-0 

29*0 

3 

11 

3 

30 

3 

49 

4 

9 

4 

27 

4 

47 

5 

6 

5 

25 

5 

44 

6 

4 

6 

23 

3-1 

12-9 

19-1 

28-9 

3 

17 

3 

37 

3 

56 

4 

16 

4 

35 

4 

55 

5 

15 

5 

35 

5 

54 

6 

14 

6 

34 

3-2 

12-8 

19-2 

28-8 

3 

22 

3 

44 

4 

3 

4 

23 

4 

43 

5 

4 

5 

24 

5 

44 

6 

4 

6 

25 

6 

45 

3-3 

12-7 

19-3 

28-7 

3 

28 

3 

50 

4 

9 

4 

30 

4 

51^ 

5 

12 

5 

33 

5 

54 

6 

14 

6 

35 

6 

56 

3-4 

12-6 

19-4 

28-6 

3 

33 

3 

55 

4 

16 

4 

38 

4 

59 

5 

21 

5 

42 

6 

3 

6 

24 

6 

46 

7 

7 

3-5 

12-5 

19-5 

28-5 

3 

39 

4 

1 

4 

23 

4 

45 

5 

7 

5 

29 

5 

51 

6 

13 

6 

34 

6 

56 

7 

18 

.3-6 

12-4 

19-6 

28*4 

3 

44 

4 

7 

4 

29 

4 

52 

5 

14 

5 

37 

5 

59 

6 

21 

6 

43 

7 

6 

7 

28 

3-7 

12-3 

19-7 

28-3 

3 

49 

4 

12 

4 

35 

4 

58 

5 

21 

5 

44 

6 

7 

6 

30 

6 

52 

7 

15 

7 38 

3-8 

12-2 

19-8 

28-2 

3 

54 

4 

18 

4 

41 

5 

5 

5 

28 

5 

52 

6 

15 

6 

38 

7 

1 

7 

25 

7 48 

3-9 

12-1 

19-9 

28-1 

3 

59 

4 

23 

4 

47 

5 

11 

5 

35 

5 

59 

6 

23 

6 

47 

7 

10 

7 

34 

7 58 

4-0 

12-0 

200 

28-0 

4 

4 

4 

28 

4 

53 

5 

17 

5 

42 

6 

6 

6 

30 

6 

55 

7 

19 

7 

44 

8 

8 

+ 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS 


87 


for  Azimuths  referred  to  the  Disturbed  Compass. 


Modulus. 

Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 

•10 

11 

•12 

•13 

•14 

• 

15 

1 • 

16 

•17 

•18 

•19 

•20 

Correspondin  g Polar-M agnet-Deviation 

in  degrees  and  minutes. 

+ 

-f- 

- 

- 

P 

4-0 

o 

D. 

P 

20-0 

P 

28-0 

o / 

4 4 

o 

4 

28 

O 

4 

53 

O / 

5 17 

5 

42 

0 

6 

6 

0 

6 

30 

0 

6 

55 

0 

7 

19 

0 

7 

44 

0 

8 

8 

4-1 

11-9 

20-1 

27-9 

4 9 

4 

33 

4 

38 

5 23 

5 

48 

6 

13 

6 

38 

7 

3 

7 28 

7 

53 

8 

18 

4-2 

11*8 

20-2 

27-8 

4 13 

4 

38 

5 

4 

5 29 

5 

55 

6 

20 

6 

46 

7 

11 

7 

36 

8 

1 

8 27 

4-3 

11-7 

20-3 

27-7 

4 18 

4 

43 

5 

9 

5 35 

6 

1 

6 27 

6 

53 

7 

18 

7 44 

8 

10 

8 

36 

4*4 

11-6 

20-4 

27-6 

4 22 

4 

48 

5 

15 

5 41 

6 

7 

6 

33 

7 

0 

7 

26 

7 

52 

8 

18 

8 

45 

4-3 

11*5 

205 

27-5 

4 26 

4 

53 

5 

20 

5 46 

6 

13 

6 

40 

7 

7 

7 

33 

8 

0 

8 

26 

8 

54 

4-6 

11*4 

20-6 

27-4 

4 30 

4 57 

5 

24 

3 51 

6 

18 

6 

46 

7 

13 

7 40 

8 

7 

8 

34 

9 

2 

4-7 

11-3 

20-7 

27-3 

4 33 

5 

2 

5 

29 

5 57 

6 

24 

6 

52 

7 

20 

7 47 

8 

15 

8 

42 

9 

10 

4-8 

11*2 

20-8 

27-2 

4 39 

5 

7 

5 

33 

6 3 

6 

31 

6 

59 

7 

27 

7 54 

8 

22 

8 

50 

9 

18 

4-9 

11-1 

20-9 

27-1 

4 43 

5 

11 

5 

40 

6 8 

6 

36 

7 

4 

7 

33 

8 

1 

8 

29 

8 

57 

9 

26 

5-0 

11-0 

21-0 

27-0 

4 47 

5 

15 

5 

44 

6 13 

6 

41 

7 

10 

7 

39 

8 

8 

8 

36 

9 

5 

9 

34 

5-1 

10-9 

2M 

26-9 

4 51 

5 

20 

5 

49 

6 18 

6 

47 

7 

16 

7 

46 

8 

15 

8 

44 

9 

13 

9 

42 

5-2 

10-8 

21*2 

26-8 

4 54 

5 

23 

5 

53 

6 22 

6 

52 

7 

21 

7 

51 

8 

20 

8 

50 

9 

19 

9 

49 

5‘3 

10*7 

21-3 

26-7 

4 57 

5 27 

5 

57 

6 27 

6 

57 

7 27 

7 

57 

8 

26 

8 

56 

9 

26 

9 

56 

5-4 

10-6 

21-4 

26-6 

5 0 

5 

30 

6 

1 

6 31 

7 

1 

7 

31 

8 

2 

8 

32 

9 

2 

9 

32 

10 

3 

5-5 

10*5 

21-5 

26-5 

5 4 

5 

34 

6 

5 

6 35 

7 

6 

7 

37 

8 

8 

8 

38 

9 

9 

9 

39 

10 

10 

5-6 

10-4 

21-6 

26-4 

5 7 

5 

38 

6 

9 

6 40 

7 

11 

7 42 

8 

13 

8 

43 

9 

14 

9 

45 

10 

16 

5-7 

10-3 

21-7 

26-3 

5 10 

5 

41 

6 

13 

6 44 

7 

15 

7 

46 

8 

18 

8 49 

9 

20 

9 

51 

10 

22 

5-8 

10-2 

21-8 

26-2 

5 13 

5 

44 

6 

16 

6 47 

7 

19 

7 50 

8 

22 

8 

53 

9 

25 

9 

56 

10 

28 

5-9 

10-1 

21-9 

26-1 

5 16 

5 

47 

6 

19 

6 51 

7 

23 

7 

55 

8 

27 

8 

58 

9 

30 

10 

2 

10 

34 

6-0 

10-0 

22-0 

26-0 

5 18 

5 

50 

6 

22 

6 54 

7 

26 

7 58 

8 

31 

9 

3 

9 

35 

10 

7 

10 

39 

6-1 

9-9 

22-1 

25-9 

5 21 

5 

53 

6 

25 

6 57 

7 

30 

8 

2 

8 

35 

9 

7 

9 

39 

10 

11 

10 

44 

6-2 

9-8 

22-2 

25-8 

5 23 

5 

53 

6 

28 

7 0 

7 

33 

8 

6 

8 

39 

9 

11 

9 

44 

10 

16 

10 

49 

6-3 

9-7 

22-3 

25-7 

5 25 

5 

58 

6 

31 

7 4 

7 

37 

8 

10 

8 

43 

9 

15 

9 

48 

10 

21 

10 

54 

6-4 

9-6 

22-4 

25-6 

5 27 

6 

0 

6 

33 

7 6 

7 

39 

8 

12 

8 

46 

9 

19 

9 

52 

10 

25 

10 

58 

6-5 

9:5 

22-5 

25-5 

5 29 

6 

2 

6 

36 

7 9 

7 

42 

8 

15 

8 

49 

9 

22 

9 

56 

10 

29 

1] 

2 

6-6 

9-4 

22-6 

25-4 

5 31 

6 

4 

6 

38 

7 11 

7 

45 

8 

18 

8 

52 

9 

25 

9 

59 

10 

32 

11 

6 

6-7 

9-3 

22-7 

25-3 

5 33 

6 

7 

6 

41 

7 14 

7 

48 

8 

21 

8 

55 

9 29 

10 

3 

10 

36 

11 

10 

6-8 

9-2 

22-8 

25-2 

5 35 

6 

9 

6 

43 

7 17 

7 

51 

8 

24 

8 

58 

9 

32 

10 

6 

10 

39 

11 

13 

6-9 

9-1 

22-9 

25-\ 

5 37 

6 

11 

6 

45 

7 19 

7 

53 

8 27 

9 

1 

9 

35 

10 

8 

10 

42 

11 

16 

7-0 

9-0 

23-0 

23-0 

5 38 

6 

12 

6 

46 

7 20 

7 

54 

8 

28 

9 

3 

9 

37 

10 

11 

10 

45 

11 

19 

7-1 

8-9 

23-1 

24-9 

5 39 

6 

13 

6 

48 

7 22 

7 

56 

8 

30 

9 

5 

9 

39 

10 

14 

10 

48 

11 

22 

7-2 

8-8 

23-2 

24-8 

5 40 

6 

14 

6 

49 

7 23 

7 

5.8 

8 

32 

9 

7 

9 

41 

10 

16 

10 

50 

11 

24 

7-3 

8-7 

23-3 

24*7 

5 41 

6 

15 

6 

50 

7 24 

7 

59 

8 

33 

9 

8 

9 

42 

10 

17 

10 

51 

11 

26 

7-4 

8-6 

23-4 

24-6 

5 42 

6 

16 

6 

51 

7 25 

8 

0 

8 

34 

9 

9 

9 

43 

10 

18 

10 

52 

11 

27 

7-5 

8-5 

23-5 

24*3 

5 42 

6 

17 

6 

52 

7 26 

8 

1 

8 

35 

9 

10 

9 

45 

10 

20 

10 

54 

11 

29 

7-6 

8-4, 

23-6 

24-4 

5 43 

6 

17 

6 

52 

7 26 

8 

1 

8 

36 

9 

11 

9 

46 

10 

21 

10 

55 

11 

30 

7-7 

8-3 

23-7 

24-3 

5 43 

6 

17 

6 

52 

7 26 

8 

1 

8 

36 

9 

11 

9 

46 

10 

21 

10 

56 

11 

31 

7-8 

8-2 

23-8 

24-2 

3 44 

6 

18 

6 

53 

7 27 

8 

2 

8 37 

9 

12 

9 47 

10 

22 

10 

57 

11 

32 

7-9 

8-1 

23-9 

24*1 

5 44 

6 

18 

6 

53 

7 27 

8 

2 

8 37 

9 

12 

9 

47 

10 

22 

10 

57 

11 

32 

8-0 

-i- 

8-0 

+ 

24-0 

24-0 

5 44 

6 

19 

6 

33 

7 28 

8 

2 

8 37 

9 

12 

9 

47 

10 

22 

10 

57 

11 

32 

Mean 

3 39 

4 

4 

23 

4 45 

5 

7 

5 

29 

52 

14 

36 

Do 

/ 

88 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations, 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


Modulus. 


•20 


•21 

•22 

•23 

•24 

•25 

•26 

•27 

•28 

•29 

Corresponding  Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 


•30 


+ 

+ 

- 

- 

p 

P 

P 

P 

O 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

0 

/ 

o 

/ 

0 

/ 

O 

/ 

o 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

0-0 

16-0 

16-0 

32-0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0-1 

15-9 

161 

31-9 

0 

14 

0 

15 

0 

15 

0 

16 

0 

16 

0 

17 

0 

18 

0 

19 

0 

19 

0 

20 

0 

20 

0-2 

15-8 

16-2 

31-8 

0 

27 

0 

29 

0 

30 

0 

31 

0 

32 

0 

34 

0 

35 

0 

36 

0 

37 

0 

39 

0 

40 

0-3 

15-7 

16-3 

31-7 

0 

41 

0 

43 

0 

45 

0 

47 

0 

49 

0 

51 

0 

53 

0 

55 

0 

57 

0 

59 

1 

1 

0-4 

15-6 

16-4 

31-6 

0 

54 

0 

57 

1 

0 

1 

3 

1 

5 

1 

8 

1 

11 

1 

14 

1 

16 

1 

19 

1 

21 

0-5 

15-5 

16-5 

31-5 

1 

8 

1 

11 

1 

14 

1 

18 

1 

21 

1 

25 

1 

28 

1 

31 

1 

34 

1 

38 

1 

41 

0-6 

15-4 

16-6 

31-4 

1 

21 

1 

25 

1 

29 

1 

33 

1 

37 

1 

41 

1 

45 

1 

49 

1 

53 

1 

57 

2 

1 

0-7 

15-3 

16-7 

31-3 

1 

35 

1 

40 

1 

44 

1 

49 

1 

53 

1 

58 

2 

3 

2 

8 

2 

12 

2 

17 

2 

21 

0-8 

15-2 

16-8 

31-2 

1 

48 

1 

54 

1 

59 

2 

4 

2 

9 

2 

15 

2 

20 

2 

25 

2 

30 

2 

36 

2 

41 

0-9 

15-1 

16-9 

31-1 

2 

1 

2 

7 

2 

13 

2 

19 

2 

25 

2 

31 

2 

37 

2 

43 

2 

49 

2 

55 

3 

1 

1-0 

15-0 

17*0 

31-0 

2 

14 

2 

21 

2 

27 

o 

34 

2 

41 

2 

48 

2 

54 

3 

1 

3 

7 

3 

14 

3 

21 

1-1 

14-9 

17'1 

30-9 

2 

28 

2 

35 

2 

42 

2 

50 

2 

57 

3 

5 

3 

12 

3 

19 

3 

26 

3 

34 

3 

41 

1-2 

14-8 

17-2 

30-8 

2 

41 

2 

49 

2 

57 

3 

5 

3 

13 

3 

21 

3 

29 

3 

37 

3 

45 

3 

53 

4 

1 

1-3 

14-7 

17-3 

30-7 

2 

54 

3 

3 

3 

11 

3 

20 

3 

28 

3 

37 

3 

46 

3 

55 

4 

3 

4 

12 

4 

21 

1-4 

14-6 

17-4 

30-6 

3 

7 

3 

17 

3 

26 

3 

35 

3 

44 

3 

54 

4 

3 

4 

12 

4 

21 

4 

31 

4 

40 

1-5 

14-5 

17-5 

30-5 

3 

20 

3 

30 

3 

40 

3 

50 

4 

0 

4 

10 

4 

20 

4 

30 

4 

40 

4 

50 

5 

0 

1-6 

14-4 

17-6 

30-4 

3 

33 

3 

44 

3 

54 

4 

5 

4 

15 

4 

26 

4 

37 

4 

48 

4 

58 

5 

9 

5 

19 

1-7 

14-3 

17*7 

30-3 

3 

46 

3 

57 

4 

8 

4 

20 

4 

31 

4 

43 

4 

54 

5 

5 

5 

16 

5 

28 

5 

39 

1-8 

14-2 

17*8 

30-2 

3 

58 

4 

10 

4 

22 

4 

34 

4 

46 

4 

58 

5 

10 

5 

22 

5 

34 

5 

46 

5 

58 

1-9 

14-1 

17*9 

30-1 

4 

10 

4 

23 

4 

36 

4 

49 

5 

1 

5 

14 

5 

27 

5 

40 

5 

52 

6 

5 

6 

17 

2-0 

14-0 

18-0 

30-0 

4 

23 

4 

37 

4 

50 

5 

3 

5 

16 

5 

30 

5 

43 

5 

56 

6 

9 

6 

23 

6 

36 

2-1 

13-9 

18-1 

29-9 

4 

35 

4 

49 

5 

3 

5 

17 

5 

31 

5 

45 

5 

59 

6 

13 

6 

27 

6 

41 

6 

55 

2-2 

13-8 

18-2 

29*8 

4 

48 

5 

3 

5 

17 

5 

32 

5 

46 

6 

1 

6 

15 

6 

30 

6 

44 

6 

59 

7 

13 

2-3 

13-7 

18-3 

29*7 

5 

0 

5 

15 

5 

30 

5 

45 

6 

0 

6 

16 

6 

31 

6 

46 

7 

1 

7 

16 

7 31 

2-4 

13-6 

18-4 

29*6 

5 

12 

5 

28 

5 

44 

6 

0 

6 

15 

6 

31 

6 

47 

7 

3 

7 

18 

7 

34 

7 

50 

2-5 

13-5 

18-3 

29*5 

5 

24 

5 

41 

5 

57 

6 

14 

6 

30 

6 

47 

7 

3 

7 

18 

7 

35 

7 52 

8 

8 

2-6 

13-4 

18-6 

29*4 

5 

36 

5 

53 

6 

10 

6 

27 

6 

44 

7 

1 

7 

18 

7 

35 

7 

52 

8 

9 

8 26 

2-7 

13-3 

18-7 

29-3 

5 

48 

6 

6 

6 

23 

6 

41 

6 

58 

7 

16 

7 

34 

7 

52 

8 

9 

8 27 

8 

44 

2-8 

13-2 

18-8 

29*2 

6 

0 

6 

18 

6 

36 

6 

54 

7 

12 

7 

31 

7 

49 

8 

7 

8 

25 

8 

43 

9 

1 

2-9 

13-1 

18-9 

29*1 

6 

12 

6 

31 

6 

49 

7 

8 

7 

26 

7 

45 

8 

4 

8 

23 

8 

41 

9 

0 

9 

19 

3-0 

13-0 

19*0 

29*0 

6 

23 

6 

43 

7 

2 

7 

21 

7 

40 

8 

0 

8 

19 

8 

38 

8 

57 

9 

17 

9 

36 

3-1 

12-9 

19*1 

28-9 

6 

34 

6 

54 

7 

14 

7 

34 

7 

54 

8 

14 

8 

34 

8 

54 

9 

13 

9 

33 

9 

53 

3-2 

12-8 

19*2 

28-8 

6 

45 

7 

6 

7 

26 

7 

47 

8 

7 

8 

28 

8 

48 

9 

9 

9 

29 

9 

50 

10 

10 

3-3 

12-7 

19*3 

28-7 

6 

56 

7 

17 

7 

38 

7 

59 

8 

20 

8 

41 

9 

2 

9 

23 

9 

44 

10 

5 

10 

26 

3-4 

12-6 

19-4 

28-6 

7 

7 

7 

28 

7 

50 

8 

12 

8 

33 

8 

55 

9 

16 

9 

38 

9 

59 

10 

21 

10 

42 

3-5 

12-5 

19*5 

28-5 

7 

18 

7 

40 

8 

2 

8 

24 

8 

46 

9 

8 

9 

30 

9 

52 

10 

14 

10 

36 

10 

58 

3-6 

12-4 

19-6 

28-4 

7 

28 

7 

51 

8 

13 

8 

36 

8 

58 

9 

21 

9 

44 

10 

7 

10 

29 

10 

52 

11 

14 

3-7 

12-3 

19*7 

28-3 

7 

38 

8 

1 

8 

24 

8 

47 

9 

10 

9 

34 

9 

57 

10 

20 

10 

43 

11 

7 

11 

30 

3-8 

12-2 

19-8 

28-2 

7 

48 

8 

12 

8 

35 

8 

59 

9 

22 

9 

46 

10 

10 

10 

34 

10 

57 

11 

21 

11 

45 

3-9 

12-1 

19*9 

28-1 

7 

58 

8 

22 

8 

46 

9 

10 

9 

34 

9 

59 

10 

23 

10 

47 

11 

11 

11 

36 

12 

0 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28-0 

8 

8 

8 

33 

8 

57 

9 

22 

9 

46 

10 

11 

10 

36 

11 

1 

11 

25 

11 

50 

12 

15 

+ 

+ 

IN  WOOD-BUIJ.T  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS 


89 


foi'  Azimuths  referred  to  the  Disturbed  Compass. 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 

Modulus. 

•20 

•21 

•22 

•23 

•24 

•25 

•26 

•27 

•28 

•29 

•30 

Correspondin 

j Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 

+ 

+ 

— 

- 

P 

P 

P 

P 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28-0' 

8 

8 

8 

33 

8 

57 

9 

9 

46 

10 

11 

10 

36 

11 

1 

11 

25 

11 

50 

12 

15 

4-1 

11-9 

20-1 

27-9 

8 

18 

8 

43 

9 

8 

9 

33 

9 

58 

10 

23 

10 

48 

11 

13 

11 

38 

12 

4 

12 

30  1 

4-2 

11-8 

20-2 

27-8 

8 

27 

8 

32 

9 

18 

9 

43 

10 

9 

10 

34 

11 

0 

11 

26 

11 

52 

12 

18 

12 

44 

j 4-3 

11-7 

20-3 

27-7 

8 

36 

9 

2 

9 

28 

9 

54 

10 

20 

10 

46 

11 

12 

11 

38 

12 

5 

12 

31 

12 

58 

1 4-4 

11-6 

20-4 

27-6 

8 

43 

9 

11 

9 

38 

10 

4 

10 

31 

10 

57 

11 

24 

11 

50 

12 

17 

12 

44 

13 

11 

4'5 

11-5 

20-3 

27-3 

8 

54 

9 

20 

9 

47 

10 

14 

10 

41 

11 

8 

1 1 

36 

12 

3 

12 

30 

12 

57 

13 

25 

4-6 

11-4 

20-6 

27*4 

9 

2 

9 

29 

9 

57 

10 

24 

10 

52 

11 

19 

11 

47 

12 

14 

12 

42 

13 

10 

13 

38 

4-7 

11-3 

20-7 

27-3 

9 

10 

9 

38 

10 

6 

10 

34 

11 

2 

11 

30 

11 

58 

12 

26 

12 

54 

13 

22 

13 

51 

4-8 

11-2 

20-8 

27-2 

9 

18 

9 

46 

10 

15 

10 

43 

11 

12 

11 

40 

12 

9 

12 

37 

13 

6 

13 

34 

14 

3 

4-9 

IM 

20-9 

27-1 

9 

26 

9 

55 

10 

24 

10 

53 

11 

22 

11 

50 

12 

19 

12 

48 

13 

17 

13 

46 

14 

15 

5-0 

11-0 

21-0 

27-0 

9 

34 

10 

3 

10 

32 

11 

1 

11 

31 

12 

0 

12 

29 

12 

58 

13 

28 

13 

57 

14 

27 

5-1 

10-9 

21-1 

26-9 

9 

42 

10 

11 

10 

41 

11 

10 

11 

40 

12 

9 

12 

39 

13 

8 

13 

38 

14 

8 

14 

38 

5-2 

10-8 

21-2 

26-8 

9 

49 

10 

18 

10 

48 

11 

18 

11 

48 

12 

18 

12 

48 

13 

18 

13 

48 

14 

18 

14 

49 

5-3 

10-7 

21-3 

26-7 

9 

56 

10 

26 

10 

56 

11 

26 

11 

56 

12 

27 

12 

57 

13 

27 

13 

58 

14 

29 

15 

0 

5*4 

10-6 

21-4 

26'6 

10 

3 

10 

33 

11 

3 

11 

33 

12 

. 4 

12 

35 

13 

6 

13 

37 

14 

8 

14 

39 

15 

10 

5*5 

10-5 

21-3 

26-3 

10 

10 

10 

40 

11 

11 

11 

42 

12 

13 

12 

44 

13 

15 

13 

46 

14 

18 

14 

49 

15 

20 

5'6 

10-4 

21-6 

26-4 

10 

16 

10 

47 

11 

18 

11 

49 

12 

21 

12 

52 

13 

24 

13 

56 

14 

27 

14 

58 

15 

30 

5*7 

10-3 

21-7 

26-3 

10 

22 

10 

33 

11 

25 

11 

57 

12 

28 

13 

0 

13 

32 

14 

4 

14 

36 

15 

8 

15 

40 

5’8 

10-2 

21-8 

26-2 

10 

28 

11 

0 

11 

32 

12 

4 

12 

36 

13 

8 

13 

40 

14 

12 

14 

44 

15 

16 

15 

49 

5-9 

10-1 

21-9 

26-1 

10 

34 

11 

6 

11 

38 

12 

10 

12 

43 

13 

15 

13 

47 

14 

19 

14 

52 

15 

24 

15 

57 

6-0 

10-0 

22-0 

26-0 

10 

39 

11 

11 

11 

44 

12 

16 

12 

49 

13 

21 

13 

54 

14 

26 

14 

59 

15 

32 

16 

5 

6-1 

9-9 

22*1 

23-9 

10 

44 

11 

16 

11 

49 

12 

22 

12 

55 

13 

27 

14 

1 

14 

34 

15 

7 

15 

40 

16 

13 

6-2 

9'8 

22-2 

25-8 

10 

49 

11 

21 

11 

54 

12 

27 

13 

0 

13 

33 

14 

7 

14 

40 

15 

14 

15 

47 

16 

21 

6-3 

9-7 

22-3 

25-7 

10 

34 

11 

27 

12 

0 

12 

33 

13 

6 

13 

39 

14 

13 

14 

47 

15 

21 

15 

54 

16 

28 

6-4 

9-6 

22-4 

23-6 

10 

38 

11 

31 

12 

5 

12 

38 

13 

12 

13 

45 

14 

19 

14 

53 

15 

27 

16 

1 

16 

35 

6*5 

9-5 

22-3 

23'3 

11 

Q 

11 

33 

12 

9 

12 

43 

13 

17 

13 

50 

14 

24 

14 

58 

15 

33 

16 

7 

16 

41 

6-6 

9-4 

22-6 

23-4 

11 

6 

11 

39 

12 

13 

12 

47 

13 

21 

13 

55 

14 

29 

15 

3 

15 

38 

16 

12 

16 

47 

6-7 

9-3 

22-7 

23-3 

11 

10 

11 

44 

12 

18 

12 

52 

13 

26 

14 

0 

14 

34 

15 

8 

15 

43 

16 

18 

16 

53 

6-8 

9-2 

22-8 

25-2 

11 

13 

11 

47 

12 

21 

12 

55 

13 

30 

14 

4 

14 

39 

15 

13 

15 

48 

16 

23 

16 

58 

6-9 

9-1 

22-9 

23-1 

11 

16 

11 

30 

12 

25 

12 

39 

13 

34 

14 

8 

14 

43 

15 

18 

15 

53 

16 

28 

17 

3 

7-0 

9-0 

23-0 

23-0 

11 

19 

11 

53 

12 

28 

13 

2 

13 

37 

14 

12 

14 

47 

15 

22 

15 

57 

16 

32 

17 

7 

7-1 

8-9 

23-1 

24-9 

11 

22 

11 

56 

12 

31 

13 

5 

13 

40 

14 

15 

14 

50 

1 5 

25 

16 

0 

18 

35 

17 

1 1 

7-2 

8-8 

23-2 

24-8 

11 

24 

11 

58 

12 

33 

13 

8 

13 

43 

14 

18 

14 

53 

15 

28 

16 

3 

16 

38 

17 

14  i 

7-3 

8-7 

23-3 

24-7 

11 

26 

12 

1 

12 

36 

13 

11 

13 

46 

14 

21 

14 

56 

15 

31 

16 

6 

16 

41 

17 

17 

7-4 

8-6 

23-4 

24-6 

11 

27 

12 

2 

12 

38 

13 

13 

13 

48 

14 

23 

14 

58 

15 

33 

16 

9 

16 

44 

17 

20  1 

7-5 

8-3 

23-3 

24-3 

11 

29 

12 

4 

12 

39 

13 

14 

13 

50 

14 

25 

15 

0 

15 

35 

16 

11 

16 

46 

17 

22  1 

7-6 

8-4 

23-6 

24-4 

11 

30 

12 

5 

12 

40 

13 

15 

13 

51 

14 

26 

15 

o 

15 

37 

16 

13 

16 

48 

17 

24  ' 

7-7 

8-3 

23-7 

24-3 

11 

31 

12 

6 

12 

41 

13 

16 

13 

52 

14 

27 

15 

3 

15 

38 

16 

14 

16 

50 

17 

26 

ch 

8-2 

23-8 

24-2 

11 

32 

12 

6 

12 

42 

13 

17 

13 

53 

14 

28 

15 

4 

15 

39 

16 

15 

16 

51 

17 

27 

7-9 

8-1 

23-9 

24-1 

11 

32 

12 

7 

12 

43 

13 

18 

13 

54 

14 

29 

15 

5 

15 

40 

16 

16 

16 

51 

17 

27 

8-0 

8-0 

24-0 

24-0 

11 

32 

12 

7 

12 

43 

13 

18 

13 

54 

14 

29 

15 

5 

15 

40 

16 

16 

16 

51 

17 

27  1 

+ 

+ 

— 

— 

■ 

Mean 

7 

20 

7 

42 

8 

4 

8 

26 

8 

49 

9 

11 

9 

34 

9 

56 

10 

19 

10 

41 

11 

4 

MDCCCLVI.  N 


90 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations, 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


+ 

+ 

- 

p 

P 

P 

0-0 

16-0 

16-0 

0-1 

15-9 

16-1 

0-2 

15-8 

16-2 

0-3 

15-7 

16-3 

0-4 

15-6 

16-4 

0-5 

15-5 

16-5 

0-6 

15*4 

16-6 

0-7 

15-3 

16-7 

0-8 

15-2 

l6-8 

0-9 

15T 

16-9 

1-0 

15-0 

17-0 

1-1 

14-9 

17-1 

1-2 

14-8 

17-2 

1-3 

14-7 

17-3 

1-4 

14*6 

17-4 

1-5 

14-5 

17-0 

1-6 

14-4 

17-6 

1-7 

14-3 

17-7 

1-8 

14-2 

17-8 

1-9 

14-1 

17-9 

2*0 

14-0 

18-0 

2-1 

13-9 

18-1 

2-2 

13-8 

18-2 

2-3 

13-7 

18-3 

2'4 

13-6 

18-4 

2*5 

13-5 

18-5 

2*6 

13-4 

18-6 

2*7 

1.3-3 

18-7 

2-8 

13-2 

18-8 

2-9 

13-1 

18-9 

3-0 

13-0 

19-0 

3-1 

12-9 

19-1 

3-2 

12-8 

19-2 

,3-3 

12-7 

19*3 

3-4 

12-6 

19-4 

3-.0 

12-.5 

19-5 

.3-6 

12-4 

19-G 

3-7 

12-3 

19-7 

.3-8 

12-2 

19-8 

3-9 

12-1 

19-9 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

+ 

+ 

p 

32-0 

31-9 

31-8 

31-7 

31-6 

31-5 

31-4 

31-3 

31-2 

3M 

31-0 

30-9 

30-8 

30-7 

30-6 

30-5 

30*4 

30-3 

30-2 

30T 

30-0 

29-9 

29-8 

29-7 

29-6 

29-5 

29-4 

29-3 

29-2 

29T 

29-0 

28-9 

28-8 

28-7 

28-6 

28-5 

28-4 

28-3 

28-2 

28-1 

28-0 


Modulus. 

•30 

•31 

•32 

•33 

•34 

•35 

•36 

'37 

•38 

•39 

•40 

Corresponding 

Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 

O 

0 

/ 

o 

o 

/ 1 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

0 

21 

0 

22 

0 

22 

0 

23 

0 

24 

0 

25 

0 

25 

0 

26 

0 

26 

0 

27 

0 

40 

0 

42 

0 

43 

0 

44 

0 

46 

0 

47 

0 

49 

0 

50 

0 

51 

0 

52 

0 

54 

1 

1 

1 

3 

1 

5 

1 

7 

1 

9 

1 

11 

1 

13 

1 

15 

1 

17 

1 

19 

1 

21 

1 

21 

1 

23 

1 

26 

1 

28 

1 

31 

1 

34 

1 

37 

1 

39 

1 

42 

1 

45 

1 

48 

1 

41 

1 

44 

1 

47 

1 

50 

1 

54 

1 

57 

2 

1 

2 

4 

2 

8 

2 

11 

o 

15 

O 

1 

2 

5 

2 

9 

2 

13 

2 

17 

2 

21 

O 

26 

2 

30 

2 

34 

2 

38 

2 

42 

C> 

21 

o 

25 

2 

30 

2 

35 

2 

40 

2 

45 

2 

50 

2 

55 

3 

0 

3 

4 

3 

9 

2 

41 

2 

46 

2 

52 

2 

57 

3 

3 

3 

8 

3 

14 

3 

19 

3 

25 

3 

30 

3 

36 

3 

1 

3 

7 

3 

13 

3 

19 

3 

25 

3 

31 

3 

38 

3 

44 

3 

50 

3 

56 

4 

3 

3 

21 

3 

28 

3 

35 

3 

41 

3 

48 

3 

55 

4 

2 

4 

8 

4 

15 

4 

22 

4 

29 

3 

41 

3 

48 

3 

56 

4 

3 

4 

11 

4 

18 

4 26 

4 

33 

4 

41 

4 

48 

4 

56 

4 

1 

4 

9 

4 

17 

4 

25 

4 

33 

4 

41 

4 

50 

4 

58 

5 

6 

5 

14 

5 

22 

4 

21 

4 

29 

4 

38 

4 

46 

4 

55 

5 

4 

5 

13 

5 

21 

5 

30 

5 

39 

5 

48 

4 

40 

4 

49 

4 

59 

5 

8 

5 .18 

5 

27 

5 

37 

5 

46 

5 

55 

6 

4 

6 

14 

5 

0 

5 

10 

5 

20 

5 

30 

5 

40 

5 

50 

6 

0 

6 

10 

6 

20 

6 

30 

6 

40 

5 

19 

5 

30 

5 

40 

5 

50 

6 

1 

6 

12 

6 

23 

6 

33 

6 

44 

6 

55 

7 

6 

3 

39 

5 

50 

6 

1 

6 

12 

6 

24 

6 

35 

6 

47 

6 

58 

7 

9 

7 20 

7 

32 

5 

58 

6 

10 

6 

22 

6 

34 

6 

46 

6 

58 

7 

10 

7 21 

7 33 

7 

45 

7 57 

6 

17 

6 

29 

6 

42 

6 

54 

7 

7 

7 20 

7 

33 

7 

45 

7 

58 

8 

10 

8 

23 

6 

36 

6 

49 

7 

2 

7 

15 

7 28 

7 

41 

7 

55 

8 

8 

8 

21 

8 

34 

8 

48 

6 

55 

7 

8 

7 

22 

7 

36 

7 50 

8 

4 

8 

18 

8 

31 

8 

45 

8 

59 

9 

13 

7 

13 

7 

27 

7 42 

7 

56 

8 

11 

8 

25 

8 

40 

8 

54 

9 

9 

9 

23 

9 

38 

7 

31 

7 

46 

8 

2 

8 

17 

8 

32 

8 

47 

9 

2 

9 

17 

9 

32 

9 

47 

10 

2 

7 

50 

8 

5 

8 

21 

8 

36 

8 

52 

9 

8 

9 

24 

9 

39 

9 

55 

10 

11 

10  27 

8 

8 

8 

24 

8 

41 

8 

57 

9 

14 

9 

30 

9 

47 

10 

3 

10 

19 

10 

35 

10 

52 

8 

26 

8 

43 

9 

0 

9 

17 

9 

34 

9 

51 

10 

8 

10 

25 

10 

42 

10 

59 

11 

16 

8 

44 

9 

1 

9 

19 

9 

36 

9 

54 

10 

12 

10 

30 

10 

47 

11 

5 

11 

22 

11 

40 

9 

1 

9 

19 

9 

37 

9 

55 

10 

13 

10 

32 

10 

50 

11 

8 

11 

26 

11 

44 

12 

3 

9 

19 

9 

37 

9 

56 

10 

15 

10 

34 

10 

53 

11 

12 

11 

30 

11 

49 

12 

8 

12  27 

9 

36 

9 

55 

10 

15 

10 

34 

10 

54 

11 

13 

11 

33 

11 

52 

12 

11 

12 

30 

12 

50 

9 

53 

10 

13 

10 

33 

10 

53 

11 

13 

11 

33 

1 1 

53 

12 

13 

12 

33 

12 

53 

13 

13 

10 

10 

10 

30 

10 

51 

11 

11 

11 

32 

11 

53 

12 

14 

12 

34 

12 

55 

13 

15 

13 

36 

|10 

26 

10 

47 

11 

9 

11 

30 

11 

51 

12 

12 

12 

34 

12 

55 

13 

16 

13 

37 

13 

58 

^ 10 

42 

11 

4 

11 

26 

11 

47 

12 

9 

12 

31 

12 

53 

13 

15 

13 

36 

13 

58 

14 

20 

!10 

38 

11 

20 

11 

43 

12 

5 

12 

28 

12 

50 

13 

13 

13 

35 

13  57 

14 

19 

14 

42 

111 

14 

11 

37 

12 

0 

12 

23 

12 

46 

13 

9 

13 

32 

13 

54 

14 

17 

14 

40 

15 

3 

11 

30 

11 

53 

12 

17 

12 

40 

13 

4 

13 

27 

13 

51 

14 

14 

14  37 

15 

0 

15 

24 

I 11 

45 

12 

9 

12 

33 

12 

57 

13 

21 

13 

45 

14 

9 

14 

33 

14  57 

15 

21 

15 

45 

12 

0 

12 

24 

12 

49 

13 

13 

13 

38 

14 

3 

14 

28 

14 

52 

15 

17 

15 

41 

l6 

6 

12 

15 

12 

40 

13 

5 

13 

30 

13 

55 

14 

20 

14 

45 

15 

10 

15 

36 

16 

1 

16 

26 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS 


91 


for  Azimuths  referred  to  the  Disturbed  Compass. 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


Modulus. 


•30 


1 

■32 

•33 

•34 

•35 

•36 

•37 

•38 

•39 

•40 


Corresponding  Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 


+ 

+ 

— 

- 

P 

P 

P 

P 

o 

/ 

o 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

0 

/ 

0 

/ 

O 

/ 

o 

o 

t 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28-0 

12 

] 5 

12 

40 

13 

5 

13 

30 

13 

55 

14 

20 

14 

45 

15 

10 

15 

36 

16 

1 

16 

26 

4-1 

11-9 

20-1 

27-9 

12 

30 

12 

55 

13 

21 

13 

46 

14 

11 

14 

37 

15 

2 

15 

28 

15 

54 

16 

20 

16 

46 

4-2 

11-8 

20-2 

27-8 

12 

44 

13 

10 

13 

36 

14 

1 

14  27 

14 

53 

15 

19 

15 

45 

16 

12 

16 

38 

17 

5 

4-3 

11-7 

20-3 

27-7 

12 

58 

13 

24 

13 

51 

14 

17 

14 

43 

1 5 

10 

15 

36 

16 

3 

16 

30 

16 

57 

17 

24 

4-4 

11-6 

20-4 

27-6 

13 

11 

13 

38 

14 

5 

14 

32 

14 

59 

15 

26 

15 

53 

16 

20 

16 

47 

17 

14 

17 

42 

4-5 

11-5 

20-5 

27-5 

13 

25 

13 

52 

14 

20 

14 

47 

15 

14 

15 

42 

16 

9 

16 

36 

17 

4 

17 

32 

18 

0 

4-6 

11-4 

20-6 

27-4 

13 

38 

14 

6 

14 

34 

15 

1 

15 ‘•29 

15 

57 

16 

25 

16 

53 

17 

21 

17 

49 

18 

18 

4-7 

11-3 

20-7 

27-3 

13 

51 

14 

19 

14 

48 

15 

15 

15 

44 

16 

12 

16 

41 

17 

9 

17 

38 

18 

7 

18 

36 

4-8 

11-2 

20-8 

27^2 

14 

3 

14 

32 

15 

1 

15 

29 

1 5 

58 

16 

27 

16 

56 

17 

25 

17 

54 

18 

23 

18 

53 

4-9 

IM 

20-9 

27-1 

14 

15 

14 

44 

15 

14 

15 

42 

16 

12 

16 

41 

17 

11 

17 

40 

18 

10 

18 

40 

19 

10 

5-0 

11-0 

21-0 

27-0 

14 

27 

14 

56 

15 

26 

15 

55 

16 

25 

16 

55 

17 

25 

17 

55 

18 

25 

18 

55 

19 

26 

5-] 

10  9 

2M 

26-9 

14 

38 

15 

8 

15 

38 

16 

8 

16 

38 

17 

9 

17 

39 

18 

9 

18 

40 

19 

10 

19 

41 

5-2 

10-8 

21-2 

26-8 

14 

49 

15 

19 

15 

50 

16 

20 

16 

51 

17 

OO 

17 

53 

18 

23 

18 

54 

19 

25 

19 

56 

5-3 

10-7 

21-3 

26-7 

15 

0 

15 

31 

16 

2 

16 

32 

17 

3 

17 

35 

18 

6 

18 

37 

19 

8 

19 

39 

20 

11 

5-4 

10-6 

21-4 

26-6 

15 

10 

15 

41 

16 

13 

16 

44 

17 

15 

17 

47 

18 

19 

18 

50 

19 

22 

19 

54 

20 

26 

5-5 

10-5 

21-5 

26^5 

15 

20 

15 

52 

16 

24 

16 

55 

17 

27 

17 

59 

18 

31 

19 

3 

19 

35 

20 

7 

20 

40 

5-6 

10-4 

21-6 

26-4 

15 

30 

16 

2 

16 

34 

17 

6 

17 

38 

18 

10 

18 

43 

19 

15 

19 

48 

20 

20 

20 

53 

5-7 

10-3 

21-7 

26-3 

15 

40 

16 

12 

16 

44 

17 

16 

17 

49 

18 

21 

18 

54 

19 

27 

20 

0 

20 

33 

21 

6 

5-8 

10-2 

21-8 

26-2 

15 

49 

16 

21 

16 

54 

17 

26 

17 

59 

18 

32 

19 

5 

19 

38 

20 

11 

20 

44 

21 

18 

5-9 

10-1 

21-9 

26-1 

15 

57 

16 

30 

17 

3 

17 

36 

18 

9 

18 

42 

19 

16 

19 

49 

20 

23 

20 

56 

21 

30 

6-0 

10-0 

22-0 

26-0 

16 

5 

16 

38 

17 

12 

17 

45 

18 

18 

18 

52 

19 

26 

19 

59 

20 

33 

21 

7 

21 

41 

6-1 

9-9 

22-1 

25-9 

16 

13 

16 

47 

17 

21 

17 

54 

18 

27 

19 

1 

19 

35 

20 

9 

20 

43 

21 

17 

21 

52 

6-2 

9-8 

22^2 

25-8 

16 

21 

16 

55 

17 

29 

18 

2 

18 

36 

19 

10 

19 

44 

20 

18 

20 

53 

21 

27 

22 

2 

6-3 

9-7 

22-3 

25-7 

16 

28 

17 

2 

17 

37 

18 

10 

18 

45 

19 

19 

19 

53 

20 

27 

21 

2 

21 

37 

OO 

12 

6-4 

9-6 

22-4 

25-6 

16 

35 

17 

9 

17 

44 

18 

18 

18 

53 

19 

27 

20 

2 

20 

37 

21 

12 

21 

47 

22 

22 

6-5 

9-5 

22-5 

25-5 

16 

41 

17 

16 

17 

51 

18 

25 

19 

0 

19 

35 

20 

10 

20 

45 

21 

20 

21 

55 

22 

31 

6-6 

9-4 

22-6 

25-4 

16 

47 

17 

22 

17 

57 

18 

32 

19 

7 

19 

42 

20 

17 

20 

52 

21 

28 

22 

3 

22 

39 

6-7 

9-3 

22-7 

25-3 

16 

53 

17 

28 

18 

3 

18 

38 

19 

13 

19 

48 

20 

24 

20 

59 

21 

35 

22 

10 

22 

46 

6-8 

9-2 

22-8 

25-2 

16 

58 

17 

33 

18 

8 

18 

43 

19 

18 

19 

54 

20 

30 

21 

5 

21 

41 

22 

17 

22 

53 

6-9 

9-1 

22-9 

25-1 

17 

3 

17 

38 

18 

13 

18 

48 

19 

23 

19 

59 

20 

35 

21 

11 

21 

47 

22 

23 

23 

0 

7*0 

9-0 

23-0 

25-0 

17 

i 

17 

42 

18 

18 

18 

63 

19 

28 

20 

4 

20 

40 

21 

16 

21 

53 

22 

29 

23 

6 

7-1 

8-9 

23-1 

24-9 

17 

11 

17 

46 

18 

22 

18 

57 

19 

33 

20 

9 

20 

45 

21 

21 

21 

58 

22 

34 

23 

11 

7-2 

8-8 

23-2 

24-8 

17 

14 

17 

50 

18 

26 

19 

1 

19 

37 

20 

13 

20 

50 

21 

26 

22 

3 

22 

39 

23 

16 

7-3 

8-7 

23-3 

24-7 

17 

17 

17 

53 

18 

29 

19 

5 

19 

41 

20 

17 

20 

54 

21 

30 

22 

7 

22 

43 

23 

20 

7-4 

8-6 

23-4 

24-6 

17 

20 

17 

56 

18 

32 

19 

8 

19 

44 

20 

20 

20 

57 

21 

33 

22 

10 

22 

47 

23 

24 

7-5 

8-5 

23-5 

24^5 

17 

22 

17 

58 

18 

34 

19 

10 

19 

47 

20 

23 

21 

0 

21 

36 

22 

13 

22 

50 

23 

27 

7-6 

8-4 

23-6 

24-4 

17 

24 

18 

0 

18 

36 

19 

12 

19 

49 

20 

25 

21 

2 

21 

39 

22 

16 

22 

53 

23 

30 

7-7 

8-3 

23-7 

24-3 

17 

26 

18 

Q 

18 

38 

19 

14 

19 

51 

20 

27 

21 

4 

21 

41 

22 

18 

22 

55 

23 

32 

7-8 

8-2 

23-8 

24-2 

17 

27 

18 

3 

18 

39 

19 

15 

19 

52 

20 

28 

21 

5 

21 

42 

22 

19 

22 

56 

23 

34 

7-9 

8-1 

23-9 

24-1 

17 

27 

18 

3 

18 

40 

19 

16 

19 

53 

20 

29 

21 

6 

21 

43 

22 

20 

22 

57 

23 

35 

8-0 

8-0 

24-0 

24-0 

17 

27 

18 

3 

18 

40 

19 

16 

19 

53 

20 

29 

21 

6 

21 

43 

22 

21 

22 

58 

23 

35 

+ 

+ 

— 

- 

Mean 

: 11 

4 

11 

27 

11 

50 

12 

13 

12 

35 

12 

58 

13 

21 

13 

44 

14 

7 

14 

30 

14 

53 

92 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OHSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COxMPASS 


Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations, 


Apparent  Azimutli  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


Modulus. 


•40 


•41  j 

•43 

•43 

•44 

•45  1 

•46 

•47 

00 

•49 

Corresponding  Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 


•50 


+ 

+ 

- 

- 

P 

P 

P 

P 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

o 

O 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

o 

o 

0-0 

16-0 

l6-0 

32*0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0-1 

15-9 

16-1 

31-9 

0 

27 

0 

27 

0 

28 

0 

29 

0 

30 

0 

31 

0 

31 

0 

31 

0 

32 

0 

33 

0 

34 

0-2 

15-8 

l6-2 

31-8 

0 

54 

0 

55 

0 

57 

0 

58 

1 

0 

1 

1 

1 

2 

1 

3 

1 

4 

1 

5 

1 

7 

0-3 

15-7 

16-3 

31-7 

1 

21 

1 

23 

1 

25 

1 

27 

1 

29 

1 

31 

1 

33 

1 

35 

1 

37 

1 

39 

1 

41 

0-4 

15^6 

16-4 

31-6 

1 

48 

1 

50 

1 

53 

1 

56 

1 

59 

2 

1 

2 

4 

2 

6 

2 

9 

2 

12 

2 

15 

0^5 

15-5 

16-5 

31-5 

O 

15 

2 

18 

2 

21 

2 

24 

2 

28 

2 

31 

2 

35 

2 

38 

2 

42 

2 

45 

2 

49 

0-6 

15-4 

16-6 

31-4 

2 

42 

2 

46 

2 

50 

2 

54 

2 

58 

3 

2 

3 

6 

3 

10 

3 

14 

3 

18 

3 

22 

1 0-7 

15-3 

16-7 

31-3 

3 

9 

3 

14 

3 

19 

3 

24 

3 

29 

3 

33 

3 

38 

3 

42 

3 

47 

3 

51 

3 

56 

0-8 

15-2 

16-8 

31-2 

3 

36 

3 

41 

3 

47 

3 

52 

3 

58 

4 

3 

4 

8 

4 

13 

4 

18 

4 

23 

4 

29 

' 0-9 

15-1 

16-9 

31-1 

4 

3 

4 

9 

4 

15 

4 

21 

4 27 

4 

33 

4 

39 

4 

45 

4 

51 

4 

57 

5 

3 

1-0 

15-0 

17*0 

31-0 

4 

29 

4 

35 

4 

42 

4 

49 

4 

56 

5 

2 

5 

9 

5 

15 

5 

22 

5 

29 

5 

36 

M 

14-9 

17*1 

30-9 

4 

56 

5 

3 

5 

10 

5 

17 

5 

25 

5 

32 

5 

40 

5 

47 

5 

54 

6 

1 

6 

9 

1-2 

14-8 

17*2 

30-8 

5 

oo 

5 

30 

5 

38 

5 

46 

5 

54 

6 

2 

6 

10 

6 

18 

6 

26 

6 

34 

6 

42 

1-3 

14-7 

17*3 

30-7 

5 

•48 

5 

57 

6 

6 

6 

15 

6 

24 

6 

32 

6 

41 

6 

49 

6 

58 

7 

6 

7 

15 

1-4 

14-6 

17*4 

30-6 

6 

14 

6 

23 

6 

33 

6 

42 

6 

52 

7 

1 

7 

11 

7 

20 

7 

29 

7 

38 

7 

48 

' 1-5 

14-5 

17*5 

30-5 

6 

40 

6 

50 

7 

0 

7 

10 

7 21 

7 

31 

7 

41 

7 

51 

8 

1 

8 

11 

8 

21 

‘ 1-6 

14-4 

17*6 

30-4 

7 

6 

7 

16 

7 

27 

7 

37 

7 48 

7 

59 

8 

10 

8 

20 

8 

31 

8 

42 

8 

53 

i 

1*7 

14-3 

17*7 

30-3 

7 

32 

7 

43 

7 

54 

8 

5 

8 

17 

8 

28 

8 

40 

8 

51 

9 

2 

9 

13 

9 

25 

' 1-8 

14-2 

17*8 

30-2 

7 

57 

8 

9 

8 

21 

8 

33 

8 

45 

8 

57 

9 

10 

9 

22 

9 

34 

9 

46 

9 

58 

1-9 

14-1 

17*9 

30-1 

8 

23 

8 

35 

8 

48 

9 

0 

9 

13 

9 

26 

9 

39 

9 

51 

10 

4 

10 

17 

10 

30 

2-0 

14-0 

18-0 

30-0 

8 

48 

9 

1 

9 

15 

9 

28 

9 

42 

9 

55 

10 

9 

10 

22 

10 

35 

10 

48 

11 

2 

: 2-1 

13-9 

18-1 

29*9 

9 

13 

9 

27 

9 

41 

9 

55 

10 

9 

10 

23 

10 

38 

10 

52 

11 

6 

11 

20 

11 

34 

2-2 

13-8 

18-2 

29*8 

9 

38 

9 

52 

10 

7 

10 

21 

10 

36 

10 

51 

11 

6 

11 

20 

11 

35 

11 

50 

12 

5 

' 2-3 

13-7 

18-3 

29*7 

10 

2 

10 

17 

10 

33 

10 

48 

11 

4 

11 

19 

11 

35 

11 

50 

12 

5 

12 

21 

12 

36 

2*4 

13-6 

18-4 

29*6 

10  27 

10 

43 

10 

59 

11 

15 

11 

31 

11 

47 

12 

3 

12 

19 

12 

35 

12 

51 

13 

7 

2-5 

13-5 

18*5 

29*5 

10 

52 

n 

8 

11 

25 

11 

41 

11 

58 

12 

15 

12 

32 

12 

48 

13 

5 

13 

21 

13 

38 

' 2-6 

13-4 

18-6 

29*4 

11 

16 

11 

33 

11 

50 

12 

7 

12 

24 

12 

41 

12 

59 

13 

16 

13 

33 

13 

50 

14 

8 

1 2-7 

13-3 

18-7 

29-3 

11 

40 

11 

57 

12 

15 

12 

33 

12 

51 

13 

9 

13 

27 

13 

44 

14 

2 

14 

20 

14 

38 

2-8 

13-2 

18-8 

29*2 

12 

3 

12 

21 

12 

40 

12 

58 

13 

17 

13 

35 

13 

54 

14 

12 

14 

31 

14 

49 

15 

8 

2-9 

13-1 

18-9 

29*1 

12  27 

12 

46 

13 

5 

13 

24 

13 

43 

14 

2 

14 

22 

14 

41 

15 

0 

15 

19 

15 

38 

3-0 

13-0 

19*0 

29*0 

12 

50 

13 

10 

13 

30 

13 

49 

14 

9 

14 

29 

14 

49 

15 

8 

15 

28 

15 

48 

16 

8 

31 

12-9 

19*1 

28-9 

13 

13 

13 

33 

13 

54 

14 

14 

14 

35 

14 

55 

15 

16 

15 

36 

15 

56 

16 

16 

16 

37 

3-2 

12-8 

19*2 

28-8 

13 

36 

13 

57 

14 

18 

14 

39 

15 

0 

15 

21 

15 

42 

16 

3 

16 

24 

16 

45 

17 

6 

3-3 

12-7 

19*3 

28-7 

13 

58 

14 

19 

14 

41 

15 

2 

15 

24 

15 

46 

16 

8 

16 

29 

16 

51 

17 

12 

17  34 

.3-4 

12-6 

19*4 

28-6 

14 

20 

14 

42 

15 

4 

15 

26 

15 

48 

16 

10 

16 

33 

16 

55 

17 

17 

17 

39 

18 

2 

3-5 

12-5 

19*5 

28-5 

14 

42 

15 

4 

15 

27 

15 

50 

16 

13 

16 

36 

16 

59 

17 

21 

17 

44 

18 

7 

18 

30 

3-6 

12-4 

19-6 

28-4 

15 

3 

15 

26 

15 

50 

16 

13 

16 

37 

17 

0 

17 

24 

17 

47 

18 

10 

18 

33 

18 

57 

3-7 

12-3 

19*7 

28-3 

15 

24 

15 

48 

16 

12 

16 

36 

17 

0 

17 

24 

17 

48 

18 

12 

18 

36 

19 

0 

19 

24 

3-8 

12-2 

19*8 

28-2 

15 

45 

16 

9 

16 

34 

16 

58 

17  23 

17 

47 

18 

12 

18 

36 

19 

1 

19 

25 

19 

50 

3-9 

12-1 

19*9 

28-1 

16 

6 

16 

31 

16 

56 

17 

21 

17 

46 

18 

11 

18 

36 

19 

1 

19 

26 

19 

51 

20 

16 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28-0 

16 

26 

16 

51 

17 

17 

17 

42 

18 

8 

18 

33 

18 

59 

19 

25 

19 

50 

20 

16 

20 

42 

+ 

IN  VVOOU-BUILT  AND  IKON-BUILT  SHIPS 


93 


for  Azimuths  referred  to  the  Disturbed  Compass. 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


Modulus. 


•40 


j .41 

•42 

•43 

•44 

•45 

•46 

•47 

00 

•49 

•50 


Corresponding  Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 


+ 

+ 

- 

- 

P 

P 

P 

P 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28-0 

16 

26 

16 

51 

17 

17 

17 

42 

18 

8 

18 

33 

18 

59 

19 

25 

19 

50 

20 

16 

20 

42 

4-1 

11-9 

20-1 

27-9 

16 

46 

17 

12 

17 

38 

18 

4 

18 

30 

18 

56 

19 

22 

19 

48 

20 

14 

20 

40 

21 

7 

4-2 

11-8 

20-2 

27-8 

17 

5 

17 

32 

17 

58 

18 

25 

18 

51 

19 

18 

19 

45 

20 

11 

20 

38 

21 

5 

21 

32 

4-3 

11-7 

20-3 

27-7 

17 

24 

17 

51 

18 

18 

18 

45 

19 

12 

19 

40 

20 

7 

20 

34 

21 

2 

21 

29 

21 

57 

4-4 

11-6 

20-4 

27-6 

17 

42 

18 

10 

18 

37 

19 

5 

19 

33 

20 

1 

20 

29 

20 

57 

21 

25 

21 

53 

22 

21 

4-5 

11-5 

20-5 

27-5 

18 

0 

18 

29 

18 

57 

19 

25 

19 

53 

20 

22 

20 

50 

21 

18 

21 

47 

22 

15 

22 

44 

4-6 

11-4 

20-6 

27-4 

18 

18 

18 

47 

19 

1 5 

19 

44 

20 

13 

20 

42 

21 

11 

21 

40 

22 

9 

22 

38 

23 

7 

4-7 

11-3 

20-7 

27-3 

18 

36 

19 

5 

19 

34 

20 

3 

20 

32 

21 

2 

21 

31 

22 

0 

22 

30 

22 

59 

23 

29 

4-8 

11-2 

20-8 

27‘2 

18 

53 

19 

23 

19 

52 

20 

22 

20 

51 

21 

21 

21 

51 

22 

21 

22 

51 

23 

21 

23 

51 

4-9 

11-1 

20-9 

27-1 

19 

10 

19 

40 

20 

10 

20 

40 

21 

10 

21 

40 

22 

10 

22 

40 

23 

11 

23 

42 

24 

13 

5-0 

11-0 

21-0 

27*0 

19 

26 

19 

56 

20 

26 

20 

57 

21 

27 

21 

58 

22 

29 

23 

0 

23 

31 

24 

2 

24 

34 

5-1 

10-9 

21-1 

26-9 

19 

41 

20 

12 

20 

43 

21 

14 

21 

45 

22 

16 

22 

48 

23 

19 

23 

51 

24 

22 

24 

54 

5-2 

10-8 

21-2 

26-8 

19 

56 

20 

28 

20 

59 

21 

31 

22 

2 

22 

34 

23 

6 

23 

38 

24 

10 

24 

42 

25 

14 

5-3 

10-7 

21-3 

26-7 

20 

11 

20 

43 

21 

15 

21 

47 

22 

19 

22 

51 

23 

23 

23 

55 

24 . 28 

25 

0 

25 

33 

5-4 

10-6 

21-4 

26-6 

20 

26 

20 

58 

21 

30 

22 

2 

22 

34 

23 

7 

23 

40 

24 

13 

24 

46 

25 

19 

25 

52 

5’5 

10-5 

21-5 

26-5 

20 

40 

21 

12 

21 

44 

22 

17 

22 

50 

23 

23 

23 

56 

24 

29 

25 

3 

25 

36 

26 

10 

5‘6 

10-4 

21-6 

26-4 

20 

53 

21 

26 

21 

59 

22 

32 

23 

5 

23 

38 

24 

12 

24 

45 

25 

19 

25 

53 

26 

27 

5-7 

10-3 

21-7 

26-3 

21 

6 

21 

39 

22 

12 

22 

46 

23 

19 

23 

53 

24 

27 

25 

1 

25 

35 

26 

9 

26 

44 

5-8 

10-2 

21-8 

26-2 

21 

18 

21 

52 

22 

25 

22 

59 

23 

33 

24 

7 

24 

42 

25 

16 

25 

51 

26 

25 

27 

0 

5-9 

10-1 

21-9 

26-1 

21 

30 

22 

4 

22 

38 

23 

12 

23 

46 

24 

21 

24 

56 

25 

31 

26 

6 

26 

41 

27 

16 

6-0 

10-0 

22-0 

26-0 

21 

41 

22 

16 

22 

50 

23 

25 

23 

59 

24 

34 

25 

9 

25 

44 

26 

20 

26 

55 

27 

31 

6-1 

9-9 

22-1 

25-9 

21 

52 

22 

27 

23 

1 

23 

36 

24 

11 

24 

46 

25 

22 

25 

57 

26 

33 

27 

9 

27  45 

6-2 

9-8 

22-2 

25-8 

22 

2 

22 

37 

23 

12 

23 

47 

24 

22 

24 

58 

25 

34 

26 

10 

26 

46 

27 

22 

27 

59 

6-3 

9-7 

22-3 

25-7 

22 

12 

22 

48 

23 

23 

23 

58 

24 

33 

25 

9 

25 

46 

26 

22 

26 

59 

27 

35 

28 

12 

6-4 

9-6 

22-4 

25-6 

22 

22 

22 

58 

23 

33 

24 

9 

24 

44 

25 

20 

25 

57 

26 

33 

27 

10 

S7 

47 

28 

24 

6‘5 

9-5 

22-5 

25^5 

22 

31 

23 

7 

23 

42 

24 

18 

24 

54 

25 

30 

26 

7 

26 

44 

27  21 

27 

58 

28 

35 

6-6 

9-4 

22-6 

25-4 

22 

39 

23 

15 

23 

51 

24 

27 

25 

3 

25 

40 

26 

17 

26 

54 

27 

31 

28 

8 

28 

46 

6-7 

9-3 

22-7 

25-3 

22 

46 

23 

23 

23 

59 

24 

36 

25 

12 

25 

49 

26 

26 

,27 

3 

27 

41 

28 

18 

28 

56 

6-8 

9-2 

22-8 

25^2 

22 

53 

23 

30 

24- 

6 

24 

43 

25 

20 

25 

57 

26 

35 

27 

12 

27 

50 

28 

27 

29 

5 

6-9 

9-1 

22-9 

25-1 

23 

0 

23 

37 

24 

13 

24 

50 

25 

27 

26 

4 

26 

42 

27 

20 

27 

58 

28 

36 

29 

14 

7-0 

9-0 

23-0 

25-0 

23 

6 

23 

43 

24 

20 

24 

57 

25 

34 

26 

11 

26 

49 

27 

27 

28 

5 

28 

43 

29 

22 

7-1 

8-9 

23-1 

24-9 

23 

11 

23 

48 

24 

25 

25 

2 

25 

39 

26 

17 

26 

56 

27 

34 

28 

12 

28 

50 

29 

29 

7-2 

8-8 

23-2 

24-8 

23 

16 

23 

53 

24 

30 

25 

8 

25 

45 

26 

23 

27 

2 

27 

40 

28 

19 

28 

57 

29 

36 

7-3 

8-7 

23-3 

24-7 

23 

20 

23 

58 

24 

35 

25 

13 

25 

50 

26 

28 

27 

7 

27 

45 

28 

24 

29 

2 

29 

41 

7-4 

8-6 

23-4 

24-6 

23 

24 

24 

2 

24 

39 

25 

17 

25 

55 

26 

32 

27 

11 

27 

49 

28 

28 

29 

7 

29 

46 

7-5 

8-5 

23-5 

24-5 

23 

27 

24 

5 

24 

42 

25 

20 

25 

58 

26 

36 

27 

15 

27 

53 

28 

32 

29 

11 

29 

50 

7-6 

8-4 

23-6 

24-4 

23 

30 

24 

8 

24 

45 

25 

23 

26 

1 

26 

39 

27 

18 

27 

57 

28 

36 

29 

15 

29 

54 

7-7 

8-3 

23-7 

24-3 

23 

32 

24 

10 

24 

48 

25 

26 

26 

3 

26 

41 

27 

20 

27 

59 

28 

38 

29 

17 

29 

56 

7-8 

8-2 

23-8 

24-2 

23 

34 

24 

11 

24 

49 

25 

27 

26 

5 

26 

43 

27 

22 

28 

1 

28 

40 

29 

19 

29 

58 

7-9 

8-1 

23-9 

24-1 

23 

35 

24 

12 

24 

50 

25 

28 

26 

6 

26 

44 

27 

23 

28 

2 

28 

41 

29 

20 

29 

59 

8-0 

8-0 

24-0 

24-0 

23 

35 

24 

13 

24 

51 

25 

29 

26 

7 

26 

45 

1 

27 

94 

28 

3 

28 

42 

29 

21 

30 

0 

4- 

+ 

- 

— 

Mean 

14 

53 

15 

16 

15 

39 

16 

2 

16 

26 

16 

49 

17 

13 

17 

37 

IS 

1 

18 

25 

IS 

49 

04 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations, 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 

•5 

Modulus. 

0 

•51 

•53 

•53 

•54 

•55 

*56 

•57 

•58 

•59 

•60 

Corresponding 

Polar-Maguet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

P 

P 

P 

P 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

0 

/ 

o 

/ 

0 

/ 

0 

/ 

0 

0-0 

16-0 

16-0 

33-0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0-1 

15-9 

16-1 

31-9 

0 

34 

0 

34 

0 

35 

0 

36 

0 

36 

0 

37 

0 

38 

0 

38 

0 

39 

0 

40 

0 

41 

0-3 

15-8 

16-3 

31-8 

1 

7 

1 

8 

1 

10 

1 

11 

1 

13 

1 

14 

1 

16 

1 

17 

1 

18 

1 

19 

1 

21 

0-3 

15-7 

l6-3 

31-7 

1 

41 

1 

43 

1 

45 

1 

47 

1 

49 

1 

52 

1 

54 

1 

56 

1 

58 

2 

0 

2 

2 

0-4 

15-6 

16-4 

31*6 

3 

15 

3 

17 

2 

30 

2 

33 

2 

25 

2 

28 

2 

31 

2 

33 

o 

36 

2 

39 

2 

42 

0-5 

15-5 

16-5 

31-5 

3 

49 

2 

53 

2 

55 

3 

58 

3 

2 

3 

5 

3 

9 

3 

12 

3 

16 

3 

19 

3 

23 

0-6 

15'4 

16-6 

31*4 

3 

33 

3 

36 

3 

30 

3 

34 

3 

38 

3 

42 

3 

47 

3 

51 

3 

55 

3 

59 

4 

3 

0-7 

15-3 

16-7 

31-3 

3 

56 

4 

0 

4 

5 

4 

9 

4 

14 

4 

19 

4 

24 

4 

28 

4 

33 

4 

38 

4 

43 

0-8 

15-3 

16-8 

31*3 

4 

39 

4 

34 

4 

40 

4 

45 

4 

51 

4 

56 

5 

2 

5 

7 

5 

12 

5 

17 

5 

23 

0-9 

15-1 

16-9 

3M 

5 

3 

5 

9 

5 

15 

5 

31 

5 

27 

5 

33 

5 

39 

5 

45 

5 

51 

5 

57 

6 

3 

1-0 

15-0 

17-0 

31-0 

5 

36 

5 

43 

5 

49 

5 

55 

6 

2 

6 

9 

6 

16 

6 

22 

6 

29 

6 

36 

6 

43 

1*1 

14-9 

17-1 

30-9 

6 

9 

6 

16 

6 

24 

6 

31 

6 

39 

6 

46 

6 

54 

7 

1 

7 

8 

7 

15 

7 23 

1-3 

14-8 

17-3 

30-8 

6 

43 

6 

50 

6 

58 

7 

6 

7 

14 

7 

22 

7 

31 

7 

39 

7 

47 

7 

55 

8 

3 

1-3 

14-7 

17-3 

30-7 

7 

15 

7 

33 

7 

33 

7 

41 

7 

50 

7 

59 

8 

8 

8 

16 

8 

25 

8 

34 

8 

43 

1-4 

14-6 

17'4 

30-6 

7 

48 

7 

57 

8 

7 

8 

16 

8 

26 

8 

35 

8 

45 

8 

54 

9 

3 

9 

12 

9 

22 

1-5 

14-0 

17-5 

30-5 

8 

31 

8 

31 

8 

41 

8 

51 

9 

1 

9 

11 

9 

22 

9 

32 

9 

42 

9 

52 

10 

2 

1-6 

14‘4 

17-6 

30-4 

8 

53 

9 

4 

9 

15 

9 

35 

9 

36 

9 

47 

9 

58 

10 

8 

10 

19 

10 

30 

10 

41 

1-7 

14-3 

17-7 

30-3 

9 

35 

9 

36 

9 

48 

9 

59 

10 

11 

10 

22 

10 

34 

10 

45 

10 

57 

11 

8 

11 

20 

1-8 

14-3 

17-8 

30-3 

9 

58 

10 

10 

10 

22 

10 

34 

10 

46 

10 

58 

11 

11 

11 

23 

11 

35 

11 

47 

11 

59 

1-9 

14-1 

17-9 

30-1 

10 

30 

10 

43 

10 

56 

11 

8 

11 

21 

11 

34 

11 

47 

11 

59 

12 

12 

12 

25 

12 

38 

3-0 

14-0 

18-0 

30-0 

11 

2 

11 

15 

11 

29 

11 

42 

11 

56 

12 

9 

12 

23 

12 

36 

12 

49 

13 

2 

13 

16 

3-1 

13-9 

18-1 

39-9 

11 

34 

11 

48 

13 

3 

13 

16 

12 

30 

12 

44 

12 

58 

13 

12 

13 

26 

13 

40 

13 

54 

3-3 

13-8 

18-3 

39-8 

13 

5 

13 

30 

13 

35 

13 

49 

13 

4 

13 

19 

13 

34 

13 

48 

14 

3 

14 

18 

14 

33 

3-3 

13-7 

18-3 

39-7 

13 

36 

13 

51 

13 

7 

13 

33 

13 

38 

13 

53 

14 

9 

14 

25 

14 

40 

14 

55 

15 

11 

3-4 

13-6 

18-4 

396 

13 

7 

13 

33 

13 

39 

13 

55 

14 

11 

14 

27 

14 

44 

15 

0 

15 

16 

15 

32 

15 

48 

3-5 

13-5 

18-5 

39-5 

13 

38 

13 

54 

14 

11 

14 

27 

14 

44 

15 

1 

15 

18 

15 

35 

15 

51 

16 

8 

16 

25 

3-6 

13-4 

18-6 

39-4 

14 

8 

14 

35 

14 

43 

15 

0 

15 

18 

15 

35 

15 

53 

16 

10 

16 

38 

16 

45 

17 

3 

3-7 

13*3 

18-7 

39*3 

14 

38 

14 

56 

15 

14 

15 

32 

15 

50 

16 

8 

16 

27 

16 

45 

17 

3 

17 

21 

17 

40 

3-8 

13-3 

18-8 

39-2 

15 

8 

15 

36 

15 

45 

16 

4 

16 

23 

16 

42 

17 

1 

17 

19 

17 

38 

17 

57 

18 

16 

3-9 

13-1 

18-9 

39-1 

15 

38 

15 

57 

16 

17 

16 

36 

16 

56 

17 

15 

17 

35 

17 

54 

18 

13 

18 

32 

18 

52 

3-0 

13-0 

19-0 

39-0 

16 

8 

16 

38 

16 

48 

17 

8 

17 

28 

17 

48 

18 

8 

18 

28 

18 

48 

19 

8 

19 

28 

3-1 

13-9 

19-1 

38-9 

16 

37 

16 

58 

17 

18 

17 

38 

17 

59 

18 

20 

18 

41 

19 

1 

19 

22 

19 

43 

20 

4 

3-3 

13-8 

19-3 

38-8 

17 

6 

17 

27 

17 

48 

18 

9 

18 

31 

18 

52 

19 

14 

19 

35 

19 

56 

20 

17 

20 

39 

3-3 

13-7 

19-3 

38-7 

17 

34 

17 

56 

18 

18 

18 

40 

19 

2 

19 

24 

19 

46 

20 

8 

20 

30 

20 

52 

21 

14 

3-4 

13-6 

19-4 

38-6 

18 

3 

18 

24 

18 

47 

19 

9 

19 

32 

19 

55 

30 

18 

20 

40 

21 

3 

21 

25 

21 

48 

3*5 

13-5 

19-0 

38-5 

18 

30 

18 

53 

19 

16 

19 

39 

20 

2 

20 

26 

20 

49 

21 

12 

21 

35 

21 

58 

22 

22 

3-6 

13-4 

19-6 

38-4 

18 

57 

19 

31 

19 

45 

30 

9 

20 

33 

20 

57 

21 

21 

21 

44 

22 

8 

22 

32 

22 

56 

3-7 

13-3 

19-7 

38-3 

19 

34 

19 

48 

30 

13 

30 

37 

31 

2 

31 

26 

21 

51 

22 

15 

23 

40 

23 

4 

23 

29 

3-8 

13-3 

19-8 

38-3 

19 

50 

30 

15 

30 

41 

31 

6 

21 

31 

21 

56 

22 

22 

22 

47 

23 

12 

23 

37 

24 

2 

3-9 

13'] 

19-9 

38-1 

30 

16 

30 

43 

31 

8 

31 

34 

21 

59 

32 

25 

22 

51 

23 

17 

33 

43 

24 

8 

24 

34 

4-0 

13-0 

30-0 

38-0 

1 30 

43 

31 

8 

31 

34 

33 

1 

22 

27 

22 

53 

23 

20 

23 

46 

34 

13 

24 

39 

25 

6 

+ 

+ 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IKON-BUILT  SHIPS 


95 


for  Azimuths  referred  to  the  Disturbed  Compass. 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 

Modulus. 

•50 

•51 

•52 

1 -53 

I -54 

•55 

1 *56 

•57 

•58 

•59 

•60 

Correspondin 

g Polar-Magnet-Deviation, 

n degrees  and  minutes. 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

P 

P 

P 

P 

i o 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

0 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28-0 

20 

42 

21 

8 

21 

34 

22 

1 

22 

27 

22 

53 

23 

20 

23 

46 

24 

13 

24 

39 

25 

6 

4-1 

11-9 

20-1 

27-9 

■ 21 

7 

21 

34 

22 

1 

22  27 

22 

54 

23 

21 

23 

49 

24 

16 

24 

43 

25 

10 

25 

37 

4-2 

11-8 

20-2 

27-8 

21 

32 

21 

59 

22  27 

22 

54 

23 

22 

23 

49 

24 

17 

24 

44 

25 

12 

25 

40 

26 

8 

4-3 

11-7 

20-3 

27-7 

21 

57 

22 

25 

22 

53 

23 

20 

23 

48 

24 

16 

24 

45 

25 

13 

25 

42 

26 

10 

26 

39 

4-4 

11'6 

20-4 

27-6 

22 

21 

22 

49 

23 

18 

23 

46 

24 

14 

24 

43 

25 

12 

25 

41 

26 

10 

26 

39 

27 

9 

4-5 

11*5 

205 

27-5 

22 

44 

23 

13 

23 

42 

24 

11 

24 

40 

25 

9 

25 

39 

26 

8 

26 

38 

27 

8 

27  38 

4-6 

11-4 

20-6 

27-4 

23 

7 

23 

36 

24 

6 

24 

35 

25 

5 

25 

35 

26 

5 

26 

35 

27 

6 

27 

36 

28 

7 

4-7 

11-3 

20*7 

27-3 

23 

29 

23 

59 

24 

30 

25 

0 

25 

30 

26 

0 

26 

31 

27 

2 

27  33 

28 

4 

28 

35 

4-8 

11-2 

20-8 

27-2 

23 

51 

24 

22 

24 

53 

25 

24 

25 

54 

26 

25 

26 

56 

27  27 

27  59 

28 

30 

29 

2 

4-9 

IM 

20-9 

27-1 

24 

13 

24 

44 

25 

16 

25 

47 

26 

18 

26 

49 

27 

21 

27 

53 

28 

25 

28 

57 

29 

29 

5*0 

11-0 

21-0 

27-0 

24 

34 

25 

6 

25 

38 

26 

9 

26 

41 

27 

13 

27 

46 

28 

18 

28 

51 

29 

23 

29 

56 

5-1 

10-9 

2M 

26-9 

24 

54 

25 

26 

25 

59 

26 

31 

27 

3 

27 

36 

28 

9 

28 

42 

29 

15 

29 

48 

30 

22 

5*2 

10-8 

21-2 

26-8 

25 

14 

25 

47 

26 

20 

26 

52 

27  25 

27  58 

28 

32 

29 

5 

29 

39 

30 

12 

30 

46 

5-3 

10-7 

21-3 

26-7 

25 

33 

26 

6 

26 

40 

27 

13 

27 

46 

28 

20 

28 

54 

29 

28 

30 

2 

30 

36 

31 

10 

5-4 

10-6 

21-4 

26'6 

25 

52 

26 

26 

27 

0 

27 

33 

28 

7 

28 

41 

29 

16 

29 

50 

30 

25 

30 

59 

31 

34 

5-5 

10-5 

21-5 

26*5 

26 

10 

26 

44 

27 

19 

27 

53 

28 

27 

29 

1 

29 

37 

30 

12 

30 

47 

31 

22 

31 

57 

5-6 

10-4 

21-6 

26-4 

26 

27 

27 

2 

27 

37 

28 

11 

28 

46 

29 

21 

29 

57 

30 

32 

31 

8 

31 

43 

32 

19 

5-7 

10-3 

21-7 

26-3 

26 

44 

27 

19 

27 

54 

28 

29 

29 

4 

29 

40 

30 

16 

30 

52 

31 

28 

32 

4 

32 

40 

5-8 

10-2 

21-8 

26-2 

27 

0 

27  35 

28 

11 

28 

46 

29 

22 

29 

58 

30 

35 

31 

11 

31 

48 

32 

24 

33 

1 

5*9 

10-1 

21-9 

26-1 

27 

16 

27 

51 

28 

27 

29 

3 

29 

39 

30 

15 

30 

53 

31 

30 

32 

7 

32 

44 

33 

21 

6-0 

10-0 

22-0 

26-0 

27 

31 

28 

7 

28 

43 

29 

19 

29 

55 

30 

32 

31 

10 

31 

47 

32 

25 

33 

2 

33 

40 

6-1 

9-9 

22-1 

25-9 

27 

45 

28 

21 

28 

58 

29 

34 

30 

11 

30 

48 

31 

26 

32 

4 

32 

42 

33 

20 

33 

58 

6-2 

9-8 

22‘2 

25*8 

27 

59 

28 

36 

29 

13 

29 

49 

30 

26 

31 

3 

31 

41 

32 

19 

32 

58 

33 

36 

34 

15 

6-3 

9-7 

22-3 

25-7 

28 

12 

28 

49 

29 

26 

30 

3 

30 

40 

31 

18 

31 

56 

32 

35 

33 

14 

33 

53 

34 

32 

6-4 

9-6 

22-4 

25-6 

28 

24 

29 

2 

29 

39 

30 

16 

30 

54 

31 

32 

32 

11 

32 

50 

33 

29 

34 

8 

34 

48 

6'5 

9-5 

22-5 

25-5 

28 

35 

29 

13 

29 

51 

30 

29 

31 

7 

31 

45 

32 

25 

33 

4 

33 

44 

34 

23 

35 

3 

6-6 

9-4 

22-6 

25-4 

28 

46 

29 

24 

30 

3 

30 

41 

31 

19 

31 

58 

32 

38 

33 

17 

33 

57 

34 

36 

35 

16 

6-7 

9-3 

22-7 

25-3 

28 

56 

29 

34 

30 

13 

30 

51 

31 

30 

32 

10 

32 

50 

33 

29 

34 

9 

34 

49 

35 

29 

6-8 

9-2 

22-8 

25-2 

29 

5 

29 

43 

30 

22 

31 

1 

31 

41 

32 

20 

33 

0 

33 

40 

34 

20 

35 

0 

35 

41 

6'9 

9-1 

22-9 

25-1 

29 

14 

20 

52 

30 

31 

31 

11 

31 

51 

32 

30 

33 

10 

33 

50 

34 

31 

35 

11 

35 

52 

7-0 

9-0 

23-0 

25-0 

29 

22 

30 

0 

30 

39 

31 

19 

31 

59 

32 

39 

33 

19 

34 

0 

34 

41 

35 

22 

36 

3 

7-1 

8-9 

23-1 

24-9 

29 

29 

30 

8 

30 

47 

31 

27 

32 

7 

32 

47 

33 

27 

54 

8 

34 

50 

35 

31 

36 

13 

7-2 

8-8 

23-2 

24-8 

29 

36 

30 

15 

30 

54 

31 

34 

32 

14 

32 

54 

33 

35 

34 

16 

34 

58 

35 

39 

36 

21 

7-3 

8-7 

23-3 

24-7 

29 

41 

30 

20 

31 

0 

31 

40 

32 

20 

33 

0 

33 

42 

34 

23 

35 

5 

35 

46 

36 

28 

7-4 

8-6 

23-4 

24-6 

29 

46 

30 

25 

31 

5 

31 

45 

32 

26 

33 

6 

33 

47 

34 

28 

35 

10 

35 

52 

36 

34 

7-5 

8-5 

23-5 

24-5 

29 

50 

30 

29 

31 

9 

31 

50 

32 

31 

33 

11 

33 

52 

34 

33 

35 

15 

35 

57 

36 

39 

7-6 

8-4 

23-6 

24-4 

29 

54 

30 

33 

31 

13 

31 

53 

32 

34 

33 

15 

33 

56 

34 

38 

35 

20 

36 

2 

36 

44 

7-7 

8-3 

23-7 

24-3 

29 

56 

30 

36 

31 

16 

31 

56 

32 

37 

33 

18 

33 

59 

34 

41 

35 

23 

36 

5 

36 

48 

7-8 

8-2 

23-8 

24-2 

29 

58 

30 

38 

31 

18 

31 

58 

32 

39 

33 

20 

34 

1 

34 

43 

35 

25 

36 

8 

36 

50 

7-9 

8-1 

23-9 

24-1 

29 

59 

30 

39 

31 

20 

32 

0 

32 

41 

33 

21 

34 

2 

34 

44 

35 

26 

36 

9 

36 

52 

8-0 

8*0 

24-0 

24-0 

30 

0 

30 

40 

31 

21 

32 

1 

32 

42 

33 

OQ 

34 

3 

34 

45 

35 

27 

36 

9 

36 

52 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

Mean 

18 

49 

19 

13 

19 

37 

20 

1 

20 

26 

20 

51 

21 

15 

1 

21 

40 

22 

5 

22 

30 

22 

55 

96 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations, 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


Modulus. 


•60 

•61 

•62 

•63 

•64 

•65 

•66 

•67 

•68 

•69 

•70 


Corresponding  Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 


+ 

+ 

— 

— 

P 

P 

P 

P 

o 

o 

o 

/ 

1 ° 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

0 

/ 

O 

/ 

0 

o 

o 

0-0 

16-0 

16-0 

32-0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i 0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0-1 

15-9 

16-1 

31-9 

0 

41 

0 

41 

0 

42 

0 

42 

0 

43 

0 

44 

0 

43 

0 

45 

0 

46 

0 

46 

0 

47 

0-2 

15-8 

16-2 

31-8 

1 

21 

1 

22 

] 

24 

1 

25 

1 

26 

1 

27 

1 

29 

1 

30 

1 

31 

1 

32 

1 

34 

0-3 

15-7 

16-3 

31-7 

2 

2 

O 

4 

2 

6 

2 

8 

O 

10 

2 

12 

2 

14 

2 

13 

2 

17 

2 

19 

2 

21 

0-4 

15-6 

16-4 

31-6 

2 

42 

2 

44 

2 

47 

2 

49 

2 

52 

2 

53 

2 

38 

3 

0 

3 

3 

3 

5 

3 

8 

0'5 

15-5 

16-5 

31-5 

3 

23 

3 

26 

3 

29 

3 

32 

3 

36 

3 

39 

3 

43 

3 

46 

3 

49 

3 

52 

3 

56 

0-6 

15-4 

16'6 

31-4 

4 

3 

4 

7 

4 

11 

4 

15 

4 

19 

4 

23 

4 

27 

4 

31 

4 

35 

4 

39 

4 

43 

0-7 

15-3 

16-7 

31-3 

4 

43 

4 

48 

4 

53 

4 

57 

5 

2 

5 

7 

5 

12 

3 

16 

5 

21 

5 

25 

5 

30 

0-8 

15-2 

16-8 

31-2 

5 

23 

5 

28 

5 

34 

3 

39 

5 

45 

5 

30 

5 

56 

6 

1 

6 

6 

6 

11 

6 

17 

0-9 

15-1 

16-9 

3M 

6 

3 

6 

9 

6 

15 

6 

21 

6 

27 

6 

33 

6 

40 

6 

46 

6 

32 

6 

58 

7 

4 

1-0 

15-0 

17-0 

31-0 

6 

43 

6 

30 

6 

57 

7 

3 

7 

10 

7 

17 

7 

24 

7 

30 

7 

37 

7 

44 

7 

51 

M 

14-9 

17-1 

30-9 

7 

23 

7 

30 

7 

38 

7 

45 

7 

53 

8 

0 

8 

8 

8 

15 

8 

23 

8 

30 

8 

38 

1-2 

14-8 

17-2 

30-8 

8 

3 

8 

11 

8 

19 

8 

27 

8 

35 

8 

43 

8 

52 

9 

0 

9 

8 

9 

16 

9 

24 

1-3 

14-7 

17-3 

30-7 

8 

43 

8 

51 

9 

0 

9 

8 

9 

17 

9 

26 

9 

35 

9 

43 

9 

52 

10 

1 

10 

10 

1-4 

14-6 

17-4 

30-6 

9 

22 

9 

31 

9 

41 

9 

50 

10 

0 

10 

9 

10 

19 

10 

28 

10 

38 

10 

47 

10 

57 

1-5 

14-5 

17-5 

30-5 

10 

2 

10 

12 

10 

22 

10 

32 

10 

42 

10 

53 

11 

3 

11 

13 

11 

23 

11 

33 

11 

43 

1-6 

14-4 

17-6 

30-4 

10 

41 

10 

32 

11 

3 

11 

13 

11 

24 

11 

33 

11 

46 

11 

36 

12 

7 

12 

18 

12 

29 

1-7 

14-3 

17-7 

30-3 

11 

20 

11 

31 

11 

43 

11 

54 

i2 

6 

12 

17 

12 

29 

12 

40 

12 

52 

13 

3 

13 

15 

1-8 

14-2 

17-8 

30-2 

11 

59 

12 

11 

12 

23 

12 

35 

12 

47 

12 

59 

13 

12 

13 

24 

13 

36 

13 

48 

14 

1 

1-9 

14-1 

17*9 

30-1 

12 

38 

12 

50 

13 

3 

13 

16 

13 

29 

13 

42 

13 

35 

14 

8 

14 

21 

14 

34 

14 

47 

2-0 

14-0 

18-0 

30-0 

13 

16 

13 

29 

13 

43 

13 

56 

14 

10 

14 

24 

14 

38 

14 

31 

13 

3 

13 

18 

13 

32 

2-1 

13-9 

18-1 

29-9 

13 

54 

14 

8 

14 

23 

14 

37 

14 

51 

15 

5 

15 

20 

15 

34 

15 

49 

16 

3 

16 

17 

2-2 

13-8 

18-2 

29-8 

14 

33 

14 

48 

15 

3 

15 

18 

15 

33 

15 

48 

16 

3 

16 

17 

16 

32 

16 

47 

17 

2 

2-3 

13-7 

18-3 

29-7 

15 

11 

15 

26 

15 

42 

15 

57 

16 

13 

16 

29 

16 

43 

17 

0 

17 

16 

17 

31 

17 

47 

2'4 

13-6 

18-4 

29-6 

13 

48 

16 

4 

16 

21 

16 

37 

16 

53 

17 

9 

17 

26 

17 

42 

17 

58 

18 

14 

18 

31 

2-5 

13'5 

18-5 

29-3 

16 

25 

16 

42 

17 

0 

17 

17 

17 

34 

17 

31 

18 

8 

18 

25 

18 

42 

18 

59 

19 

16 

2-6 

13-4 

18-6 

29-4 

17 

3 

17 

20 

17 

38 

17 

55 

18 

13 

18 

31 

18 

49 

19 

6 

19 

24 

19 

42 

20 

0 

2-7 

13-3 

18-7 

29-3 

17 

40 

17 

58 

18 

16 

18 

34 

18 

53 

19 

11 

19 

30 

19 

48 

20 

7 

20 

25 

20 

44 

2-8 

13-2 

18-8 

29-2 

18 

16 

18 

35 

18 

54 

19 

13 

19 

32 

19 

51 

20 

11 

20 

30 

20 

49 

21 

8 

21 

27 

2-9 

13-1 

18-9 

29-1 

18 

52 

19 

12 

19 

32 

19 

31 

20 

11 

20 

31 

20 

51 

21 

10 

21 

30 

21 

50 

22 

10 

3-0 

13-0 

19-0 

29-0 

19 

28 

19 

48 

20 

9 

20 

29 

20 

50 

21 

10 

21 

31 

21 

51 

22 

12 

22 

32 

22 

53 

3-1 

12-9 

19-1 

28-9 

20 

4 

21 

25 

20 

46 

21 

7 

21 

28 

21 

49 

22 

11 

22 

32 

22 

53 

23 

14 

23 

36 

.3-2 

12-8 

19-2 

28-8 

20 

39 

21 

0 

21 

22 

21 

44 

22 

6 

22 

28 

22 

50 

23 

12 

23 

34 

23 

56 

24 

18 

3-3 

12-7 

19-3 

28-7 

21 

14 

21 

36 

21 

58 

22 

20 

22 

43 

23 

6 

23 

29 

23 

51 

24 

14 

24 

37 

25 

0 

.3-4 

12-6 

19-4 

28-6 

21 

48 

22 

11 

22 

34 

22 

57 

23 

21 

23 

44 

24 

8 

24 

31 

24 

54 

25 

17 

25 

41 

3-5 

12-5 

19-5 

28-5 

22 

22 

22 

45 

23 

9 

23 

33 

23 

57 

24 

21 

24 

46 

25 

10 

25 

34 

23 

58 

26 

22 

3-6 

12-4 

19-6 

28-4 

22 

56 

23 

20 

23 

44 

24 

9 

24 

34 

24 

59 

25 

24 

25 

48 

26 

13 

26 

38 

27 

3 

3-7 

12-3 

19-7 

28-3 

23 

29 

23 

54 

24 

19 

24 

44 

25 

10 

23 

35 

26 

1 

26 

26 

26 

52 

27 

17 

27  43 

3-8 

12-2 

19-8 

28-2 

24 

2 

24 

27 

24 

53 

25 

19 

25 

45 

26 

11 

26 

38 

27 

4 

27 

30 

27 

36 

28 

22 

3-9 

12-1 

19-9 

28-1 

24 

34 

25 

0 

23 

27 

25 

53 

26 

20 

26 

47 

27 

14 

27 

40 

28 

7 

28 

34 

29 

1 

4-0 

12-0 

200 

28-0 

25 

6 

25 

33 

26 

0 

26 

28 

26 

55 

27 

22 

27 

30 

28 

17 

28 

45 

29 

12 

29 

40 

+ 

-P 

i 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS, 

for  Azimuths  referred  to  the  Disturbed  Compass. 


97 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


+ 

p 

4-0 

4-1 

4’2 

4-3 

4-4 

4-5 

4-6 

4-7 

4-8 

4- 9 
5*0 

5- 1 
5-2 
5-3 
5-4 
5*5 
5’6 
5-7 
5-8 

5- 9 

6*0 

6- 1 
6-2 
6-3 
6-4 
6*5 
6-6 
6-7 
6-8 

6- 9 

7- 0 

7-1 

7-2 

7*3 

7-4 

7-5 

7-6 

7-7 

7-8 

7-9 

8*0 

-f 


+ 

P 

12*0 

11*9 

11-8 

11-7 

11-6 

11*5 

11-4 

11-3 

11-2 

IM 

11-0 

10-9 

10-8 

10-7 

10-6 

10-5 

10-4 

10-3 

10-2 

10-1 

10-0 

9-9 

9-8 

9-7 

9-6 

9-5 

9-4 

9-3 

9’2 

9-1 

9-0 

8-9 

8-8 

8-7 

8-6 

8-5 

8-4 

8-3 

8-2 

8-1 

8-0 

+ 


20-0 

20-1 

20-2 

20-3 

20-4 

205 

20-6 

20-7 

20-8 

20- 9 

21- 0 
21-1 
21-2 
21-3 
21*4 
21-5 
21-6 
21-7 
21-8 

21- 9 

22- 0 
22-1 
22*2 
22-3 
22-4 
22-5 
22*6 
22-7 
22-8 

22- 9 
23*0 

23- 1 
23*2 
23-3 
23-4 
23-5 
23-6 
23-7 
23-8 

23- 9 

24- 0 


p 

28-0 

27'9 

27-8 

27-7 

27-6 

27*5 

27-4 

27-3 

27-2 

27-1 

27-0 

26-9 

26-8 

26-7 

26-6 

26-5 

26*4 

26-3 

26-2 

26-1 

26-0 

25-9 

25-8 

25-7 

25-6 

25*5 

25-4 

25-3 

25-2 

25*1 

25-0 

24-9 

24-8 

24*7 

24-6 

24-5 

24*4 

24-3 

24-2 

24-1 

24-0 


Modulus. 


Mean 


•60 

•61 

•62 

CO 

•64 

•65 

•66 

•67 

GO 

•69 

•70 

Corresponding  Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 

O 

/ 

0 

/ 

O 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

,1 

o 

o 

/ 

25 

6 

25 

33 

26 

0 

26 

28 

26 

55 

27 

22 

27 

50 

28 

17 

28 

45 

29 

12 

29 

40 

25 

37 

26 

5 

26 

33 

27 

1 

27 

29 

27 

56 

28 

24 

28 

53 

29 

22 

29 

50 

30 

18 

26 

8 

26 

36 

27 

5 

27 

33 

28 

2 

28 

30 

28 

59 

29 

28 

29 

58 

30 

27 

30 

56 

26 

39 

27 

8 

27 

37 

28 

6 

28 

35 

29 

4 

29 

34 

30 

4 

30 

34 

31 

3 

31 

33 

27 

9 

27 

38 

28 

8 

28 

38 

29 

8 

29 

37 

30 

8 

30 

38 

31 

9 

31 

39 

32 

10 

27 

38 

28 

8 

28 

38 

29 

9 

29 

40 

30 

10 

30 

41 

31 

12 

31 

43 

32 

14 

32 

46 

28 

7 

28 

38 

29 

9 

29 

40 

30 

11 

30 

42 

31 

13 

31 

45 

32 

17 

32 

49 

33 

21 

28 

35 

29 

6 

29 

38 

30 

9 

30 

41 

31 

13 

31 

45 

32 

17 

32 

50 

33 

23 

33 

56 

29 

2 

29 

34 

30 

6 

30 

38 

31 

11 

31 

44 

32 

17 

32 

50 

33 

23 

33 

56 

34 

30 

29 

29 

30 

1 

30 

34 

31 

7 

31 

40 

32 

14 

32 

48 

33 

21 

33 

55 

34 

29 

35 

3 

29 

56 

30 

29 

31 

2 

31 

35 

32 

9 

32 

43 

33 

18 

33 

52 

34 

26 

35 

1 

35 

36 

30 

22 

30 

55 

31 

29 

32 

3 

32 

37 

33 

11 

33 

46 

34 

21 

34 

56 

35 

32 

36 

8 

30 

46 

31 

20 

31 

55 

32 

29 

33 

4 

33 

39 

34 

14 

34 

50 

35 

26 

36 

2 

36 

39 

31 

10 

31 

45 

32 

20 

32 

55 

33 

30 

34 

6 

34 

42 

35 

18 

35 

55 

36 

32 

37 

9 

31 

34 

32 

9 

32 

45 

33 

20 

33 

56 

34 

32 

35 

9 

35 

46 

36 

24 

37 

2 

37 

39 

31 

57 

32 

33 

33 

9 

33 

45 

34 

21 

34 

58 

35 

36 

36 

14 

36 

52 

37 

30 

38 

8 

32 

19 

32 

55 

33 

32 

34 

9 

34 

46 

35 

23 

36 

1 

36 

39 

37 

18 

37 

56 

38 

35 

32 

40 

33 

17 

33 

55 

34 

32 

35 

10 

35 

47 

36 

25 

37 

4 

37 

43 

38 

22 

39 

2 

33 

1 

33 

38 

34 

16 

34 

54 

35 

32 

36 

10 

36 

48 

37 

28 

38 

8 

38 

48 

39 

28 

33 

21 

33 

59 

34 

37 

35 

15 

35 

54 

36 

32 

37 

11 

37 

51 

38 

32 

39 

12 

39 

53 

33 

40 

34 

18 

34 

57 

35 

36 

36 

15 

36 

54 

37 

33 

38 

14 

38 

55 

39 

36 

40 

18 

33 

58 

34 

37 

35 

16 

35 

55 

36 

35 

37 

14 

37 

54 

38 

35 

39 

17 

39 

59 

40 

41 

34 

15 

34 

54 

35 

34 

36 

14 

36 

54 

37 

34 

38 

14 

38 

56 

39 

39 

40 

21 

41 

3 

34 

32 

35 

12 

35 

52 

36 

32 

37 

12 

37 

53 

38 

34 

39 

16 

39 

59 

40 

41 

41 

24 

34 

48 

35 

28 

36 

9 

36 

49 

37 

30 

38 

11 

38 

53 

39 

35 

40 

17 

41 

0 

41 

44 

35 

3 

35 

43 

36 

24 

37 

5 

37 

46 

38 

28 

39 

10 

39 

52 

40 

35 

41 

19 

42 

3 

35 

16 

35 

57 

36 

38 

37 

19 

38 

1 

38 

44 

39 

26 

40 

9 

40 

52 

41 

36 

42 

21 

35 

29 

36 

10 

36 

52 

37 

33 

38 

15 

38 

59 

39 

42 

40 

25 

41 

9 

41 

53 

42 

38 

35 

41 

36 

23 

37 

5 

37 

47 

38 

29 

39 

12 

39 

56 

40 

40 

41 

24 

42 

9 

42 

54 

35 

52 

36 

34 

37 

16 

37 

58 

38 

41 

39 

24 

40 

8 

40 

53 

41 

37 

42 

22 

43 

8 

36 

3 

36 

45 

37 

27 

38 

9 

38 

52 

39 

36 

40 

20 

41 

4 

41 

49 

42 

35 

43 

21 

36 

13 

36 

55 

37 

37 

38 

19 

39 

2 

39 

46 

40 

30 

41 

15 

42 

0 

42 

46 

43 

33 

36 

21 

37 

3 

37 

46 

38 

29 

39 

12 

39 

56 

40 

40 

41 

25 

42 

11 

42 

57 

43 

44 

36 

28 

37 

11 

37 

54 

38 

37 

39 

21 

40 

5 

40 

49 

41 

35 

42 

21 

43 

7 

43 

54 

36 

34 

37 

17 

38 

1 

38 

44 

39 

28 

40 

12 

40 

57 

41 

42 

42 

28 

43 

15 

44 

2 

36 

39 

37 

22 

38 

6 

38 

50 

39 

34 

40 

18 

41 

3 

41 

49 

42 

35 

43 

22 

44 

9 

36 

44 

37 

27 

38 

11 

38 

55 

39 

39 

40 

23 

41 

8 

41 

54 

42 

41 

43 

28 

44 

15 

36 

48 

37 

31 

38 

15 

38 

59 

39 

43 

40 

27 

41 

12 

41 

58 

42 

45 

43 

32 

44 

20 

36 

50 

37 

33 

38 

17 

39 

1 

39 

45 

40 

29 

41 

15 

42 

1 

42 

48 

43 

35 

44 

23 

36 

52 

37 

35 

38 

19 

39 

2 

39 

46 

40 

31 

41 

17 

42 

3 

42 

50 

43 

37 

44 

25 

36 

52 

37 

35 

38 

19 

39 

3 

39 

47 

40 

32 

41 

18 

42 

4 

42 

51 

43 

38 

44 

26 

22 

55 

23 

20 

23 

46 

24 

12 

24 

38 

25 

4 

25 

30 

25 

56 

26 

23 

26 

50 

27 

17 

MDCCCLVF 


O 


98 


MR.  AIRY  ON  THE  OBSERVED  DEVIATIONS  OF  THE  COMPASS 


Table  of  Polar-Magnet-Deviations, 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

n points  and  decimals. 


Modulus. 

•70 

•71 

•72 

•73 

•74 

•76 

•76 

•77 

•78 

•79 

•80 

Corresponding  Polar-Magnet-Deviation,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 


-f 

-f- 

- 

- 

P 

P 

P 

P 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

O 

/ 

0-0 

16-0 

16-0 

32-0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0-1 

15-9 

16-1 

31-9 

0 

47 

0 

47 

0 

48 

0 

48 

0 

49 

0 

50 

0 

51 

0 

31 

0 

52 

0 

53, 

0 

54 

0-2 

15-8 

16-2 

31-8 

1 

34 

1 

35 

1 

CO 

1 

38 

1 

40 

1 

41 

1 

43 

1 

44 

1 

45 

1 

46 

1 

48 

0-3 

15-7 

16-3 

31-7 

2 

21 

2 

23 

2 

25 

2 

27 

2 

29 

2 

31 

2 

34 

2 

36 

2 

38 

2 

40 

2 

42 

0-4 

13-6 

16-4 

31-6 

3 

8 

3 

11 

3 

14 

3 

16 

3 

19 

3 

22 

3 

25 

3 

27 

3 

30 

3 

33 

3 

36 

0-5 

13-3 

16-3 

31-3 

3 

56 

3 

59 

4 

2 

4 

5 

4 

9 

4 

12 

4 

16 

4 

19 

4 

23 

4 

26 

4 

30 

0-6 

13-4 

16-6 

31-4 

4 

43 

4 

47 

4 

51 

4 

53 

4 

59 

5 

3 

5 

8 

5 

12 

5 

16 

5 

20 

5 

24 

0-7 

13-3 

16-7 

31-3 

3 

30 

5 

34 

5 

39 

5 

44 

5 

49 

5 

54 

5 

59 

6 

3 

6 

8 

6 

13 

6 

18 

0-8 

13-2 

16-8 

31-2 

6 

17 

6 

22 

6 

28 

6 

33 

6 

39 

6 

44 

6 

50 

6 

55 

7 

1 

7 

6 

7 

12 

0-9 

13-1 

16-9 

31-1 

7 

4 

7 

1 

7 

16 

7 

22 

7 

28 

7 

34 

7 

41 

7 

47 

7 

53 

7 

59 

8 

6 

1-0 

13-0 

17-0 

31-0 

7 

31 

7 

57 

8 

4 

8 

11 

8 

18 

8 

25 

8 

32 

8 

38 

8 

45 

8 

52 

8 

59 

1-1 

14-9 

17-1 

30-9 

8 

38 

8 

45 

8 

52 

8 

59 

9 

i 

9 

15 

9 

23 

9 

30 

9 

38 

9 

45 

9 

53 

1-2 

14-8 

17-2 

30-8 

9 

24 

9 

32 

9 

40 

9 

48 

9 

56 

10 

4 

10 

13 

10 

21 

10 

29 

10 

37 

10 

46 

1-3 

14-7 

17-3 

30-7 

10 

10 

10 

19 

10 

28 

10 

37 

10 

46 

10 

35 

11 

4 

11 

13 

11 

22 

11 

31 

11 

40 

1-4 

14-6 

17-4 

30-6 

10 

57 

11 

6 

11 

16 

11 

25 

11 

35 

11 

45 

11 

55 

12 

4 

12 

14 

12 

23 

12  -33 

1-5 

14-3 

17-5 

30*3 

11 

43 

11 

53 

12 

4 

12 

14 

12 

24 

12 

34 

12 

43 

12 

53 

13 

5 

13 

15 

13 

26 

1-6 

14’4 

17-6 

30-4 

12 

29 

12 

41 

12 

51 

13 

2 

13 

13 

13 

24 

13 

35 

13 

46 

13 

57 

14 

8 

14 

19 

1-7 

14-3 

17-7 

30-3 

13 

15 

13 

27 

13 

39 

13 

50 

14 

2 

14 

14 

14 

26 

14 

37 

14 

49 

15 

0 

15 

12 

1-8 

14-2 

17-8 

30-2 

14 

1 

14 

13 

14 

26 

14 

38 

14 

50 

15 

0 

15 

15 

15 

27 

15 

39 

15 

52 

16 

4 

1-9 

14T 

17-9 

30-1 

14 

47 

15 

0 

15 

13 

15 

26 

15 

39 

15 

52 

16 

5 

16 

18 

16 

31 

16 

44 

16 

57 

2-0 

14-0 

18-0 

30-0 

13 

32 

15 

45 

15 

59 

16 

12 

16 

26 

16 

40 

16 

54 

17 

8 

17 

22 

17 

35 

17 

49 

2-1 

13-9 

18-1 

29-9 

16 

17 

16 

31 

16 

46 

17 

0 

17 

15 

17 

29 

17 

44 

17 

58 

18 

13 

18 

27 

18 

42 

2-2 

13-8 

18-2 

29-8 

17 

2 

17 

17 

17 

32 

17 

47 

18 

2 

18 

17 

18 

33 

18 

48 

19 

3 

19 

18 

19 

34 

2-3 

13-7 

18-3 

29-7 

17 

47 

18 

2 

18 

18 

18 

34 

18 

50 

19 

6 

19 

22 

19 

38 

19 

54 

20 

10 

20 

26 

2-4 

13-6 

18-4 

29-6 

18 

31 

18 

47 

19 

4 

19 

20 

19 

37 

19 

34 

20 

11 

20 

27 

20 

44 

21 

1 

21 

18 

2-3 

13-3 

18-3 

29-5 

19 

16 

19 

33 

19 

50 

20 

7 

20 

25 

20 

42 

21 

0 

21 

17 

21 

35 

21 

52 

22 

10 

2-6 

13-4 

18-6 

29-4 

20 

0 

20 

18 

20 

36 

20 

54 

21 

12 

21 

30 

21 

49 

22 

7 

22 

25 

22 

43 

23 

1 

2-7 

1.3-3 

18-7 

29-3 

20 

44 

21 

2 

21 

21 

21 

40 

21 

59 

22 

18 

22 

37 

22 

55 

23 

14 

23 

33 

23 

52 

2-8 

13-2 

18-8 

29-2 

21 

27 

21 

46 

22 

6 

22 

25 

22 

43 

23 

5 

23 

23 

23 

44 

24 

4 

24 

23 

24 

43 

2-9 

13-1 

18-9 

29-1 

22 

10 

22 

30 

22 

51 

23 

11 

23 

31 

23 

51 

24 

12 

24 

32 

24 

52 

25 

12 

25 

33 

3-0 

13-0 

19-0 

29-0 

22 

53 

23 

14 

23 

35 

23 

56 

24 

17 

24 

38 

24 

59 

23 

20 

25 

41 

26 

2 

26 

23 

3-1 

12-9 

19-1 

28-9 

23 

36 

23 

57 

24 

19 

24 

40 

25 

2 

25 

24 

25 

46 

26 

H 

l 

26 

29 

26 

51 

27 

13 

3-2 

12-8 

19-2 

28-8 

24 

18 

24 

40 

23 

2 

25 

24 

25 

47 

26 

9 

26 

32 

26 

54 

27 

17 

27 

39 

28 

2 

3-3 

12-7 

19-3 

28-7 

23 

0 

25 

22 

25 

45 

26 

8 

26 

32 

26 

55 

27 

19 

27 

42 

28 

5 

28 

28 

28 

52 

3-4 

12-6 

19-4 

28-6 

23- 

41 

26 

4 

26 

28 

26 

32 

27 

16 

27 

40 

28 

5 

28 

29 

28 

53 

29 

17 

29 

41 

3-5 

12-3 

19-3 

28-3 

26 

22 

26 

46 

27 

10 

27 

35 

28 

0 

28 

25 

28 

50 

29 

15 

29 

40 

30 

5 

30 

30 

3-6 

12-4 

19-6 

28-4 

27 

3 

27 

27 

27 

52 

28 

17 

28 

43 

29 

9 

29 

35 

30 

0 

30 

26 

30 

52 

31 

18 

3-7 

12-3 

19-7 

28-3 

27 

43 

28 

8 

28 

34 

29 

0 

29 

27 

29 

53 

30 

20 

30 

46 

31 

13 

31 

39 

32 

6 

3-8 

12-2 

19-8 

28-2 

28 

22 

28 

48 

29 

15 

29 

42 

30 

9 

30 

36 

31 

4 

31 

31 

31 

58 

32 

25 

32 

53 

3-9 

12-1 

19-9 

28-1 

29 

1 

29 

28 

29 

56 

30 

24 

30 

52 

31 

20 

31 

48 

32 

16 

32 

44 

33 

12 

33 

40 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28-0 

29 

40 

30 

8 

30 

37 

31 

5 

31 

34 

32 

2 

32 

31 

33 

0 

33 

29 

33 

58 

34  27 

-f 

I + 

IN  WOOD-BUILT  AND  IRON-BUILT  SHIPS 


99 


for  Azimuths  referred  to  the  Disturbed  Compass. 


Modulus. 


Apparent  Azimuth  from  Neutral 
Position 

in  points  and  decimals. 


+ 

+ 

— 

- 

p 

P 

P 

P 

4-0 

12-0 

20-0 

28-0 

4-1 

11-9 

20-1 

27-9 

4-2 

11-8 

20-2 

27-8 

4-3 

11-7 

20-3 

27-7 

4-4 

11*6 

20-4 

27-6 

4-5 

11-5 

20-5 

27*5 

4-6 

11-4 

20-6 

27*4 

4-7 

11-3 

20-7 

27*3 

4-8 

11-2 

20-8 

27*2 

4-9 

IM 

20-9 

27*1 

5-0 

11-0 

21-0 

27*0 

5-1 

10-9 

2M 

26-9 

5-2 

10-8 

21-2 

26-8 

5-3 

10-7 

21-3 

26-7 

5'4 

10-6 

21-4 

26*6 

5-5 

10-5 

21-5 

26’5 

5-6 

10-4 

21-6 

26-4 

5*7 

10-3 

21-7 

26-3 

5-8 

10-2 

21-8 

26*2 

5-9 

10-1 

21-9 

26-1 

6-0 

10-0 

22-0 

26-0 

6-1 

9-9 

22-1 

25-9 

6*2 

9-8 

22-2 

25-8 

6-3 

9-7 

22-3 

25-7 

6*4 

9-6 

22-4 

25-6 

6*5 

9-5 

22-5 

25*5 

6-6 

9-4 

22-6 

25-4 

6-7 

9-3 

22-7 

25-3 

6-8 

9-2 

22-8 

25-2 

6-9 

9-1 

22*9 

25*1 

7-0 

9-0 

23-0 

25*0 

7-1 

8*9 

23-1 

24-9 

7*2 

8*8 

23-2 

24-8 

7-3 

8-7 

23-3 

24-7 

7-4 

8-6 

23-4 

24-6 

7-5 

8-5 

23-5 

24-5 

7-6 

8-4 

23-6 

24-4 

7-7 

8-3 

23-7 

24-3 

7-8 

8-2 

23-8 

24-2 

7-9 

8-1 

23-9 

24-1 

8-0 

8-0 

24-0 

24-0 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

•70 

•71 

•72 

CO 

•74 

•75 

•76 

■77 

00 

•79 

•80 

Corresponding  Po 

ar-Magnet-Deviati 

on,  in  degrees  and  minutes. 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

f 

O 

O 

O 

o 

/ 

O 

29 

40 

30 

8 

30 

37 

31 

5 

31 

34 

32 

2 

32 

31 

33 

0 

33 

29 

33 

58 

34 

27 

30 

18 

30 

47 

31 

17 

31 

46 

32 

15 

32 

44 

33 

14 

33 

43 

34 

13 

34 

43 

35 

13 

30 

56 

31 

26 

31 

56 

32 

26 

32 

56 

33 

25 

33 

56 

34 

26 

34 

57 

35 

28 

35 

59 

31 

33 

32 

3 

32 

34 

33 

5 

33 

36 

34 

6 

34 

37 

35 

8 

35 

40 

36 

12 

36 

44 

32 

10 

32 

41 

33 

12 

33 

43 

34 

15 

34 

46 

35 

18 

35 

50 

36 

23 

36 

55 

37  28 

32 

46 

33 

17 

33 

49 

34 

21 

34 

54 

35 

26 

35 

59 

36 

32 

37 

5 

37 

38 

38 

12 

33 

21 

33 

53 

34 

26 

34 

59 

35 

32 

36 

5 

36 

39 

37 

13 

37 

47 

38 

21 

38 

55 

33 

56 

34 

29 

35 

2 

35 

36 

36 

10 

36 

43 

37 

18 

37 

53 

38 

28 

39 

3 

39 

38 

34 

30 

35 

4 

35 

38 

36 

12 

36 

47 

37 

21 

37 

57 

38 

32 

39 

8 

39 

44 

40 

20 

35 

3 

35 

38 

36 

13 

36 

48 

37 

23 

37 

58 

38 

35 

39 

11 

39 

47 

40 

24 

41 

1 

35 

36 

36 

11 

36 

47 

37 

23 

37 

59 

38 

35 

39 

12 

39 

49 

40 

26 

41 

4 

41 

42 

36 

8 

36 

44 

37 

20 

37 

57 

38 

34 

39 

10 

39 

48 

40 

26 

41 

4 

41 

43 

42 

22 

36 

39 

37 

16 

37 

53 

38 

30 

39 

8 

39 

45 

40 

24 

41 

3 

41 

42 

42 

21 

43 

1 

37 

9 

37 

47 

38 

25 

39 

3 

39 

41 

40 

19 

40 

59 

41 

39 

42 

19 

42 

59 

43 

39 

37 

39 

38 

17 

38 

56 

39 

35 

40 

14 

40 

53 

41 

34 

42 

14 

42 

54 

43 

35 

44 

16 

38 

8 

38 

47 

39 

26 

40 

5 

40 

45 

41 

25 

42 

7 

42 

47 

43 

28 

44 

10 

44 

52 

38 

35 

39 

15 

39 

55 

40 

35 

41 

16 

41 

56 

42 

38 

43 

20 

44 

2 

44 

45 

45 

28 

39 

2 

39 

42 

40 

23 

41 

4 

41 

45 

42 

26 

43 

9 

43 

52 

44 

35 

45 

19 

46 

3 

39 

28 

40 

9 

40 

50 

41 

32 

42 

14 

42 

56 

43 

39 

44 

23 

45 

6 

45 

51 

46 

36 

39 

53 

40 

34 

41 

16 

41 

59 

42 

42 

43 

25 

44 

8 

44 

52 

45 

36 

46 

22 

47 

8 

40 

18 

41 

0 

41 

42 

42 

25 

43 

8 

43 

52 

44 

36 

45 

21 

46 

6 

46 

52 

47  39 

40 

41 

41 

24 

42 

7 

42 

50 

43 

34 

44 

18 

45 

3 

45 

49 

46 

35 

47 

22 

48 

9 

41 

3 

41 

46 

42 

29 

43 

13 

43 

58 

44 

43 

45 

28 

46 

15 

47 

2 

47 

50 

48 

38 

41 

24 

42 

4 

42 

51 

43 

36 

44 

21 

45 

7 

45 

53 

46 

40 

47 

28 

48 

17 

49 

6 

41 

44 

42 

28 

43 

12 

43 

57 

44 

43 

45 

30 

46 

17 

47 

5 

47 

53 

48 

42 

49 

32 

42 

3 

42 

47 

43 

32 

44 

18 

45 

4 

45 

51 

46 

39 

47 

28 

48 

17 

49 

7 

49 

57 

42 

21 

43 

6 

43 

51 

44 

37 

45 

24 

46 

12 

47 

0 

47 

49 

48 

39 

49 

30 

50 

21 

42 

38 

43 

23 

44 

9 

44 

56 

45 

43 

46 

31 

47 

20 

48 

10 

49 

0 

49 

51 

50 

43 

42 

54 

43 

40 

44 

26 

45 

13 

46 

1 

46 

49 

47 

39 

48 

29 

49 

20 

50 

12 

51 

4 

43 

8 

43 

54 

44 

41 

45 

29 

46 

17 

47 

6 

47 

56 

48 

47 

49 

38 

50 

30 

51 

23 

43 

21 

44 

8 

44 

55 

45 

43 

46 

32 

47 

21 

48 

12 

49 

3 

49 

55 

50 

48 

51 

41 

43 

33 

44 

20 

45 

8 

45 

56 

46 

45 

47 

35 

48 

26 

49 

18 

50 

10 

51 

3 

51 

57 

43 

44 

44 

31 

45 

19 

46 

8 

46 

57 

47 

48 

48 

39 

49 

31 

50 

24 

51 

18 

52 

12 

43 

54 

44 

41 

45 

29 

46 

18 

47 

8 

47 

59 

48 

51 

49 

43 

50 

36 

51 

30 

52 

25 

44 

2 

44 

50 

45 

38 

46 

27 

47 

17 

48 

8 

49 

0 

49 

53 

50 

46 

51 

41 

52 

36 

44 

9 

44 

57 

45 

46 

46 

35 

47 

25 

48 

16 

49 

8 

50 

1 

50 

55 

51 

50 

52 

46 

44 

15 

45 

3 

45 

52 

46 

42 

47 

32 

48 

23 

49 

15 

50 

8 

51 

2 

51 

58 

52 

54 

44 

20 

45 

8 

45 

57 

46 

47 

47 

37 

48 

28 

49 

21 

50 

14 

51 

8 

52 

4 

53 

0 

44 

23 

45 

11 

46 

0 

46 

50 

47 

40 

48 

32 

49 

25 

50 

19 

51 

13 

52 

8 

53 

4 

44 

25 

45 

13 

46 

2 

46 

52 

47 

42 

48 

34 

49 

27 

50 

21 

51 

15 

52 

10 

53 

7 

44 

26 

45 

14 

46 

3 

46 

53 

47 

44 

48 

35 

49 

28 

50 

21 

51 

16 

52 

11 

53 

3 

27 

17 

27 

44 

28 

11 

28 

39 

29 

/ 

29 

35 

30 

4 

30 

33 

31 

O 

31 

32 

32 

- 

Mean 


I 


■a 


I-  .:S  • 


'IP 


-1  >! 


['V-.  '■■  ' ■ '^‘'.;,sV-  - f/i 

' ' '‘■■?ii-.^>‘v|^l’i  '■"  -""W'  |.i*- 

i % ; ■ 


} vT* 


[ 101  ] 


VI.  A Second  Memoir  upon  Quantics.  By  Arthur  Cayley,  Esq. 

Received  April  14, — Read  May  24,  1855. 

The  present  memoir  is  intended  as  a continuation  of  my  Introductory  Memoir 
upon  Quantics,  t.  144.  (1854)  p.  245,  and  must  be  read  in  connexion  with  it;  the 
paragraphs  of  the  two  Memoirs  are  numbered  continuously.  The  special  subject  of 
the  present  memoir  is  the  theorem  referred  to  in  the  Postscript  to  the  Introductory 
Memoir,  and  the  various  developments  arising  thereout  in  relation  to  the  number 
and  form  of  the  covariants  of  a binary  quantic. 

25.  I have  already  spoken  of  asyzygetic  covariants  and  invariants,  and  I shall  have 
occasion  to  speak  of  irreducible  covariants  and  invariants.  Considering  in  general 
a function  u determined  like  a covariant  or  invariant  by  means  of  a system  of  partial 
differential  equations,  it  will  be  convenient  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  an  asyzygetic 
integral  and  by  an  irreducible  integral.  Attending  for  greater  simplicity  only  to  a 
single  set  (a,  h,  c...),  which  in  the  case  of  the  covariants  or  invariants  of  a single 
function  will  be  as  before  the  coefficients  or  elements  of  the  function,  it  is  assumed 
that  the  system  admits  of  integrals  of  the  form  m=P,  m=Q,  &c.,  or  as  we  may 
express  it,  of  integrals  P,  Q,  &c.,  where  P,  Q,  &c.  are  rational  and  integral  homogeneous 
functions  of  the  set  {a,  h,  c..),  and  moreover  that  the  system  is  such  that  P,  Q,  &c. 
being  integrals,  (p(P,  Q..)  is  also  an  integral.  Then  considering  only  the  integrals 
which  are  rational  and  integral  homogeneous  functions  of  the  set  (a,  b,  c..),  integrals 
P,  Q,  R,..  not  connected  by  any  linear  equation  or  syzygy  (such  as  XP+jM/Q+>'R--=0*), 
are  said  to  be  asyzygetic ; but  in  speaking  of  the  asyzygetic  integrals  of  a particular 
degree,  it  is  implied  that  the  integrals  are  a system  such  that  every  other  integral  of 
the  same  degree  can  be  expressed  as  a linear  function  (such  as  AP+|M/Q+j/R..)  of 
these  integrals ; and  any  integral  P not  expressible  as  a rational  and  integral  homo- 
geneous function  of  integrals  of  inferior  degrees  is  said  to  be  an  irreducible  integral. 

26.  Suppose  now  that  Aj,  A^,  A3,  &c.  denote  the  number  of  asyzygetic  integrals  of  the 
degrees  1,  2,  3,  &c.  respectively,  and  let  Kj,  0,3,  &c.  be  determined  by  the  equations 

Ai  = ai 

A2=^ai(a,-f  l)-l-a2 

A3=  |“i(ai  + 1 )(a,+2) +a,052-l-a3 

A4=^a,(ai-f-l)(ai-l-2)(ai-|-3)-|-^o5i(o5i-l-l)a2H-aia3-l-^a2(a2+l)+a4,  &c., 

* It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark,  that  the  multipliers  X,  y.,  v and  generally  any  coefficients  or  quantities 
not  expressly  stated  to  contain  the  set  (a,  b,  c..),  are  considered  as  independent  of  the  set,  or  to  use  a con- 
venient word,  are  considered  as  ‘ trivials.’ 


MDCCCLVI. 


P 


102 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


or  what  is  the  same  thing-,  suppose  that 

1 +Ai>r+A2a;^+  &c.  = (l  — 

A little  consideration  will  show  that  represents  the  number  of  irreducible  integrals 
of  the  degree  r less  the  number  of  linear  relations  or  syzygies  between  the  composite 
or  non-irreducible  integrals  of  the  same  degree.  In  fact  the  asyzygetic  integrals  of 
the  degree  1 are  necessarily  irreducible,  i.  e.  Ai=a,.  Represent  for  a moment  the 
irreducible  integrals  of  the  degree  1 by  X,  X',  &c.,  then  the  composite  integrals 

X^,  XX',  &c.,  the  number  of  which  is  must  be  included  among  the  asyzy- 

getic integrals  of  the  degree  2 ; and  if  the  composite  integrals  in  question  were  asyzy- 
getic, there  would  remain  A2—^ai(o5i-f  1)  for  the  number  of  irreducible  integrals  of 
the  degree  2 ; but  if  there  exist  syzygies  between  the  composite  integrals  in  question, 
the  number  to  be  subtracted  from  Ag  will  be  less  the  number  of  these 

syzygies,  and  we  shall  have  Ag — ^ai(ai  + l),  e.  equal  to  the  number  of  the  irre- 
ducible integrals  of  the  degree  2 less  the  number  of  syzygies  between  the  composite 
integrals  of  the  same  degree.  Again,  suppose  that  a,^  is  negative  =—(3^,  we  may  for 
simplicity  ouppose  that  there  are  no  irreducible  integrals  of  the  degree  2,  but  that 
the  composite  integrals  of  this  degree,  X^  XX',  &c.,  are  connected  by  (3^  syzygies, 
such  as  &c.=0,  &c.=0.  The  asyzygetic  integrals  of 

I 

the  degree  4 include  X^,  X®X',  &c.,  the  number  of  which  is  ^ai(ai  + l)(«i  + 2)(aiH-3  ); 

but  these  composite  integrals  are  not  asyzygetic,  they  are  connected  by  syzygies  which 
are  augmentatives  of  the  jSa  syzygies  of  the  second  degree,  viz.  by  syzygies  such  as 

(xX^-l-|a-XX'..)X^=0,  (?vX^+^XX'..)XX'=0  &c.  (;v,X^-l-,w,iXX'..)X^=0, 
(X,X^+iM'iXX'..)XX'=:0,  &c., 

the  number  of  which  is|ai(ai-l- 1)^2-  And  these  syzygies  are  themselves  not  asyzy- 
getic, they  are  connected  by  secondary  syzygies  such  as 

-k(X,X^+f^,XX'.,)X^-f^(X,X^+f^,XX'..)XX'-kc.=0,  See.  Sec., 

the  number  of  which  is^j32(/32— 1).  The  real  number  of  syzygies  between  the  com- 
posite integrals  X^,  X^X',  &c.  (i.  e.  of  the  syzygies  arising  out  of  the  syzygies 
between  X^,  XX',  &c.),  is  therefore  |a,(ai-j-l)j32— ^(32(|32— 1),  and  the  number  of  inte- 
grals of  the  degree  4,  arising  out  of  the  integrals  and  syzygies  of  the  degrees  1 and  2 
respectively,  is  therefore 

1)(«i+2)(c4,-1-3)  — 2ai(a,-[-  l)^32+2^2(f32—  1) ; 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


103 


or  writing  instead  of  (S^,  the  number  in  question  is 

^ai(a,  + l)(o5,+2)(ai+3)-f-|a,(ai  + l)a2+|a2(a2+l). 


The  integrals  of  the  degrees  1 and  3 give  rise  to  integrals  of  the  degree  4 j and  it 
all  the  composite  integrals  obtained  as  above  were  asyzygetic,  we  should  have 

A4-^ai(ai  + l)(ai+2)(ai+3)— ^ai(ai  + l)a2— ^a2(a2+l)— a,a3, 

i.  e.  as  the  number  of  irreducible  integrals  of  the  degree  4 ; but  if  there  exist  any 
further  syzygies  between  the  composite  integrals,  then  will  be  the  number  of  the 
irreducible  integrals  of  the  degree  4 less  the  number  of  such  further  syzygies,  and  the 
like  reasoning  is  in  all  cases  applicable. 

27-  It  maybe  remarked,  that  for  any  given  partial  differential  equation,  or  system 
of  such  equations,  there  will  be  always  a finite  number  v such  that  given  v inde- 
pendent integrals  every  other  integral  is  a function  (in  general  an  irrational  function 
only  expressible  as  the  root  of  an  equation)  of  the  v independent  integrals  ; and  if  to 
these  integrals  we  join  a single  other  integral  not  a rational  function  of  the  integrals, 
it  is  easy  to  see  that  every  other  integral  will  be  a rational  function  of  the  t'-f-l  inte- 
grals ; but  every  such  other  integral  will  not  in  general  be  a rational  and  integral 
function  of  the  v-\- 1 integrals  ; and  there  is  not  in  general  any  finite  number  whatever 
of  integrals,  such  that  every  other  integral  is  a rational  and  integral  function  of  these 
integrals,  i.  e.  the  number  of  irreducible  integrals  is  in  general  infinite ; and  it  would 
seem  that  this  is  in  fact  the  case  in  the  theory  of  covariants. 

28.  In  the  case  of  the  covariants,  or  the  invariants  of  a binary  quantic,  A.^  is  given 
(this  will  appear  in  the  sequel)  as  the  coefficient  of  in  the  development,  in  ascend- 

ing  powers  of  x,  of  a rational  fraction  where  fx  is  of  the  form 

(1  — xy'{i—x^YK.{]  — 'x’^Y’c, 

and  the  degree  of  (px  is  less  than  that  offx.  We  have  therefore 


1 -j- 

and  consequently  9a7=(l  — x)^‘““'(l  — ^^)^2~"2..(1— x*)^*"“*(l— 


Now  every  rational  factor  of  a binomial  X—x^  is  the  irreducible  factor  of  \—x”'', 
where  m!  is  equal  to  or  a submultiple  of  m.  Hence  in  order  that  the  series  a,, 
may  terminate,  (px  must  be  made  up  of  factors  each  of  which  is  the  irreducible  factor 
of  a binomial  1— ■x®,  or  if  (px  be  itself  irreducible,  then  <px  must  be  the  irreducible 
factor  of  a binomial  l—x™.  Conversely,  if  <px  be  not  of  the  form  in  question,  the 
series  &c.  will  go  on  ad  infinitum,  and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  there  is  no  point 

in  the  series  such  that  the  terms  beyond  that  point  are  all  of  them  negative,  i.  e.  there 
will  be  irreducible  covariants  or  invariants  of  indefinitely  high  degrees ; and  the 

p 2 


104 


MR,  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


number  of  covariants  or  invariants  will  be  infinite.  The  number  of  invariants  is  first 
infinite  in  the  case  of  a quantic  of  the  seventh  order,  or  septic  ; the  number  of  cova- 
riants is  first  infinite  in  the  case  of  a quantic  of  the  fifth  order,  or  quintic. 

29.  Resuming-  the  theory  of  binary  quantics,  I consider  the  quantic 

[a,  b,  ..  b\  «'X^,  I/)™. 

Here  writing  {yB^}=aB4-l-26Bc..+m6'^„.=X 

any  function  which  is  reduced  to  zero  by  each  of  the  operations  X— Y— is  a 
covariant  of  the  quantic.  But  a covariant  will  always  be  considered  as  a rational 
and  integral  function  separately  homogeneous  in  regard  to  the  facients  {x,y)  and  to 
the  coefficients  {a,  b, ..  d).  And  the  words  order  and  degree  will  be  taken  to  refer 

to  the  facients  and  to  the  coefficients  respectively. 

I commence  by  proving  the  theorem  enunciated.  No.  23.  It  follows  at  once  from 
the  definition,  that  the  covariant  is  reduced  to  zero  by  the  operation 

X— Y —xb^—  Y —xby.'K—yb^, 

which  is  equivalent  to 

X.Y-Y.X-f3/B,-a;B,. 

Now 

X. Y=XY-bX(Y) 

Y. X=YX+Y(X), 

where  XY  and  YX  are  equivalent  operations,  and 

X(Y)  = lmdd^'\-2m—  1 . . -j-m  1 b'b/,- 

Y(X)=  mlbbi..  -\-2m—lb''di-\-lma'ba, 

whence 

X(Y)  — Y(X)=maB„-|-m  — 26B*..— m— 26'^* — 

=.k  suppose, 

and  the  covariant  is  therefore  reduced  to  zero  by  the  operation 

k+^/^y—xb,. 

Now  as  regards  a term  a!^¥ .x^y^ , we  have 

k—ma,-\-m—2^..,  — m — 2|3'— wa 
yby-xb,=j-i ; 

and  we  see  at  once  that  for  each  term  of  the  covariant  we  must  have 

wia + m — 2(3 , . — m — 2|8' — ma -J-j  — * = 0, 

i.  e.  if  (x,  y)  are  considered  as  being  of  the  weights  respectively,  and  {a,  b,  ..b\  d) 

as  being  of  the  weights  —^m,  \m  respectively,  then  the  weight 

of  each  term  of  the  covariant  is  zero. 


MR.  A.  CAYJiEy’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


105 


But  if  {x,y)  are  considered  as  being-  of  the  weights  1,0  respectively,  and  {a,  h,..h\  d) 
as  being  of  the  weights  0,  1,  ..m— 1,  m respectively,  then  writing  the  equation  under 
the  form 

7w(a+j8..+|8'+a')+jH-i— 2(|3+ ..  d-m — l(3'd-ma'+^)=0, 

and  supposing  that  the  covariant  is  of  the  order  jO,  and  of  the  degree  6,  each  term  of 
the  covariant  will  be  of  the  weight  ^ 

I shall  in  the  sequel  consider  the  weight  as  reckoned  in  the  last-mentioned  manner. 
It  is  convenient  to  remark,  that  as  regards  any  function  of  the  coefficients  of  the 
degree  6 and  of  the  weight  q,  we  have 

X.Y-Y.X=m^-2^. 

30.  Consider  now  a covariant 

(A,  B,  ..B',  k'J^x,yY 

of  the  order  ^ and  of  the  degree  0\  the  covariant  is  reduced  to  zero  by  each  of  the 
operations  X— and  we  are  thus  led  to  the  systems  of  equations 

XA=0 
XB  =[j(jA 
XC=f^B 

XB'=2C' 

XA=B' 

and 

YA=B 
YB  =2C 


YB=:fJt.A' 

YA'=0. 

Conversely  if  these  equations  are  satisfied  the  function  will  be  a covariant. 

I assume  that  A is  a function  of  the  degree  d and  of  the  weight  ^ {md—id),  satis- 
fying the  condition 

XA=0. 

And  I represent  by  YA,  Y^A,  Y^A,  &c.  the  results  obtained  by  successive  operations 
with  Y upon  the  function  A.  The  function  Y*A  will  be  of  the  degree  6 and  of  the 
weight  ^ {md—iJu)-\-s.  And  it  is  clear  that  in  the  series  of  terms  YA,  Y^A,  Y^A,  &c., 
we  must  at  last  come  to  a term  which  is  equal  to  zero.  In  fact,  since  m is  the 
greatest  weight  of  any  coefficient,  the  weight  of  Y®  is  at  most  equal  to  m6,  and  there- 
fore if  \{m6—[d)-\-s>m6,  or  we  must  have  Y®A=0. 


106 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


Now  writing  for  greater  simplicity  XY  instead  of  X.Y,  and  so  in  similar  cases,  we 
have,  as  regards  Y*A, 

XY-YX=^-2.9. 

Hence 


and  consequently 

Similarly 

and  therefore 


(XY-YX)A=^A, 

XYA=YXA+M=i^A. 

{XY-YX)\A=]:^2YA, 

XY^A = YX  Y A +^'^2  Y A 

=-[iYA-{-(ju — 2YA=2(|M/—  1)YA, 


And  again, 
and  therefore 

or  generally 


(XY-YX)Y^A=|t4-4Y^A, 


X Y*  A = YX  Y^  A + ^ - 4 Y^  A 


=2(^—  1Y'A+|«.— 4Y"A=3(|!a— 2)Y^A, 
XTA=s(iJ.-s+l)TA. 


Hence  putting  A==/a-+l,  jt/-+2,  &c.,  we  have 


XY'^^'A=0 

XY"-^^A=-(p+2)l.Y'^^^A 

XY"^*A=-(^+3)2.Y"''^A 


&c., 

equations  which  show  that 

Y'^^^A  = 0; 


for  unless  this  be  so,  i.  e.  if  Y''’^'A=|=0,  then  from  the  second  equation  XY'"'^^A=|=0, 
and  therefore  Y'^^^AH^O,  from  the  third  equation  XY^‘^^=l=0,  and  therefore  Y'‘^^A=1=0, 
and  so  on  ad  irifinitum,  i.e.  we  must  have  Y'^’^'A=0. 

31,  The  suppositions  which  have  been  made  as  to  the  function  A,  give  therefore  the 
equations 

XA=0 


XYA=^A 

XY^A=2(y.-l)YA 


XY'^A=^.Y^-'A 

Y'^-^’A=0. 

B=YA,  C=iYB,  ..A'  = iYB’, 


And  if  we  now  assume 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


107 


the  system  becomes 

XA=:0 
XB  =^A 
XC 


XA'=B' 

YA'  = 0; 

so  that  the  entire  system  of  equations  which  express  that  (A,  B..B',  yY  is 

a covariant  is  satisfied  ; hence 

Theorem.  Given  a quantic  {a,  h,  ..h\  a'\x,  yY’,  if  A be  a function  of  the  coeflftcients 
of  the  degree  6 and  of  the  weight  ^ satisfying  the  condition  XA=0j  and  if 

B,  C,  ..B',  A'  are  determined  by  the  equations 

B=YA,  C=iYB,  ..A'=JyB', 

then  will 

(A,  B,..B',  A'%x,yY 

be  a covariant. 

In  particular,  a function  A of  the  degree  6 and  of  the  weight  \ satisfying  the 
condition  XA=0,  will  (also  satisfy  the  equation  YA=0  and  will)  be  an  invariant. 

32.  I take  now  for  A the  most  general  function  of  the  coefficients,  of  the  degree  6 

and  of  the  weight  \ {mO—Y) ; then  XA  is  a function  of  the  degree  6 and  of  the  weight 
I and  the  arbitrary  coefficients  in  the  function  A are  to  be  determined 

so  that  XA=0.  The  number  of  arbitrary  coefficients  is  equal  to  the  number  of 
terms  in  A,  and  the  number  of  the  equations  to  be  satisfied  is  equal  to  the  number  of 
terms  in  XA ; hence  the  number  of  the  arbitrary  coefficients  which  remains  indeter- 
minate is  equal  to  the  number  of  terms  in  A less  the  number  of  terms  in  XA ; and 
since  the  covariant  is  completely  determined  when  the  leading  coefficient  is  known, 
the  difference  in  question  is  equal  to  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants,  i.  e.  the 
number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  order  [/j  and  the  degree  6 is  equal  to  the 
number  of  terms  of  the  degree  6 and  weight  \ — less  the  number  of  terms  of 

the  degree  & and  weight  \ (!//)  — 1. 

33.  I shall  now  give  some  instances  of  the  calculation  of  covariants  by  the  method 
just  explained.  It  is  very  convenient  for  this  purpose  to  commence  by  forming  the 
literal  parts  by  Arbogast’s  Method  of  Derivations : we  thus  form  tables  such  as  the 
following ; — 

a b e 


ah 

ac 

he 

h‘ 

108 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


ah 

ac 

ad 

hd 

cd  j 

¥ 

he 

1 

a’ 

a^b 

etc 

(td 

ahd 

acd 

adP 

bdP 

ceP 

dP 

aV 

abc 

a(? 

Pd 

bed 

Pd 

P 

Pc 

hc^ 

P 

a* 

a^b 

a^c 

a^d 

Phd 

Ped 

a^P 

ahd‘ 

acP 

ad^ 

bd^ 

cP 

d* 

a^P 

Pbc 

PP 

aPd 

abed 

aPd 

PP 

beP 

Pd‘ 

aP 

aPe 

abc‘ 

aP 

Ped 

bPd 

Pd 

P 

Pc 

Pd 

bP 

Pc~ 

ab 

ac 

ad 

ae 

be 

bd 

cd 

P 

P 

be 

bd 

cd 

(? 

P 

Pb 

etc 

Pd 

Pe 

abe 

ace 

ade 

aP 

bP 

cP 

dP 

P 

aP 

abc 

abd 

acd 

aP 

bee 

bde 

ede 

Pe 

P 

aP 

Pd 

We 

bP 

c^e 

d^ 

b“c 

bP 

bed 

Pd 

cP 

P 

34.  Thus  in  the  case  of  a cubic  (a,  h,  c,  d\x,yY,  the  tables  show  that  there  will 
be  a single  invariant  of  the  degree  4.  Represent  this  by 

-\-^ahcd 

-\-Cac^ 

-\-jyjfd 

which  is  to  be  operated  upon  with  This  gives 

c^cd 
aPd 
ahc^ 
b^c 


+ B 

+ 6A 

+ 3D 

+ 2B 

+ 2E 

+ 6C 

+ 3B 

+ 4E 

+ 3D 

MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS.  109 

i.  e.  B+6A=0,  3D4-2B=0,  &c. ; or  putting  A=l,  we  find  B=— 6,  C=4,  D=4, 
E=:— 3,  and  the  invariant  is 

— Qahcd 
+4ac® 

-36  V. 


Again,  there  is  a covariant  of  the  order  3 and  the  degree  3.  The  coefficient  of  V 
or  leading  coefficient  is 

Aa^d 

4-Ba6c 

+C6^ 

which  operated  upon  with  abi-\-2bb^-\-3cba,  gives 

a“e 
ab“ 

i.  e.  B+3A=0,  3C+2B=0  ; or  putting  A=l,  we  have  B=  — 3,  C=2,  and  the  leading 
coefficient  is 

a^d 

— 3abc 
+2b\ 

The  coefficient  of  is  found  by  operating  upon  this  with  {3b'ba-\-2cbi-\-d'd^),  this 
gives 

ahd 
ac~ 
b^c 

i.  e.  the  required  coefficient  of  V3/  is 

3abd 

—6ac^ 

+3b^c ; 

and  by  operating  upon  this  with  ^ (36B„+2cBa+c?BJ,  we  have  for  the  coefficient  of 

acd 
h~d 
bc~ 

i.  €.  the  coefficient  of  is 

— 3acd 
+ 66V 

— 3bc\ 

Q 


+3 

-6 

' 2 

-1-^ 

^ 2 

-9 

+e 

+ 6 

-6 

— 3 

-9 

+ 12 

+ B 

+ 3A 

+ 3C 

+ 2B 

MDCCCLVI. 


110 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  xMEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


Finally,  operating  upon  this  with  ^ we  have  for  the  coefficient  of 

a(F 
bed 

,.3 


i.  e.  the  coefficient  of  is 

-\-3bcd 
— 2c\ 

and  the  covariant  is 


I have  worked  out  the  example  in  detail  as  a specimen  of  the  most  convenient  method 
for  the  actual  calculation  of  more  complicated  covariants  *. 

35.  The  number  of  terms  of  the  degree  6 and  of  the  weight  q is  obviously  equal  to 
the  number  of  ways  in  which  q can  be  made  up  as  a sum  of  B terms  with  the  elements 
(0, 1,2,  ...m),  a number  which  is  equal  to  the  coefficient  of  in  the  development  of 

1 . 

and  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  any  particular  degree  for  the  quantic 

* Note  added  Feb.  7,  1856. — The  following  method  for  the  calculation  of  an  invariant  or  of  the  leading 
coefficient  of  a covariant,  is  easily  seen  to  be  identical  in  principle  with  that  given  in  the  text.  Write  down 
all  the  terms  of  the  weight  next  inferior  to  that  of  the  invariant  or  leading  coefficient,  and  operate  on  each  of 
these  separately  with  the  symbol 

h . c . b' 

ind.  S • - + 2 ind.  c>i"  • +m— 1 ind.  5'*— » 
a b a 

where  we  are  first  to  multiply  by  the  fraction,  rejecting  negative  powers,  and  then  by  the  index  of  the  proper 
letter  in  the  term  so  obtained.  Equating  tbe  results  to  zero,  we  obtain  equations  between  the  terms  of  the 
invariant  or  leading  coefficient,  and  replacing  in  these  equations  each  term  by  its  numerical  coefficient  in  the 
invariant  or  leading  coefficient,  we  have  the  equations  of  connexion  of  these  numerical  coefficients.  Thus,  for 
the  discriminant  of  a cubic,  the  terms  of  the  next  inferior  weight  are  a-cd,  abrd,  aber,  b^c,  and  operating  on  each 
of  these  separately  with  the  symbol 

ind.  A • - + 2 ind.  c • - + 3 ind.  c?  • - > 
a b c 

we  find 


abed 

+ 6 a~d~ 

3 ¥d 

+ 2 abed 

2 ¥(? 

+ 6 ae^ 

+ 3 abed 

+ 4 b‘(? 

+ 3 bH 

and  equating  the  horizontal  lines  to  zero,  and  assuming  a‘d‘=\,  we  have  a~d“=l,  abcd=—6,  ac®=4,  ¥d—4, 
h^c-=—S,  or  the  value  of  the  discriminant  is  that  given  in  the  text. 


a~d 

Zabd 

—Zaed 

— a(P 

— Zabe 

— 6ac" 

+ 66V 

-\~Zbed 

+ 36* 

+ 36"c 

-Zbe^ 

-2c* 

-1 

-3 

+ 8 

-2 

-2 

MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


Ill 


yY"  can  therefore  be  determined  by  means  of  this  development.  In  the  case  of 
a cubic,  for  example,  the  function  to  be  developed  is 

1 

—X^z){\—0l^zy 

which  is  equal  to 


where  the  coefficients  are  given  by  the  following  table ; on  account  of  the  symmetry, 
the  series  of  coefficients  for  each  power  of  2 is  continued  only  to  the  middle  term  or 
middle  of  the  series. 


(0) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 


and  from  this,  by  subtracting  from  each  coefficient  the  coefficient  which  immediately 
precedes  it,  we  form  the  table 


(0) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 


The  successive  lines  fix  the  number  and  character  of  the  covariants  of  the  degrees 
0,  1,2,  3,  &c.  The  line  (0),  if  tliis  were  to  be  interpreted,  would  show  that  there  is  a 
single  covariant  of  the  degree  0 ; this  covariant  is  of  course  merely  the  absolute  con- 
stant unity,  and  may  be  excluded.  The  line  (1)  shows  that  there  is  a single  covariant 

Q 2 


112  MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 

of  the  degree  ],  viz.  a covariant  of  the  order  3 ; this  is  the  cubic  itself,  which  I repre- 
sent by  U.  The  line  (2)  shows  that  there  are  two  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the 
degree  2,  viz.  one  of  the  order  6,  this  is  merely  U^,  and  one  of  the  order  2,  this  I 
represent  by  H.  The  line  (3)  shows  that  there  are  three  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the 
degree  3,  viz.  one  of  the  order  9,  this  is  U^;  one  of  the  order  5,  this  is  UH,  and  one  of 
the  order  3,  this  I represent  by  <I>.  The  line  (4)  shows  that  there  are  five  asyzygetic 
covariants  of  the  degree  4,  viz.  one  of  the  order  12,  this  is  U^;  one  of  the  order  8, 
this  is  UTd ; one  of  the  order  6,  this  is  ; and  one  of  the  order  0,  i.  e.  an  invariant, 
this  I represent  by  v-  The  line  (5)  shows  that  there  are  six  asyzygetic  covariants  of 
the  degree  5,  viz.  one  of  the  order  15,  this  is  U® ; one  of  the  order  11,  this  is  U^H ; 
one  of  the  order  9,  this  is  TPO;  one  of  the  order  7,  this  is  UH^ ; one  of  the  order  5, 
this  is  HO ; and  one  of  the  order  3,  this  is  VU.  The  line  (6)  shows  that  there  are  8 
asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  6,  viz.  one  of  the  order  18,  this  is  U®;  one  of  the 
order  14,  this  is  U^H ; one  of  the  order  12,  this  is  U^O;  one  of  the  order  10,  this  is 
U^IP ; one  of  the  order  8,  this  is  UHO ; two  of  the  order  6 {i.  e.  the  three  covariants 
H^,  and  VU^  are  not  asyzygetic,  but  are  connected  by  a single  linear  equation  or 
syzygy),  and  one  of  the  order  2,  this  is  VH.  We  are  thus  led  to  the  irreducible 
covariants  U,  H,  O,  V connected  by  a linear  equation  or  syzygy  between  H®,  O*  and 
VU^  and  this  is  in  fact  the  complete  system  of  irreducible  covariants  ; V is  therefore 
the  only  invariant. 

36.  The  asyzygetic  covariants  are  of  the  form  or  else  of  the  form 

; and  since  U,  H,  V are  of  the  degrees  1,  2,  4 respectively,  and  is  of  the 
degree  3,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  m of  the  first  form  is 
equal  to  the  coefficient  of  in  1 -r-(l— :c)(l  — a?^)(l— and  the  number  of  the 
asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  m of  the  second  form  is  equal  to  the  coefficient 
of  in  — ^)(1 — .r^)(l — x*).  Hence  the  total  number  of  asyzygetic  covariants 

is  equal  to  the  coefficient  of  a?™  in  (1 -=-(1 — a:)(l — .r^)(l — x*),  or  what  is  the 
same  thing,  in 

1 

and  conversely,  if  this  expression  for  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of 
the  degree  m were  established  independently,  it  would  follow  that  the  irreducible 
invariants  were  four  in  number,  and  of  the  degrees  1,  2,  3,  4 respectively,  but  con- 
nected by  an  equation  of  the  degree  6.  As  regards  the  invariants,  every  invariant  is 
of  the  form  i.  e.  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  m is  equal  to 

the  coefficient  of  x'"  in  conversely,  from  this  expression  it  would  follow  that 

there  was  a single  irreducible  invariant  of  the  degree  4. 

37-  In  the  case  of  a quartic,  the  function  to  be  developed  is 

1 

(1  — 2’)(l  —xz)[\  —x‘^z){l  —0(^z){\  —x'^z') 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


113 


and  the  coefficients  are  given  by  the  table. 


1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

3 

1 

1 

2 

3 

4 

4 

5 

1 

1 

2 

3 

5 

5 

7 

7 

8 

1 

] 

2 

3 

5 

6 

8 

9 

11 

11 

12 

1 

1 

2 

3 

5 

6 

9 

10 

13 

14 

16 

16 

18 

(0) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 


And  subtracting  from  each  coefficient  the  coefficient  immediately  preceding  it,  we 
have  the  table — 


1 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

1 

0 

1 

1 

1 

0 

1 

1 

0 

1 

1 

2 

0 

2 

0 

1 

1 

0 

1 

1 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 

0 

1 

1 0 

1 

1 

2 

1 

3 

1 

3 

1 

2 

0 

2 

(0) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 


the  examination  of  which  will  show  that  we  have  for  the  quartic  the  following 
irreducible  covariants,  viz.  the  quartic  itself  U ; an  invariant  of  the  degree  2,  which  I 
represent  by  I ; a co  variant  of  the  order  4 and  of  the  degree  2,  which  I represent  by  H ; 
an  invariant  of  the  degree  3,  which  I represent  by  J ; and  a covariant  of  the  order  6 
and  the  degree  3,  which  I represent  by  O ; but  that  the  irreducible  covariants  are 
connected  by  an  equation  of  the  degree  6,  viz.  there  is  a linear  equation  or  syzygy 
between  O®,  PH®,  PJFPU,  and  J®U®;  this  is  in  fact  the  complete  system  of 

the  irreducible  covariants  of  the  quartic:  the  only  irreducible  invariants  are  the 
invariants  I,  J. 

38.  The  asyzygetic  covariants  are  of  the  form  U^PPFT,  or  else  of  the  form 
and  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  m is  equal  to 
the  coefficient  of  in  or  what  is  the  same  thing,  in 

1 — 


(1 — a?)(l— 


114 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


and  the  asyzygetic  invariants  are  of  the  form  and  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic 
invariants  of  the  degree  m is  equal  to  the  coefficient  of  in  1 -f-(l— 
Conversely,  if  these  formulae  were  established,  the  preceding  results  as  to  the  form 
of  the  system  of  the  irreducible  covariants  or  of  the  irreducible  invariants,  would 
follow. 

39.  In  the  case  of  a quintic,  the  function  to  be  developed  is 


and  the  coefficients  are  given  by  the  table  : 


1 

1 

2 

3 

5 

6 

8 

9 

11 

11 

12 

11 


14 


16 


18 


19 


20 


(0) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 


and  subtracting  from  each  coefficient  the  one  which  immediately  precedes  it,  we  have 
the  table  ; 


1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

0 

1 

1 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 

0 

1 

(0) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 


We  thus  obtain  the  following  irreducible  covariants,  viz. — 

Of  the  degree  1 ; a single  covariant  of  the  order  5,  this  is  the  quintic  itself. 

Of  the  degree  2 ; two  covariants,  viz.  one  of  the  order  6,  and  one  of  the  order  2. 

Of  the  degree  3 ; three  covariants,  viz.  one  of  the  order  9,  one  of  the  order  5,  and 
one  of  the  order  3. 

Of  the  degree  4 ; three  covariants,  viz.  one  of  the  order  6,  one  of  the  order  4,  and 
one  of  the  order  0 (an  invariant). 

Of  the  degree  5 ; three  covariants,  viz.  one  of  the  order  7,  one  of  the  order  3,  and 
one  of  the  order  1 (a  linear  covariant). 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


115 


And  these  covariants  are  connected  by  a single  syzygy  of  the  degree  5 and  of  the 
order  1 1 ; in  fact,  the  table  shows  that  there  are  only  two  asyzygetic  covariants  of 
this  degree  and  order  ; but  we  may,  with  the  above-mentioned  irreducible  covariants 
of  the  degrees  1,  2,  3 and  4,  form  three  covariants  of  the  degree  5 and  the  order  11  ; 
there  is  therefore  a syzygy  of  this  degree  and  order. 

40.  I represent  the  number  of  ways  in  which  q can  be  made  up  as  a sum  of  m terms 
with  the  elements  0,  1,  each  element  being  repeatable  an  indefinite  number 

of  times  by  the  notation 

P(0, 1,2, 

and  I write  for  shortness 

P'(0, 1,  2,  ..m)®^=P(0,  1,2  — P(0, 1,2  ...mYq—l. 

Then  for  a quantic  of  the  order  m,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree 
i and  of  the  order  ^ is  ^ 

In  particular,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

P'(0, 1,2  ..my^mO. 

To  find  the  total  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  d,  suppose  first 
that  md  is  even;  then,  giving  to  fjb  the  successive  values  0,  2,  the  required 

number  is 

— P(-|m^— 1) 

+ V{\m& — 1 ) — P(^m^  — 2) 


H-P(2)  -P(l) 

H-P(l) 

= P(-|m^), 

i.  e.  when  is  even,  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

P(0,  1,2  ..my ; 

and  similarly,  when  m0  is  odd,  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree 

^ V{0,1,2,  ..my\{rn&—l). 

But  the  two  formulae  may  be  united  into  a single  formula;  for  when  md  is  odd  \ni9 
is  a fraction,  and  therefore  P(^m^)  vanishes,  and  so  when  m6  is  even  \{m6—l)  is  a 
fraction,  and  1)  vanishes;  we  have  thus  the  theorem,  that  for  a quantic  of 

the  order  m, — 

The  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

P(0, 1,2  ...my^md-\-V{0, 1,2,  ..my\{md—^\). 

41.  The  functions  V\md,  &c.  may,  by  the  method  explained  in  my  “Researches 


116 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


on  the  Partition  of  Numbers,”  post.  p.  34,  be  determined  as  the  coefficients  of  in 
certain  functions  of  a; ; I have  calculated  the  following  particular  cases : — 

Putting,  for  shortness, 

P'(0,  1,  2,  coefficient  x^  in  <pm, 


then 


then 


then 


1— + 

^ (1— a;®) 

(l-a;2)2(l-a;3)(l-a?4)(]  -x^) 


97= 


1 — x^  + 2x^ — x^^  + 5x^^  + 2x^^  + 6x^^-f-2x^^  + 5x^^ — x^-\-2x^‘^ — + 


(1  —x)[\  + x — x^ —x'^ x^  + x"^ x^ -{■  aP x^^ — x^^  + x^^  + x^^)  ^ 
{\  — x‘^Y[\.—x^)'^{\—x'^){\—oP){\—x'^)  ’ 

P(0,  1,  2,  ..my^m6=-  coefficient  of  a?®  in 

1 

X)(l— 

. l+a?"* 

. 1—x  + x'^ 

— x)\i  — x‘^)[l  — oP) 

\+x^-\-  6x‘^  + 9x^  + 1 2x^  + + 6x^'^  + + x^^ 


\p5  — - 


{1 —x^y(i—x'^)(i—x^){i—x^)  ’ 

P(0,  1,  2,  ..my^(m^—l)=  coefficient  of  x n ^ppi, 


. ^ x + sP 

'r/'3  — n — -2\2/i  _ ^4’ 


■^^b  = 


(1  —x’^yfi  —x^ 
x + Ax^  + ^sP+lOx’^  — + +Ax^^  + !p^ 


{l  — x‘^)'^[\  — x'^){\—x^){  \ —x^) 

And  from  what  has  preceded,  it  appears  that  for  a quantic  of  the  order  ^/^,  the  number 
of  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  d is  for  m even,  coefficient  x^  in  and  for  m 
odd,  coefficient  x^  in  and  that  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the 

degree  & is  coefficient  a?®  in  ipm.  Attending  first  to  the  invariants, — 

42.  For  a quadric,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  ^ is 

1 


coefficient  a?®  in 


l-x^’ 


which  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  a single  irreducible  invariant  of  the 
degree  2. 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


117 


43.  For  a cubic,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

l 


coefficient  in 


1— a:'*’ 


i.  e.  there  is  a single  irreducible  invariant  of  the  degree  4. 

44.  For  a quartic,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

coefficient  in 

i.  e.  there  are  two  irreducible  invariants  of  the  degrees  2 and  3 respectively. 

45.  For  a quintic,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  d is 

coefficient  :r»  in  (i,  ■ 

The  numerator  is  the  irreducible  factor  of  1— i.  e.  it  is  equal  to  (1— x®) 
-j-(l  — and  substituting  this  value,  the  number  becomes 

l_^6 


coefficient  in 


(1  — a?‘*)(l  — a?®)(l— — a?'®)’ 


i.  e.  there  are  in  all  four  irreducible  invariants,  which  are  of  the  degrees  4,  8,  12  and 
18  respectively;  but  these  are  connected  by  an  equation  of  the  degree  36,  i.e.  the 
square  of  the  invariant  of  the  degree  18  is  a rational  and  integral  function  of  the 
other  three  invariants ; a result,  the  discovery  of  which  is  due  to  M.  Hermite. 

46.  For  a sextic,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

coefficient  **  in  t 

the  second  factor  of  the  numerator  is  the  irreducible  factor  of  1— i.  e.  it  is  equal 
to  (1  — .r®®)(l— x®)(l— x®)(l— j:^)-r(l— .r’®)(l  — .r*®)(l— ir®)(l— .r);  and  substituting  this 
value,  the  number  becomes 

coefficient  a?®®  in  (i -x'^){\.-x%l -a;®)(l  — — a?*®)’ 

i.  e.  there  are  in  all  five  irreducible  invariants,  which  are  of  the  degrees  2,  4,  6,  10  and 
15  respectively;  but  these  are  connected  by  an  equation  of  the  degree  30,  i.e.  the 
square  of  the  invariant  of  the  degree  15  is  a rational  and  integral  function  of  the 
other  four  invariants. 

47.  For  a septic,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  0 is 

„ . 1 — x^  + 2x^ — x^^  + 5x^^+2x^‘^-i-6x^^  + 2x^^  + 5x^'^ — x^^  + 2x'^ — x'^  + x^^ 

coefficients  in ’ 

the  numerator  is  equal  to 

(1  _^6)(1  _a^8)-2(i -a:‘®)(l 

where  the  series  of  factors  does  not  terminate ; hence  the  number  of  irreducible  inva- 

MDCCCLVI.  R 


118 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


riants  is  infinite ; substituting  the  preceding  value,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  invariants 
of  the  degree  ^ is 

coefficient  in 

The  first  four  indices  give  the  number  of  irreducible  invariants  of  the  corresponding 
degrees,  i.  e.  there  are  1,  3,  6 and  4 irreducible  invariants  of  the  degrees  4,  8,  12  and 
14  respectively,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  same  thing  holds  with 
respect  to  the  indices  of  the  subsequent  terms.  To  verify  this  it  is  to  be  remarked, 
that  there  are  1,  4,  10  and  4 asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degrees  in  question  respect- 
ively ; there  is  therefore  one  irreducible  invariant  of  the  degree  4 ; calling  this  X^, 
there  is  only  one  composite  invariant  of  the  degree  8,  viz.  XI;  there  are  therefore 
three  irreducible  invariants  of  this  degree,  say  Xg,  Xg,  Xg.  The  composite  invariants 
of  the  degree  12  are  four  in  number,  viz.  Xk  X4X8,  X4X'g,  these  eannot  he 

connected  by  any  syzygy,  for  if  they  were  so,  X4,  Xg,  X'g,  Xg  would  be  connected  by  a 
syzygy,  or  there  would  be  less  than  3 irreducible  invariants  of  the  degree  8.  Hence 
there  are  precisely  6 irreducible  invariants  of  the  degree  1 2.  And  since  the  irreducible 
invariants  of  the  degrees  4,  8 and  12  do  not  give  rise  to  any  composite  invariant  of 
the  degree  14,  there  are  precisely  4 irreducible  invariants  of  the  degree  14. 

48.  For  an  octavic,  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  invariants  of  the  degree  6 is 


coefficient  x^  in 


(1  — a?)(l  X — — x‘^  + — x^^  + x^^ -{■  x^^) 

(1  — (1  — [l—x"^)  ’ 


and  the  second  factor  of  the  numerator  is 

(1  — a’)~*(l  — a:^)(l— a?®)~'(l  — x®)“'(l  — a?®)“*(l  — a?®)“‘(l  — a;*“)“'(l  — J?'®)(1  — x’^)(l  — x^^) .., 

where  the  series  of  factors  does  not  terminate,  hence  the  number  of  irreducible  inva- 
riants is  infinite.  Substituting  the  preceding  value,  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic 
invariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

coeff.  (1  — — a;’®)(l  — a;'q(l 

There  is  certainly  one,  and  only  one  irreducible  invariant  for  each  of  the  degrees 
2,  3,  4,  5 and  6 respectively ; but  the  formula  does  not  show  the  number  of  the  irre- 
ducible invariants  of  the  degrees  7,  &c. ; in  fact,  representing  the  irreducible  inva- 
riants of  the  degrees  2,  3,  4,  5 and  6 by  X^,  Xg,  X4,  Xj,  Xg,  these  give  rise  to  3 com- 
posite invariants  of  the  degree  7>  viz.  XgXgXg,  XgXg,  X3X4,  which  may  or  may  not  be 
connected  by  a syzygy;  if  they  are  not  connected  by  a syzygy,  there  will  be  a single 
irreducible  invariant  of  the  degree  7 ; but  if  they  are  connected  by  a syzygy,  there  will 
be  two  irreducible  invariants  of  the  degree  7;  it  is  useless  at  present  to  pursue  the 
discussion  further. 

Considering  next  the  covariants, — 

49.  For  a quadric,  the  number  of  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  0 is 

1 

[l—x){l—x'^)’ 


coefficient  x^  in 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


119 


i.  e.  there  are  two  irreducible  covariants  of  the  degrees  1 and  2 respectively ; these  are 
of  course  the  quadric  itself  and  the  invariant. 

50.  For  a cubic,  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

coefficient  in 

The  first  factor  of  the  numerator  is  the  irreducible  factor  of 


and  the  second  factor  of  the  numerator  is  the  irreducible  factor  of 

l-x\  =(1-x4)h-(1- 
substituting  these  values,  the  number  is 

1 


■X^)  ; 


coefficient  x^  in 


(1  — a;)(l  — a:^)(l  —x^)’ 


i.  e.  there  are  4 irreducible  covariants  of  the  degrees  1,  2,  3,  4 respectively ; but  these 
are  connected  by  an  equation  of  the  degree  6 ; the  covariant  of  the  degree  I is  the 
cubic  itself  U,  the  other  covariants  are  the  covariants  already  spoken  of  and  repre- 
sented by  the  letters  H,  O and  V respectively  (H  is  of  the  degree  2 and  the  order  3, 
0 of  the  degree  3 and  the  order  3,  and  V is  of  the  degree  4 and  the  order  0,  i.  e.  it  is 
an  invariant). 

51.  For  a quartic,  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  6 is 


coefficient  x®  in 


1 —x  + x"^ 

(1  — a?)^(l  —x’^)  (1  — 


the  numerator  of  which  is  the  irreducible  factor  of  1— .r®,  i.  e.  it  is  equal  to 
(1— a?®)(l— Making  this  substitution,  the  number  is 

coefficient  x®  in 

i.  e.  there  are  five  irreducible  covariants,  one  of  the  degree  1,  two  of  the  degree  2,  and 
two  of  the  degree  3,  but  these  are  connected  by  an  equation  of  the  degree  6.  The 
irreducible  covariant  of  the  degree  1 is  of  course  the  quartic  itself  U,  the  other  irre- 
ducible covariants  are  those  already  spoken  of  and  represented  by  I,  H,  J,  0 respect- 
ively (I  is  of  the  degree  2 and  the  order  0,  and  J is  of  the  degree  3 and  the  order  0, 
i.  e.  I and  J are  invariants,  H is  of  the  degree  2 and  the  order  4,  O is  of  the  degree  3 
and  the  order  6). 

52.  For  a quintic,  the  number  of  irreducible  covariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

CO0lT«  OC  in  ' " ' / 1 o\ 2 / 1 4w~i  fiVTi  8\  - , 

the  numerator  of  which  is 

(l-l-.x')^(l  — x-\-2x'‘-]-x^-{-2x^-\-3x^-\-x^-\-5x‘^-\-x^-\-3x^-\-2x^°-{-x^^-{-2x^^ — ; 


the  first  factor  is  (1— <2:’)  ^{l—x^Y,  the  second  factor  is 


120 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


which  does  not  terminate  ; the  number  of  irreducible  covariants  is  therefore  infinite. 
Substituting  the  preceding  values,  the  expression  for  the  number  of  the  asyzygetic 
covariants  of  the  degree  6 is 

coeff'.^®in(l  —x^)~^{l—x*)  ^(l  —x^)  ^(l— — a;‘®)®(l  — a;®)’(l  — — a? 

which  agrees  with  a previous  result : the  numbers  of  irreducible  covariants  for  the 
degrees  1,  2,  3,  4 are  1,  2,  3 and  3 respectively,  and  for  the  degree  5,  the  number 
of  irreducible  covariants  is  three,  but  there  is  one  syzygy  between  the  composite 
covariants  of  the  degree  in  question ; the  difference  3—  1=2  is  the  index  taken  with 
its  sign  reversed  of  the  factor  (1— 

53.  I consider  a system  of  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  any  particular  degree  and 
order  of  a given  quantic,  the  system  may  of  course  be  replaced  by  a system  the  terms 
of  which  are  any  linear  functions  of  those  of  the  original  system,  and  it  is  necessary 
to  inquire  what  covariants  ought  to  be  selected  as  most  proper  to  represent  the 
system  of  asyzygetic  covariants ; the  following  considerations  seem  to  me  to  furnish 
a convenient  rule  of  selection.  Let  the  literal  parts  of  the  terms  which  enter  into 
the  coefficients  of  the  highest  power  of  x or  leading  coefficients  be  represented  by 
M„,  M^,  M^, ..  these  quantities  being  arranged  in  the  natural  or  alphabetical  order; 
the  first  in  order  of  these  quantities  M.  which  enters  into  the  leading  coefficient  of  a 
particular  covariant,  may  for  shortness  be  called  the  leading  term  of  such  covariant, 
and  a covariant  the  leading  term  of  which  is  posterior  in  order  to  the  leading  term 
of  another  covariant,  may  be  said  to  have  a lower  leading  term. 

It  is  clear,  that  by  properly  determining  the  multipliers  of  the  linear  functions  we 
may  form  a covariant  the  leading  term  of  which  is  lower  than  the  leading  term  of 
any  other  covariant  (the  definition  implies  that  there  is  but  one  such  covariant);  call 
this  0.  We  may  in  like  manner  form  a covariant  such  that  its  leading  term  is  lower 
than  the  leading  term  of  every  other  covariant  except  Gj ; or  rather  we  may  form  a 
system  of  such  covariants,  since  if  O2  be  a covariant  having  the  property  in  question, 
<I>2+A:0,  will  have  the  same  property,  but  k maybe  determined  so  that  the  covariant 
shall  not  contain  the  leading  term  of  Gj,  i.  e.  we  may  form  a covariant  02  such  that 
its  leading  term  is  lower  than  the  leading  term  of  every  other  covariant  excepting 
0,,  and  that  the  leading  term  of  0i  does  not  enter  into  02 ; and  there  is  but  one  such 
covariant,  02.  Again,  we  may  form  a covariant  03  such  that  its  leading  term  is  lower 
than  the  leading  term  of  every  other  covariant  excepting  Gj  and  02,  and  that  the 
leading  terms  of  0i  and  02  do  not  either  of  them  enter  into  03 ; and  there  is  but  one 
such  covariant,  Gj.  And  so  on,  until  we  arrive  at  a covariant  the  leading  term  of 
which  is  higher  than  the  leading  terms  of  the  other  covariants,  and  which  does 
not  contain  the  leading  terms  of  the  other  covariants.  We  have  thus  a series  of 
covariants  0,,  02,  03,  &c.  containing  the  proper  number  of  terms,  and  which 
covariants  may  be  taken  to  represent  the  asyzygetic  covariants  of  the  degree  and 
order  in  question. 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


J2I 


In  order  to  render  the  covariants  0 definite  as  well  numerically  as  in  regard  to 
sign,  vve  may  suppose  that  the  covariant  is  in  its  least  terms  {i.  e.  we  may  reject 
numerical  factors  common  to  all  the  terms),  and  we  may  make  the  leading  term 
positive.  The  leading  term  with  the  proper  numerical  coefficient,  if  different  from 
unitv  and  with  the  proper  power  of  x,  or  the  order  of  the  function  annexed,  will,  when 
the  covariants  of  a quantic  are  tabulated,  be  sufficient  to  indicate,  without  any 
ambiguity  whatever,  the  particular  covariant  referred  to.  I subjoin  a table  of  the 
covariants  of  a quadric,  a cubic  and  a quartic,  and  of  the  covariants  of  the  degrees 
],  2,  3,  4 and  5 respectively  of  a quintic,  and  also  two  other  invariants  of  a quintic. 


Co  variant  Tables  (Nos.  1 to  26). 

No.  1.  No.  2. 


( +1  « 

+ 2 b 

+ 1 c 

yY 

+ 1 ac 

-1  P 

The  tables  Nos.  1 and  2 are  the  covariants  of  a binary  quadric.  No.  1 is  the  qua- 
dric itself;  No.  2 is  the  quadrinvariant,  which  is  also  the  discriminant. 


No.  3. 


No.  4. 


+ 1 


-f-  3 i 


3 c 


+ 1 d 


3/)'- 


+ \ ac 

+ 1 ad 

+ \ bd 

-1  P 

— 1 be 

-1  r 

No.  5. 


No.  6. 


-f  1 a"d 

-|-  3 dhd 

— 3 acd 

— 1 ad^ 

— 3 abc 

— 6 ac^ 

-f6  P d 

+ 3 bed 

-1-2  P 

+ 3 Pc 

-3  bP 

—2  c^ 

yY’ 


+ 1 «"c?" 
— 6 ahcd 
+ 4 ac^ 
-t-4  Pd 
-3 


The  tables  Nos.  3,  4,  5 and  6 are  the  covariants  of  a binary  cubic.  No.  3 is  the 
cubic  itself ; No.  4 is  the  quadricovariant,  or  Hessian ; No.  5 is  the  cubicovariant ; 
No.  6 is  the  invariant,  or  discriminant.  And  if  we  write 

No.  3 = U, 

No.  4=:H, 

No.  5 = 0, 

No.  6=V, 

O"— VU"+4H*=0. 


then  identically, 


122 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


No.  7- 


+ 1 a 

+4  b 

+ 6 c 

+ 4 d 

+ 1 e 

yY 


No.  8. 


No.  9. 


+ 1 ae 
-4  hd 
-j-  3 c“ 


+ 1 ae 

+ 2 ad 

+ \ ae 

+ 2 be 

1 bd 

-1  b‘ 

— 2 be 

+ 2 bd 
-3 

—2  cd 

-1 

4 


No.  10.  No.  11. 


+1 

ace 

+ 1 

a^d 

+ 1 

9 

a“e 

+ 5 

abe 

ace 

- 5 

ade 

— 1 

ae^' 

— 1 be^ 

— 1 

ad~ 

f 

-3 

abe 

+ 2 

abd 

-15 

acd 

-10 

ad^ 

+ 15 

bee 

— 2 

bde 

+ 3 ede 

— 1 

b^e 

\ 

+ 2 

-9 

ac“ 

+ 10 

Vd 

+ 10 

Ve 

-10 

bd^ 

+ 9 

c‘e 

-2  d^ 

+ 2 

bed 

+ 6 

bc^ 

bed 

cV 

-6 

edr 

— 1 

c® 

No.  12. 


+ 

1 

ede^ 

+ 81 

ac*e 

— 

12 

d^bde“ 

- 54 

ac^d? 

— 

18 

cre^e^ 

- 27 

+ 

54 

d^cd'^e 

+ 108 

b^ede 

— 

27 

ard'^ 

- 64 

b^d^ 

+ 

54 

afj^ce^ 

— 54 

Vc^e 

—• 

6 

ab‘d^e 

+ 36 

bW 

— 

180 

abdde 

bc^d 

+ 

108 

abed^ 

The  tables  Nos.  7>  8,  9,  10  and  11  are  the  irreducible  covariants  of  a quartic. 
No.  7 is  the  quartic  itself;  No.  8 is  the  quadrinvariant ; No.  9 is  the  quadricovariant, 
or  Hessian  ; No.  10  is  the  cubinvariant ; and  No.  11  is  the  cubico variant.  The  table 
No.  12  is  the  discriminant.  And  if  we  write 

No.  7=U, 

No.  8=1, 

No.  9 = H, 

No.  10=J, 

No.  11=0, 

No.  12=V, 

then  the  irreducible  covariants  are  connected  by  the  identical  equation 

JU^-IU^H+4H^+O^=0, 

V=P— 27J". 


and  we  have 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


123 


No.  13. 


"1“  1 d 


+ 56 


+ 10 


+ 10  d 


+ 5 e 


+ 1/ 


yY 


No.  14. 


( 


+ 1 ae 

+ 1 af 

+ 1 bf 

— 4 bd 

— 3 be 

— 4 ce 

+ 3 c' 

+ 2 cd 

+ 3 (P 

y) 


2 


No.  15. 


+ l ac 

“1“  3 ad 

+ 3 ae 

+ 1 af 

+ 3 bf 

+ 3 ef 

+ 1 df 

-1  b'^ 

— 3 be 

+ 3 6c? 
—6 

+ 7 be 

— 8 cc? 

-|-  3 €& 

— 6 cf’ 

— 3 de 

-1  e- 

No.  16. 


+ 1 

ace 

+ 1 

acf 

+ 1 

adf 

+ 1 

bdf 

— 1 

adr 

-1 

ade 

— 1 

aP 

— 1 

be‘‘ 

— 1 

b'^e 

— 1 

bf 

— 1 

bef 

— 1 

+ 2 

bed 

+ 1 

bee 

+ 1 

bde 

+ 2 

ede 

— 1 

c* 

+ 1 

bd? 

+ 1 

c^e 

-1 

d? 

— 1 

c^d 

— 1 

cd^ 

No.  17. 


+ 1 

«y 

+ 

5 

abf 

+ 2 

acf 

- 2 

adf 

- 5 

aef 

— 1 

af 

-5 

abe 

— 

16 

ace 

-12 

ade 

- 8 

aP 

+ 16 

bdf 

+ 5 

bef 

+ 2 

acd 

+ 

6 

ad^ 

+ 8 

6V 

+ 12 

bef 

+ 9 

be^ 

-2 

cdf 

+ 8 

Vd 

— 

9 

Ve 

-38 

bee 

+ 38 

bde 

- 6 

cf 

-8 

cP 

-6 

bc^ 

+ 38 

bed 

+ 72 

bd’^ 

-72 

Pe 

-38 

ede 

+ 6 

dre 

— 

24 

c® 

— 32 

<?d 

+ 32 

cd~ 

+ 24 

d? 

No.  18. 


+ 1 a^d 

+ 

2 a?e 

+ 1 af 

+ 1 abf 

+ 5 acf 

— 5 adf 

— 7 aef 

- 1 af 

- 2 bf 

-1  cf 

— 3 abe 

+ 

1 abd 

+ 11  abe 

— 8 ace 

— 40  ade 

— 16  ade 

+ 8 bdf 

-11  bef 

- 1 erfj 

+ 3def 

+ 2 P 

— 

12  ac^ 

— 34  acd 

— 34  ad~ 

+ 16  bf 

+ 40  bf 

-29  6e‘ 

+ 34  cdf 

+ 12  df 

-2  e=> 

+ 

9 b^-c 

+ 16  6V 

+ 29  6^e 

+ 47  bee 

— 47  bee 

+ 34  cy 

— 16  cP 

- ^dP 

+ 6 bc^ 

— 2 bed 

-44  bd‘^ 

+ 44  bd^ 

+ 2 ede 

— 6 d'^e 

+ 8 c’ 

+ 16  c^d 

-16  c^d 

- 3 d^ 

yY 


324 


MR.  A.  CAYLKY’S  second  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


No.  19.  No.  20. 


+ 1 «;/■ 

+ 1 a^df 

+ 2 a"ef 

+ 1 a\f 

+ 2 ahf 

+ 1 ac/^ 

— 10  ahef 

k5w 

— 4 ahdf 

— 4 ahef 

— 4 acef 

— 3 adef 

+ 4 acdf 

— 3 ahcf 

— 10  ah^ 

— 2 acdf 

— 2 ad?f 

+ 2 ae^ 

+ 1 6 ace" 

— 5 ah  de 

- 2 acj 

+ 4 ace" 

+ 4 ade" 

Vf 

— 12  ad"e 

+ 10  a<?e 

+ 24  acde 

adPe 

— 10 

— 5 hcef 

+ 16  Irdf 

( 

— 4 acd"^ 

— 12  ad? 

+ 4 

+ 24  6cc?/ 

+ 10  hdf 

+ 9 h-e- 

+ 2 hy 

+ 4 }?cf 

— 9 Ire" 

+ 16  bce‘‘ 

— 5 hde^ 

-12  hc"f 

— 5 IPce 

+ 16  SVe 

vs»  6cy 

— 22  6<^^e 

— 4 c^df 

— 76  hcde 

+ 14 

— 22  hc^e 

+ 50  hcde 

-12  cf 

+ 14  cV 

+ 48  hd'^ 

— 16  h(?d 

- 4 hcd? 

-36  hd? 

— 4 cVe 

— 1 6 cd’^e 

+ 48  c^e 
-32  c^d" 

+ 6 

+ 8 chi 

— 36  c^e 
+ 28  (?d^ 

+ 8 cd? 

+ 6 

No.  21. 


+ 1 

ahf 

+ 2 

a^df 

a'^ef 

abf 

- 2 

acf 

— 1 

adf^ 

‘ —1 

a"de 

— 2 

a‘e~ 

+ 2 

abdf 

t<5>> 

abef 

-2 

acef 

adef 

+ 1 

aef 

— 1 

ab"f 

-10 

abcf 

-2 

abe^ 

acdf 

+ 1 

ariy 

+ 2 

ae^ 

+ 1 

bef- 

2 

ahce 

+ 10 

ahde 

— 1 

acf 

—20 

ace^ 

+ 1 

ade^ 

+ 2 

hy^ 

+ 2 

bdef 

+ 4 

ahd" 

ac"e 

-2 

acde 

+ 20 

ad^e 

+ 2 

Vef 

beef 

— 3 

be^ 

— 1 

ac"d 

acd'^ 

+ 3 

ad^ 

+ 20 

Vdf 

+ 2 

bedf 

+ 10 

bdy 

— 4 

c^ef 

+ 3 

b^e 

— 2 

by 

— 1 

b^cf 

Ve^ 

-5 

bce^' 

-14 

bde^ 

+ 1 

edy 

-6 

Ircd 

+ 14 

JPce 

+ 5 

b^de 

— 20 

bey 

-1 

bd'^e 

-10 

c^df 

+ 6 

eder 

+ 3 

bc^ 

+ 2 

bH"^ 

+ 1 

bc"e 

bede 

-3 

- 2 

<?e^ 

— 3 

d^e 

— 26 

bc^d 

-9 

bed? 

—20 

bd'^ 

+ 9 

(?de 

+ 26 

cd^e 

+ 12 

c"* 

+ 4 

c^d 

+ 20 

c^e 

-4 

cd^ 

-12 

df^ 

cy^ 

No.  22. 


+ 1 a?cf" 

+ 1 ayf 

— 2 aWe/ 

- 1 a+y 

+ 1 a^e® 

— 2 aSe/’® 

- 1 aby^ 

— 4 abdef 

— 4 abcef 

+ 6 aSe® 

+ 8 aSjy 

+ 8 ac^ef 

— 2 abde^ 

— 2 aedy 

— 2 ac^df 

— 12  aede^ 

+ 14  ac^e" 

+ 6 ad?e 

— 22  acd?e 

+ 1 by^ 

+ 9 ad"^ 

— 2 Veef 

+ 6 Wef 

+ 14  b"dy 

-12  b\df 

— 15  b^^d'd 

— 15  Vee^ 

— 22  bc^df 

+ 10  VdPe 

+ 10  b(?e^ 

+ 6 bey 

+ 30  bcd"e 

+ 30  bc^de 

— 15  bd'^ 

^20  bed? 

+ 9 cf 

-15  cV 

— 20  c^de 

+ 10  cy^ 

+ 10  cy 

MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


125 


No.  23. 


a?by^ 

+ 

1 

Pcf 

— 

1 

Pdf 

Pef 

+ 

1 

cdcef 

— 

5 

a'def 

+ 

1 

PPf 

— 

1 

abdf 

— 

3 

eddy 

+ 

4 

PP' 

+ 

5 

abef 

+ 

1 

abpf 

+ 

2 

(dd^ 

— 

1 

aPf 

— 

8 

abdef 

+ 

3 

aPf 

— 

1 

aVef 

+ 

8 

abcef 

+ 

3 

abe^ 

— 

14 

aedef 

+ 

14 

abedf 

+ 

11 

abdy 

— 

11 

aPef 

+ 

8 

acP 

— 

11 

abce^ 

— 

17 

abdp 

+ 

11 

aedy 

+ 

9 

ady 



1 

abd'^e 

— 

11 

aPdf 

+ 

6 

aedP' 

— 

6 

ad^e^ 

— 

9 

acy 

— 

16 

aPP 

— 

6 

ad^e 

— 

2 

Pef 

+ 

14 

a(?de 

+ 

44 

acd^e 

— 

4 

Pf 

+ 

11 

Pdef 

— 

6 

acd^ 

— 

18 

ad‘^ 

+ 

17 

Pcef 

— 

9 

PP 

— 

8 

Pdf 

— 

3 

Pef 

+ 

16 

pdy 

+ 

1 

bPef 

+ 

9 

Pe‘ 

— 

6 

Pedf 

— 

21 

PdP 

— 

14 

bedy 

+ 

6 

b\y 

+ 

21 

PeP 

— 

44 

bPdf 

+ 

16 

bedp 

— 

16 

Pede 

— 

5 

Pd~e 

+ 

5 

bPP 

— 

3 

bd^e 

+ 

8 

Pd^ 

+ 

6 

bPf 

+ 39 

bed^e 

+ 

6 

Pdf 

+ 

3 

bPe 

— 

39 

bpde 

— 

12 

bd^ 

8 

c^P 

_ 

2 

bPd^ 

+ 

22 

bed^ 

+ 

18 

df 

+ 

2 

Pd'^e 

Pd 

+ 

12 

Pe 

— 

22 

Pde 

cd* 

— 

8 

Pd‘ 

+ 

8 

Pd^ 

No.  24. 


Pef 

V5»  Pf 

a^f 

- 1 a^cf 

+ 1 Pdf 

Pef 

pf 

abf 

Pbdf 

v5»  Pbef 

— 3 Pcef 

+ 7 Pdef 

— 1 PPf 

+ 3 abdf 

abef 

acef 

^ PbP 

+ 7 Pedf 

+ 12  Pdy 

- 6 a^e^ 

— 7 abef 

— 3 abPf 

— 7 aedf 
"+  7 acPf 

-2  ady^ 

+2  Pey 

— 10  PeP 

— 9 PdP 

+ 1 aPf 

+ 26  abdef 

— 12  aPf 

+ 4 adey 

— 5 Pe  de 

+ 3 Pd'^e 

+ 3 aPef 

— 26  abcef 
+ 32  abdy 

— 19  abP 

+ 18  aedef 

+ 7 ad'^ef 

— 2 ap 

-|-  3 ord^ 

- 7 aPdf 

— 18  abedf 

— 32  ac^ef 

+ 6 ace^ 

— 7 ade^ 

^ Pef 

— 4 aPef 

+ 10  aPP 

— 18  abeP 

— 8 abde^' 

+ 18  aedy 

+ 3 ady 

+ 10  Pdf 

+ 5 bedf 

+ 5 aPde 

— 7 abey 

+ 30  abd‘e 

-18  aPdf 

+ 53  aedP 

— 15  ad‘^P 

-10  Pey 

— 5 bePf 

+ 5 abe^e 

— 8 abode 

— 3 acy 

+ 6 aPe‘' 

— 39  ad^e 

+ 9 Pef 

- 3 bP^f 

— 5 bd~ef 

— 7 abed^ 

+ 9 abd^ 

+ 45  ac^de 

+ 52  acd'^e 

+ 6 Pf 

+ 18  Pdef 

+ 8 bedef 

+ 5 bde^ 

+ 1 ac^d 

+ 22  ac^e 

— 39  acd^ 

-39  ad'^ 

+ 8 Pcef 

-27  PP 

— 2 bce^ 

-3  cy^- 

+2by 

— 19  aPd"^ 

- 6 Pdf 

+ 19  Pef 

- 6 Pdf 

-30  bPef 

-22  bdy 

+ 7 c^def 

— 5 Pee 

+ 7 Pef 

+ 27  PP 

— 53  Pedf 

-20  PdP 

-45  bedy 

+ 19  bd^P 

+ 2 cV 

-2  PP 

+ 2 P de 

+ 15  Pey 

+ 20  PeP 

+ 45  bPdf 

+ 87  bede^ 

— 9 Pef 

-1  edy 

+ 8 Pc"d 

— 19  PPe 

-87  Pede 

— 25  Pd^e 

+ 25  bPP 

-12  bd\ 

+ 19  cvy 

— 8 ed~e^ 

-3  bP 

-11  Ped"^ 
+ 33  bPd 
-12  P 

+ 6 Pd^ 

+ 12  bc^e 
+ 57  be'^d^ 
-24  c*d 

+ 39  bPf 
— 45  bP^de 
+ 65  bed^ 
c^e 

-20  Pd^ 

— 52  bcd‘^e 

bd^ 

+ 39  Pf 

— 65  c^de 
+ 20  Pd^ 

+ 39  Pdf 
— 6 

— 57  Pd'^e 
+ 24  cd'^ 

+ 11  cW 
-33  cd^e 
+ 12  d^ 

+ 3 d*e 

No.  25. 


■O’  a^hcf^ 

+ 1 a^cdf^ 

- 1 a^cey^ 
~ 3 a^d^ef^ 
+ 5 cddey 

— 2 

- 1 a^h'^df 

+ 1 

- 3 

+ 11  od'hcdef^ 

- 5 (dhcey 
+ 12  a^dy^ 
-30  a^hd'^ey 
+ 15  a^^hde^ 


+ 

12 

a^chf 

— 

21 

aWf 

— 

34 

PPdPf 

+ 

22 

PPe* 

+ 

78 

Ped^ef 

— 

48 

oded'^e^ 

— 

27 

Pdy 

+ 

18 

Pd^e‘‘ 

+ 

5 

aPef 

— 

5 

aPdef 

aPey 

— 

30 

aPe^ef 

— 

34 

aPedy^ 

+ ■ 

133 

aPedPf 

— 

54 

aPee* 

— 18  ah^d^ef 

+ 3 ah^d^e^ 

+ 78  abc^dy 

— 18  ahc^ey 

— 210  abc^d'^ef 
+ 106  ab(?de^ 

+ 93  ahcd\f 

— 30  abcd^e^ 

— 9 abd^e 

— 17  ac^f'^ 

+ 93  ac^def 

— 38  ac‘*e® 

— 42  ac^dy 

+ 8 ac^d^e^ 

+ 6 a(?d^e 

V 


acd^ 

— 

2 

Pf 

+ 

15 

Pcef 

+ 

18 

Pd^f 

— 

54 

Pdey 

+ 

27 

PP 

— 

48 

PPdf 

+ 

3 

PePf 

+ 106 

Ped’^ef 

— 

81 

PedP 

— 

38 

Pdf 

+ 

38 

Pdh‘ 

+ 

18 

Pc\f 

— 

30 

PPdef 

+ 

38 

PPP 

+ 8 

ppdy 

+ 25 

PeWP 

-57 

Pcd*e 

+ 18 

Pd^ 

- 9 

bPef 

+ 6 

bc*dy 

-57 

bc*dP 

+ 38 

bPdh 

— 24 

bc-d^ 

Pdf 

+ 18 

c^’P 

-24 

c^d~e 

+ 8 

Pd* 

MDCCCLVI. 


S 


126 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  SECOND  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 

No.  26. 


+ 

] 

aT 

— 

20 

PbeY 

— 

120 

Pcdf 

+ 

160 

PceY 

+ 

360 

Pd”eY 

— 

640 

PdPf 

+ 

256 

d*e' 

+ 

160 

a-Pdf 

— 

10 

PPPY 

+ 

360 

a~bPY 

— 

1640 

Pbcdef" 

+ 

320 

PbcPf 

— 

1440 

PbdY 

+ 

4080 

Pbd^ef 

— 

1920 

a~bde* 



1440 

PPeY 

+ 

2640 

PPdY 

+ 

4480 

PPdPf 

— 

2560 

a~Pe* 

— 10080  arcd^ef 

+ 5760  aWV 
+ 3456  a^(Pf 
— 2160 

— 640  ab^cf^ 

+ 320  ab^def^ 

— 180  aPe^f 

+ 4080  aPPef"" 
+ 4480  aPcdrf 
-14920  aPcdPf 

+ 7200  aPcd^ 

+ 960  aPd^ef 

— 600  aPd-p 

— 10080  ahPdf 

+ 960  abPPf 

+ 28480  abPd^ef 
— 16000  abPdP 

— 11520  abcd^f 


+ 7200  abcdh^ 
abd^e 
+ 3456  aPf^ 
-11520  aPdef 
+ 6400  aPe^ 

+ 5120  aPdy 

— 3200  aPd'^P 

aPd^e 

acd^ 

+ 256  Pf 

— 1920  Pcef- 

— 2560  PdY- 
+ 7200  PdPf 

— 3375  Pe'^ 

+ 5760  PPdf 

— 600  PcPf 

— 16000  Pcd‘ef 
+ 9000  Pcde^ 


+ 6400  pdy 
-4000  Pd^e‘ 

-2160  PcY- 

+ 7200  PPdef 
— 4000  PPP 
-3200  PPdy 
+ 2000  PPd‘P 
Pcd^e 
^ Pd^ 
bpef 
bPd~f 
bPde‘ 
bPd^e 
bPd^ 
Pdf 
Pe^ 
Pd'^e 
Pd* 


The  tables  Nos.  13  to  24  are  the  irreducible  covariants  of  the  degrees  1,  2,  3,  4 
and  5 of  a quintic.  No.  13  is  the  quintic  itself ; No.  15  is  the  Hessian ; No.  19  is  the 
qiiartinvariant ; No.  22  is  the  linear  covariant ; the  other  covariants  can  be  referred 
to  by  their  degree  and  order,  or  simply  by  the  number  of  the  table.  The  foregoing 
covariants  are  connected  by  the  equation  of  the  degree  5 and  order  1 1, 

(No.  13)(No.  21)  + (No.  14)(No.  18)-(No.  15)(No.  17)=0. 

The  table  No.  25  is  the  simplest  octinvariant,  and  the  table  No.  26  is  the  discrimi- 
nant ; we  have 

(No.  26)  = (No.  19)"-1152(No.  25). 


[ 127  ] 


VII.  Researches  on  the  Partition  of  Numbers.  By  Arthur  Cayley,  Esq. 


Received  April  14, — Read  May  3 and  10,  1855. 


I PROPOSE  to  discuss  the  following  problem  ; “ To  find  in  how  many  ways  a 
number  q can  be  made  up  of  the  elements  a,  b,c,..  each  element  being  repeatable  an 
indefinite  number  of  times.”  The  required  number  of  partitions  is  represented  by 
the  notation  F(a,b,c,..)q, 


and  we  have,  as  is  well  known, 

P(a,  b,  c,  ..)9= coefficient  x'^  in 

where  the  expansion  is  to  be  effected  in  ascending  powers  of  x. 

It  may  be  as  well  to  remark  that  each  element  is  to  be  considered  as  a separate 
and  distinct  element,  notwithstanding  any  equalities  which  may  exist  between  the 
numbers  a,  b,  c, .. ; thus,  although  a=b,  yet  a+a+a+  &c.  and  + &c.  are  to 

be  considered  as  two  different  partitions  of  the  number  q,  and  so  in  all  similar  cases. 

The  solution  of  the  problem  is  thus  seen  to  depend  upon  the  theory,  to  which  I now 
proceed,  of  the  expansion  of  algebraical  fractions. 


Consider  an  algebraical  fraction 


where  the  denominator  is  the  product  of  any  number  of  factors  (the  same  or  different) 
of  the  form  \ —x'^.  Suppose  in  general  that  [l— j-”*]  denotes  the  irreducible  factor 
of  1 — x™,  i.  e.  the  factor  which,  equated  to  zero,  gives  the  prime  roots  of  the  equa- 
tion 1— a:'“=0.  We  have 

1— a7“=n[i— x“'], 

where  m'  denotes  any  divisor  whatever  of  m (unity  and  the  number  m itself  not 
excluded).  Hence,  if  a represent  a divisor  of  one  or  more  of  the  indices  m,  and  h 
be  the  number  of  the  indices  of  which  « is  a divisor,  we  have 


fx=X\.\\—x^~f. 

Now  considering  apart  from  the  others  one  of  the  multiple  factors  [_\~x’'f,  we 
may  write  fx=  [l  —x'^ffx. 

Suppose  that  the  fraction^  is  decomposed  into  simpler  fractions,  in  the  form 

<px 


fa 


=1(1) 

+ &C., 


[1  — a?“] 


k-2 


[1— a?®]  [1— a;®] 


s 2 


128 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


where  I(j?)  denotes  the  integral  part,  and  the  &c.  refers  to  the  fractional  terms 
depending  upon  the  other  multiple  factors,  such  as  [l  —a?®]*.  The  functions  6x  are 
to  be  considered  as  functions  with  indeterminate  coefficients,  the  degree  of  each 
such  function  being  inferior  by  unity  to  that  of  the  corresponding  denominator;  and 
it  is  proper  to  remark  that  the  number  of  the  indeterminate  coefficients  in  all  the 
functions  0x  together  is  equal  to  the  degree  of  the  denominatoi-yjr. 

The  term  {x'b^Y~'^  [i— reduced  to  the  form 

4.&C 

[1 — [1 — ,2?“]*“'  ' ’’ 

the  functions  gx  being  of  the  same  degree  as  6x,  and  the  coefficients  of  these 
functions  being  linearly  connected  with  those  of  the  function  6x.  The  first  of  the 
foregoing  terms  is  the  only  term  on  the  riglit-hand  side  which  contains  the  denomi- 
nator [l— .r®]*;  hence,  multiplying  by  this  denominator  and  then  writing  [1— 
we  find 

which  is  true  when  x is  any  root  whatever  of  the  equation  [1— .2;“]=0.  Now  by 

means  of  the  equation  [l — .r®]=0,^  may  be  expressed  in  the  form  of  a rational  and 

integral  function  Gj;,  the  degree  of  which  is  less  by  unity  than  that  of  [t  — x“].  We 
have  therefore  an  equation  which  is  satisfied  by  each  root  of  [l — x®]=0, 

and  which  is  therefore  an  identical  equation  ; gx  is  thus  determined,  and  the 
coefficients  of  ^x  being  linear  functions  of  those  of  gx^  the  function  Qx  may  be  con- 
sidered as  determined.  And  this  being  so,  the  function 

fx  [1-a;®] 

will  be  a fraction  the  denominator  of  which  does  not  contain  any  power  of  [l — jc®] 
higher  than  [l— a;®]'""';  and  therefore  d^x  can  be  found  in  the  same  way  as  6x,  and 
similarly  d^x,  and  so  on.  And  the  fractional  parts  being  determined,  the  integral  part 

may  be  found  by  subtracting  from  ~ the  sum  of  the  fractional  parts,  so  that  the 

JX 

(bX 

fraction  ^ can  by  a direct  process  be  decomposed  in  the  above-mentioned  form. 

JX 

Particular  terms  in  the  decomposition  of  certain  fractions  may  be  obtained  with 
great  facility.  Thus  m being  a prime  number,  assume 

\ o , . 

{\—x’^)[\—x^)..[\—x^)  ’”^[1— 

then  observing  that  (1  — = — x)[l — a?”*],  M^e  have  for  [l — x^~\—0, 


0x= 


\—x)[\—x‘^)..[i—x'" 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


129 


Now  u being  any  quantity  whatever  and  x being  aroot  of  [l  —x”"']  =0,we  have  identically 

[l  — = — x){u — x'^)..{u — 

and  therefore  putting  m— 1,  we  have  w=(l —.»)(! 


and  therefore 


whence 


Sx=z—, 


— &C.  +-  rT— 


(1 — x^){\ — a;^)..(l — x'^)  [1 — a?”*] 

Again,  m being  as  before  a prime  number,  assume 

_ D „ I 

(1 — a:')(l — x^)..(\ — a?”*)  " ' [1 — a?™]’ 

we  have  in  this  case  for  [l  — .r”*]=0. 


6x— 


'1  — x)‘^{\  — a;^) ..  (1  — a?™"*)’ 


1 ] 


which  is  immediately  reduced  to  ^x=-  — . Now 
•'  m 1—x 

[1  — M*”] [1  — M*”]  — [1  —a;’"] 


u—x  u—x 

or  putting  m = 1, 


(1+^+..+^*”  ^)  + (l +M.. -f-M’" 


1 —X 


=m — 1 d-m  — 2x..-\-x” 


and  substituting  this  in  the  value  of  dx,  we  find 

1 


(1  — x)  (1  — x^) ..  (1  — a?™) 


P 1 (m— 1)  + (m  — 2)a:.. +a;’”~^ 

= &c.  H — 2 


[1  — a?”‘] 


(t>X 

The  preceding  decomposition  of  the  fraction  ^ gives  very  readily  the  expansion  of 

JX 

the  fraction  in  ascending  powers  of  x.  For,  consider  a fraction  such  as 


Sx 

[1-x‘^y 

where  the  degree  of  the  numerator  is  in  general  less  by  unity  than  that  of  the  deno- 
minator ; we  have 

i—x°=  [i  — ^'']n[i  — x“'], 

where  a'  denotes  any  divisor  of  a (including  unity,  but  not  including  the  number 
a itself).  The  fraction  may  therefore  be  written  under  the  form 

SxU  [1  — a?“'] 

1 — a;“ 


where  the  degree  of  the  numerator  is  in  general  less  by  unity  than  that  of  the  deno- 
minator, i.  e.  is  equal  to  a—l.  Suppose  that  b is  any  divisor  of  a (including  unity, 
but  not  including  the  number  a itself),  then  1— a?Ms  a divisor  of  n[l— jr“'],  and 


130  MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS, 
therefore  of  the  numerator  of  the  fraction.  Hence  representing  this  numerator  by 

Aj-j- Aj.2?.  . , , 

and  putting  a=hc,  we  have  (corresponding  to  the  case  6=1) 

Ao+ Ai+ A2.. . +Aa_i=0, 

and  generally  for  the  divisor  b, 

Ao  + Aa...+A(c_,)4  = 0 
Ai+Aa+i..  +A(£._j)j+,  = 0 


Aa_i  + A2A_i..  -j- Aci_,  = 0. 

Suppose  now  that  a.q  denotes  a circulating  element  to  the  period  a,  i.  e,  write 

Uqzzzl  q=0  (mod.  a) 
ag=0  in  every  other  case. 

A function  such  as 

Ao«5+ Aiaj_i . . . + 

will  be  a circulating  function,  or  circulator  to  the  period  a,  and  may  be  represented 
by  the  notation 

(Ao,  A,,  ...A„_i)  circlor  a,. 

In  the  case  however  where  the  coefficients  A satisfy,  for  each  divisor  b of  the  number 
a,  the  above-mentioned  equations,  the  circulating  function  is  what  I call  a prime 
circulator,  and  I represent  it  by  the  notation 

(Ao,  A„  ..A„_,)  pcr«,. 

By  means  of  this  notation  we  have  at  once 

coefficient  Xg  in^^l^]  =(Ao,  A...A„_i)  pcra„ 
and  thence  also 

coefficient  Xg  in  =9’  (Ao,  A,..A„_0  per  a,. 


Hence  assuming  that  in  the  fraction 


fa 


the  degree  of  the  numerator  is  less  than  that 


of  the  denominator  (so  that  there  is  not  any  integral  part),  we  have 


coefficient  in^  = 2 q’'{Ao,  A„  ...A«_i)  per  a, ; 

or,  if  we  wish  to  put  in  evidence  the  non-circulating  part  arising  from  the  divisor  a=  1, 

coefficient  Xg  in^=Ag*~*-|-B5'*“^...-|-L5'+M 

+ 2 q’'{Ag,  A,...A,_,)  per  a,; 

where  k denotes  the  number  of  the  factors  1 —x""  in  the  denominator  fx,  a is  any 
divisor  (unity  excluded)  of  one  or  more  of  the  indices  m ; and  for  each  value  of  a 
r extends  from  r=0  to  r=k—\,  where  k denotes  the  number  of  indices  m of  which 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


131 


a is  a divisor.  The  particular  results  previously  obtained  show,  that  m being  a 
prime  number, 


and 


coefiicient  in 


coefficient  x^  in 


(l-a?2)(l-a^). .(!-«« 
1 


3;;^=&C.  + -(1,-1,0,  0,..)  per 


m. 


1,  — 1,  — 1,..)  perm,. 


Suppose,  as  before,  that  the  degree  of  (px  is  less  than  that  of  fx,  and  let  the  analy- 
tical expression  above  obtained  for  the  coefficient  of  x"^  in  the  expansion  in  ascending 

(I)X 

powers  of  x of  the  fraction  ^ be  represented  by  ¥q,  it  is  very  remarkable  that  if  we 
expand^  in  descending  powers  of  x,  then  the  coefficient  of  x"^  in  this  new  expansion 

{q  is  here  of  course  negative,  since  the  expansion  contains  only  negative  powers  of  x) 
is  precisely  equal  to  — ; this  is  in  fact  at  once  seen  to  be  the  case  with  respect  to 

each  of  the  partial  fractions  into  which  ^ has  been  decomposed,  and  it  is  conse- 
quently the  case  with  respect  to  the  fraction  itself*.  This  gives  rise  to  a result  of 
some  importance.  Suppose  that  px  and  fx  are  respectively  of  the  degrees  N and  D ; 

it  is  clear  from  the  form  of  fx  that  we  have  f(^  = {—)°x~^fx  ; and  I suppose  that  px 

is  also  such  that  = ; then  writing  D—N=A,  and  supposing  that^ 

is  expanded  in  descending  powers  of  x,  so  that  the  coefficient  of  x'^  in  the  expansion 
is  — F^,  it  is  in  the  first  place  clear  that  the  expansion  will  commence  with  the 
term  a;"*,  and  we  must  therefore  have 

F^=0 

for  all  values  of  q from  q=  — 1 to  q=  — {h — 1), 

Consider  next  the  coefficient  of  a term  where  ^ is  0 or  positive ; the  coefficient 

in  question,  the  value  of  which  is  —Y{  — h—q),  is  obviously  equal  to  the  coefficient 


of  in  the  expansion  in  ascending  powers  of  x of 


1 


e.  to 


(i)^(~)°  coefficient  in 


x’‘ipx 


fx 
(px  , 


or  what  is  the  same  thing,  to 

)°  coefficient  in  ^ ; 

and  we  have  therefore,  q being  zero  or  positive, 

F(-A-^)=-(±n-)-F^. 

In  particular,  when  px=l,  Fq—0 


* The  property  is  a fundamental  one  in  the  general  theory  of  developments. 


132 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


for  all  values  of  q from  q—  — \ to^=  — (D— 1);  and  q being  0 or  positive, 

The  preceding  investigations  show  the  general  form  of  the  function  P(a,  c,  ...)^, 
viz.  that 

P(a,  h,  c,  + 2 /( Ao,  A,, ..  A;_,)  per/,, 

a formula  in  which  k denotes  the  number  of  the  elements  a,  h,  c,  . . &c.,  and  / is  any 
divisor  (unity  excluded)  of  one  or  more  of  these  elements  ; the  summation  in  the  case 
of  each  such  divisor  extends  from  r=0  to  r=/i:— 1,  where  A"  is  the  number  of  the 
elements  a,  b,  c,  . . . &c.  of  which  / is  a divisor;  and  the  investigations  indicate  how 
the  values  of  the  coefficients  A of  the  prime  circulators  are  to  be  obtained.  It  has 
been  moreover  in  effect  shown,  that  if  D=ad-6  + c+..,  then,  writing  for  shortness 
P(9)  instead  of  P(tt,  b,  c,  ..)q,  we  have 

P(^)  = 0 

for  all  values  of  q from  q=  — 1 to  — (D— 1),  and  that  q being  0 or  positive, 

P(-D-9)  = (-)>^->P(9); 

these  last  theorems  are  however  uninterpretable  in  the  theory  of  partitions,  and  they 
apply  only  to  the  analytical  expression  for  P(y). 

I have  calculated  the  following  particular  results  : — 

P(l,2),  =i{2</+3 

+ (1,-1)  pci- 2, 1 

P(l,  2,  3)?  =^|6j‘+36?+47 

+ 9(1,  —1)  per  2, 

+ 8(2,— i,— 1)  pcr3,j 

P(l,2,  3.  4)q  =^|25r='+309^+135^+175 

+ (9^  + 45)(l,  — 1)  pcr2, 

+ 32  (1,0, -1)  per  3, 

+ 36  (1,0, -1,0)  per +1 

P(l,  2,  3,  4,  5)9=g^|309"+9009='+9300^^+38250^+50651 

+ (1350^+10125)  (1,-1)  pcr2, 

+ 3200  (2, -1,  — 1)  pcr3, 

+ 5400  (I,  1,  — 1,  — 1)  pcr4, 

+3456(4,  - 1,  - 1 , - 1 , - 1 ) per  5, 1 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


133 


P(2,  3)9  =^|29  + 5 

+ 3 (1,-1)  pcr2, 

+ 4(1,  — 1,0)  pcr3,| 

P(2,3,4)9  =^{69^+549+107 

+ (189+81)(1,-  l)pcr2, 

+32  (2,-l,-l)pcr3, 

+ 36  (1,-1, -1,1)  per  4, 1 

P(2,  3,  4,  5)9  =y^{29^+429^+2679+497 

+ (459+315)(l,-l)pcr2, 

+ 160  (1, -1,0)  per  3, 

+ 180  (1,0, -1,0)  per  4, 

+288  (1,-1, 0,0,0)  per5,j 

P(2,  3,  4,  5,  6)9=j^^|l09^+4009*+55509^+310009+56877 

+ (4509"+90009+39075)(1,  -1)  per  2, 
+32OO9  (1,  — 1, 0)  per  3, 

+ 1600  (21,— 19, —2)  per  3, 

+ 10800  (1,0, -1,0)  per  4, 

+6912  (4,  -1,  -1,  -1,  - 1)  per  5, 

+4800  (1,  - 1,  -2,  - 1, 1, 2)  per  6, . 

P(l,2,3,  5)?  =j^|4y>+66f+324j+451 

+45  (1,-1)  per  2, 

+80  (1, —1,0)  per  3, 

+ 144(1,0,0,0,-1)  pcr5,j 

P(l,  2,  2,  3,  4)9=^|69^+1449^+11949^+39609+4267 

+ (549^+6489  + 1 70 1 )( 1 , - 1 ) per  2, 

+256  (2,  — 1,  — 1)  per3y 

+ 432  (],0,  — l,0)per4,j 

P(^)9 

+ 1 (1,-1)  per  2, 

+2  (1,0, —1,0)  per  4, 

+8(1, 0, 0, 0,  — 1, 0, 0, 0)  per  8,  j 

MDCCCLVI.  T 


134  MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 

P(7,  8)?=i^|2j+43 

+ 7 (1,-1)  per  2, 

+ 14  (1, -1,  — 1, 1)  pcr4, 

+ 16(3, 2,1, 0,-1, -2, -3)  pcr7, 

+56  (0,  - 1,  - 1, 0, 0, 1. 1, 0)  per  8,|, 

vyhich  are,  I think,  worth  preserving. 


Received  April  14, — Read  May  3 and  10,  1855. 


I proceed  to  discuss  the  following  problem  : “ To  find  in  how  many  ways  a number 
q can  be  made  up  as  a sum  of  m terms  with  the  elements  0,  1,2,  ...h,  each  element 
being  repeatable  an  indefinite  number  of  times.”  The  required  number  of  partitions 
is  represented  bv 

p(o,  1,2, 

and  the  number  of  partitions  of  q less  the  number  of  partitions  of  ^—1  is  repre- 
sented by 

P'(0,  1,2,  ..A-)> 

We  have,  as  is  well  known, 

1 


P(0,  1,  2,  ..kYq=  coefficient  in 


x'^z) 


where  the  expansion  is  to  be  effected  in  ascending  powers  of  2.  Now 

(1— 2')(l  — a72’)..(l — x^z)  ' \—x  ^ (1  — a7)(l  — ' *■’ 


the  general  term  being 


(l-^ft+l)(l-^fc  + 2)_^(l— ^fc  + . 

(1  — x)  (1  — x’^) . . (1  —x'^) 


or,  what  is  the  same  thing. 


and  consequently 


(1  — a:'«+q(l  — 

(1  — ^)(1  — a.'^)  ..(1  — a;*) 


P(0,  1,  2,  ..krq=  coefficient  in 

to  transform  this  expression  I make  use  of  the  equation 
(,+..)(!  + A) ..  ( 1 +.*z)=  1 


X 


,is{s+0 


( 1 — «)  (1  — a?^) . . (1  — a?®) 


where  the  general  term  is 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


135 


and  the  series  is  a finite  one,  the  last  term  being  that  corresponding  to  s=k,  viz. 
Writing  —x^  for  z,  and  substituting  the  resulting  value  of 
(1  — 0?™+')  ( 1 — 0?“+") . . ( 1 — 
in  the  formula  for  P(0,  1,  2,  we  have 

C ^m+is,s+l  1 

P(0,  1,2,  coefficients" 

where  the  summation  extends  from  .y=:  0 to  s=k;  but  if  for  any  value  of  s between 
these  limits  5md-|^y(.y4-l)  becomes  greater  than  q,  then  it  is  clear  that  the  summation 
need  only  be  extended  from  s=0  to  the  last  preceding  value  of  s,  or  what  is  the  same 
thing,  from  ^=0  to  the  greatest  value  of  s,  for  which  q — sm — ^5(5+1)  is  positive  or 
zero. 

It  is  obvious,  that  if  q>km,  then 

P(0,  1,  2..A:)’"^  = 0; 
and  moreover,  that  if  dA^\km,  then 


P(0,  1,  2,  ..^)’”^=P(0,  1,  2..kY.km—6, 


so  that  we  may  always  suppose  q^y^km.  I write  therefore  q=\{km  — Di)  where  a is 
zero  or  a positive  integer  not  greater  than  km,  and  is  even  or  odd  according  as  km  is 
even  or  odd.  Substituting  this  value  of  q and  making  a slight  change  in  the  form  of 
the  result,  we  have 


I 1 

P(0,  1,  2..A-)-|(fa-.,)  = 2,|(-)-coeffixa»-"--in-,— 


where  the  summation  extends  from  s=-0  to  the  greatest  value  of  s,  for  which 
{^k—s)m—\a—\s{s-^\)  is  positive  or  zero.  But  we  may,  if  we  please,  consider  the 
summation  as  extending,  when  k is  even,  from  ^=0  to  .9=^/::— 1,  and  when  k is  odd, 
from  .9=0  to  s—^{k — 1),  the  terms  corresponding  to  values  of  s greater  than  the 
greatest  value  for  which  {\k  — s)m—\a,—\s{s-\-\)  is  positive  or  zero,  being  of  course 
equal  to  zero.  It  may  be  noticed,  that  the  fraction  will  be  a proper  one  if 
a<{k — 9)(^  — A'+l);  or  substituting  for  s its  greatest  value,  the  fraction  will  be  a 
proper  one  for  all  values  of  .9,  if,  when  k is  even,  a<^k{k-{-2),  and  when  k is  odd, 
c<l{k^l){k-{-d). 

We  have  in  a similar  manner, 

P'(0, 1,2  ... /f)’"o= coefficient  in  — r-7^ r\’ 

which  leads  to 

f „ia+i(s+l) 

P'(0,  \,2..kY^{km  — a)  = ^A  (— l^coeff.  .r<**“''""in  gr — j- — — ^ ^ ^ j- 

where  the  summation  extends,  as  in  the  former  case,  from  5=0  to  the  greatest  value 
of  5,  for  which  (^A:— 5)m— ^05— ^5(5+ 1)  is  positive  or  zero,  or,  if  we  please,  when  k is 
even,  from  5=0  to  5=^/1:— 1,  and  when  5 is  odd,  from  5=0  to  5=^(A:— 1).  The  con- 
dition, in  order  that  the  fraction  may  be  a proper  one  for  all  values  of  5,  is,  when  k is 
even,  a-f-l  <^k(^k-\-2),  and  when  k is  odd,  os-j-l  l)(A:-l-3). 

T 2 


136 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


To  transform  the  preceding  expressions,  I write  when  h is  odd  instead  of  x,  and 
I put  for  shortness  6 instead  of  ^ or  2{\k—s),  and  y instead  of  or 

a-l-j(5+l) ; we  have  to  consider  an  expression  of  the  form 

coefficient  x^”"  in 

where  Fx  is  the  product  of  factors  of  the  form  l—x''.  Suppose  that  a'  is  the  least 
common  multiple  of  a and  0,  then  (1  — J7“')  -i-(l  — is  an  integral  function  of  x,  equal 
XX  suppose,  and  1 -i-(l  — x“)=%x-7- (1  — x“').  Making  this  change  in  all  the  factors  of 
Fx  which  require  it  {i.  e.  in  all  the  factors  except  those  in  which  a is  a multiple  of  0), 
the  general  term  becomes 

coefficient  x^”'  in 

Gx 

where  Gj:  is  a product  of  factors  of  the  form  1 — x“',  in  which  a'  is  a multiple  of  0, 
{.  e.  Gx  is  a rational  and  integral  function  of  x^.  But  in  the  numerator  x^Wx  we  may 
reject,  as  not  contributing  to  the  formation  of  the  coefficient  of  x®”*,  all  the  terms  in 
which  the  indices  are  not  multiples  of^;  the  numerator  is  thus  reduced  to  a rational 
and  integral  function  of  x^,  and  the  general  term  is  therefore  of  the  form 

coefficient  a;®’"  in 

or  what  is  the  same  thing,  of  the  form 

coefficient  x^  in  — • 

XX 


Where  )cx  is  the  product  of  factors  of  the  form  1 — and  Xx  is  a rational  and  integral 
function  of  x,  the  particular  value  of  the  fraction  depends  on  the  value  of  s;  and 
uniting  the  different  terms,  we  have  an  expression 


which  is  equivalent  to 


coefficient  x^in  S.  (— )*  — j 

® 'XX 


coefficient  a?™  in 


where yj?  is  a product  of  factors  of  the  form  1— j?",  and  <px  is  a rational  and  integral 
function  of  x.  And  it  is  clear  that  the  fraction  will  be  a proper  one  when  each 
of  the  fractions  in  the  original  expression  is  a proper  fraction,  t.  e.  in  the  case  of 
P(0,  l,2..A')'"^(/rm— a),  when  for^even  cc<^k{k-{-2),  and  for^odd  a<:^(A-+ 1)(^+3); 
and  in  the  case  of  P'(0,  \,2  ..ky'^{km—a,),  when  for  k even  a+1  <\k{k-\-2),  and  for 
k odd  a+1  <^(Ar+l)(A:+3). 

We  see,  therefore,  that 

P(0,  1,2  a), 

and 

P'(0, 1,2..  k)”'\{km  — ci), 

are  each  of  them  of  the  form 

coefficient  x”  in 

tx 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


137 


where  fx  is  the  product  of  factors  of  the  form  1 — x",  and  up  to  certain  limiting’  values 
of  a the  fraction  is  a proper  fraction.  When  the  fraction^  is  known,  we  may  there- 
fore obtain  by  the  method  employed  in  the  former  part  of  this  Memoir,  analytical 
expressions  (involving  prime  circulators)  for  the  functions  P and  P'. 

As  an  example,  take  P(0,  1, 2, 

which  is  equal  to 

coefficient  in 

-coefficient  x” in 
The  multiplier  for  the  first  fraction  is 

(1  — a7®)(l  — 

(1— a;^)(l — ’ 

which  is  equal  to  1 2x^-1- 

Hence,  rejecting  in  the  numerator  the  terms  the  indices  of  which  are  not  divisible 
by  3,  the  first  term  becomes 

coemcient  x*  m 7; 12T71 gv? 

or  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  first  term  is 

coefficient  x”  m ’(i  5 

and  the  second  term  being 

x^ 

—coefficient  x”*  in  7-, 2^27; 47> 

(1  — xd  (1  — x^) 

1 “1“ 

we  have  P(0, 1 , 2, 3)'"f /w  = coefficient  x”  in 

And  similarly  it  may  be  shown,  that 

P(0,  l,2,3)’"i(3m— l)=coefficient  x”  in 

As  another  example,  take  P'(0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5)f  m, 
which  is  equal  to 

coefficient  in 

-coefficient  in  (Ti:si)(ii:^4^r^(rris, 

+coefficient  a:"  in 

The  multiplier  for  the  first  fraction  is 

(1-X2‘>)(l-X3«)(l-X^0) 


138 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


which  is  a function  of  of  the  order  36,  the  coefficients  of  which  are 
1,0, 1,  1,2, 1,3,2,  4,3,  4,4,6,  4, 6, 5,  7,  5,  7,  5,  7, 5, 6,  4,  6,  4,  4, 3,  4, 2,  3, 1,2,  1, 1,0, 1, 
and  the  first  part  becomes  therefore 

coemcient  x m - — wn Jwi bvti s\ 

Tlie  multiplier  for  the  second  fraction  is 

(1— — —x^'^) 

(l—<r‘'^)(l (1 —.2?®)  ’ 

which  is  a function  of  of  the  order  14,  the  coefficients  of  which  are 

1,  1,  2,  1,  3,  2,  3,  1,  3,  2,  3,  1,  2,  1,  1 ; 
and  the  second  term  becomes 

. . 2x^ -h  2x‘^  + 3x^ + x^  + x^^ 

-coefficient  le"  in  s 

X^ 

and  the  third  term  is  coefficient  x"^  in 

Now  the  fractions  may  be  reduced  to  a common  denominator 

T 

by  multiplying  the  terms  of  the  second  fraction  by  = 1 and  the  terms 

X ““  o(^  • 

of  the  third  fraction  by  y3;^(=  1 +■3^^) ; performing  the  operations  and  adding,  the 

numerator  and  denominator  of  the  resulting  fraction  will  each  of  them  contain  the 
factor  1—0?^;  and  casting  this  out,  we  find 

P(0, 1 , 2, 3,  4,  5)”*-|w= coefficient  x”^  in 

I have  calculated  by  this  method  several  other  particular  cases,  which  are  given  in 
my  ‘SSecond  Memoir  upon  Quantics the  present  researches  were  in  fact  made  for 
tlie  sake  of  their  application  to  that  theory. 

Received  April  20, — Read  May  3 and  10,  1855. 

Since  the  preceding  portions  of  the  present  Memoir  were  written,  Mr.  Sylvester 
has  communicated  to  me  a remarkable  theorem  which  has  led  me  to  the  following 
additional  investigations*. 

<5  <37 

Let^-  be  a rational  fraction,  and  let  (a?— be  a factor  of  the  denominator 
then  if 

\<^x'\ 


* Mr.  Sylvester’s  researches  are  published  in  the  Quarterly  Mathematical  Journal,  July  1855,  and  he  has 
there  given  the  general  formula  as  well  for  the  circulating  as  the  non-circulating  part  of  the  expression  for  the 
number  of  partitions. — Added  23rd  February,  1856. — A.  C. 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


139 


denote  the  portion  which  is  made  up  of  the  simple  fractions  having  powers  of  .r— j:, 
for  their  denominators,  we  have  by  a known  theorem 

= coefficient  - in 

faU,  ^ 3C-X  -Z  f{x^+z) 

Now  by  a theorem  of  Jacobi’s  and  Cauchy’s, 


coefficient^  in  F2=  coefficient  y in  ; 


whence,  writing  \ we  have 


^ I = coefficient  7 in  - 

t x^-xe^  f{x^e-*) 

x^ — xe^  a7j(l — — e®)  a?](l — e®) 


1 . 


Now  putting  for  a moment  x—x^e^,  we  have 

1 1 1 


and  whence 


x^ — xe^  X 


|(/C/  X XaW  i4/  j t4/ 


the  general  term  of  which  is 


n(s 


1 

— 

— 1)'  Xj  — X 


Hence  representing  the  general  term  of 

x^^(xje-^) 


by  xXit  % so  that 


f{x^e-‘) 

m • I • C ^X,(p(x,e~‘) 

xx,  = coefficient  y in  ^ f{x,e-*)  ’ 


we  find,  writing  down  only  the  general  term 

■ ■ • + + ■ ■ 

where  the  value  of  x/Ti  depends  upon  that  of  s,  and  where  A’eKtends  from  .v— 1 to  sz=k. 

Suppose  now  that  the  denominator  is  made  up  of  factors  (the  same  or  different)  of 
the  form  l—x"".  And  let  a be  any  divisor  of  one  or  more  of  the  indices  m,  and  let 
k be  the  number  of  the  indices  of  which  a is  a divisor.  The  denominator  contains 
the  divisor  [l— a;®]*,  and  consequently  if  § be  any  root  of  the  equation  [l  — a'“]=0, 
the  denominator  contains  the  factor  {^—xy.  Hence  writing  § for  .r,  and  taking  the 
sum  with  respect  to  ail  the  roots  of  the  equation  [l— a'“]=0,  we  find 


_ 


n(s 


where 


Xi=  coefficient]  in  f 


140 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  PARTITION  OF  NUMBERS. 


and  as  before  s extends  from  ^=1  to  s=k.  We  have  thus  the  actual  value  of  the 
function  6x  made  use  of  in  the  memoir. 

A preceding  formula  gives 

= coefficient  ^ in  ^ 

which  is  a very  simple  expression  for  the  non-circulating  part  of  the  fraction 
This  is,  in  fact,  Mr.  Sylvester’s  theorem  above  referred  to. 


[ 141  ] 


VIII.  Examination  of  select  Vegetable  Products  from  India. 

By  John  Stenhouse,  LL.D.,  F.R.S. 

Received  November  14, — Read  December  6,  1855. 

PART  I. 

Through  the  kindness  of  my  esteemed  friend  Dr.  Royle,  I have  been  permitted 
to  select  such  vegetable  products  from  the  extensive  collection  at  the  India  House 
as  seemed  most  likely  to  repay  the  trouble  of  investigation.  My  attention  during 
the  last  twelve  months  has  been  chiefly  directed  to  three  of  these  vegetable  sub- 
stances; and  the  results  of  their  examination  I now  take  the  liberty  of  submitting  to 
the  Royal  Society,  to  be  followed  by  those  of  the  others  as  they  may  be  completed. 

Datisca  cannahina. 

The  first  of  these  substances  which  I examined  consisted  of  a quantity  of  the  roots 
of  the  Datisca  cannahina,  from  Lahore,  where  this  plant  is  employed  to  dye  silk  of  a 
fast  yellow  colour.  The  roots,  which  had  been  cut  into  pieces  about  six  or  eight 
inches  long,  were  from  one-half  to  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  thickness.  They  had 
a deep  yellow  colour.  The  leaves  and  smaller  branches  of  the  Datisca  cannahina  from 
the  Levant  have  long  been  employed  for  a similar  purpose  in  the  South  of  France. 
A decoction  of  the  leaves  of  the  Datisca  cannahina  was  examined  by  Braconnot  in 
1816,  who  discovered  in  it  a crystallizable  principle  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of 
datiscine.  Braconnot,  of  course,  did  not  subject  this  substance  to  analysis,  but  he 
described  its  appearance  and  properties  in  an  exceedingly  accurate  manner*.  The 
observations  of  Braconnot  had  fallen  into  such  entire  oblivion,  however,  that  for 
many  years  past,  we  find  in  most  of  the  larger  systems  of  chemistry  the  term  datis- 
cine used  as  synonymous  with  inuline.  Thus  in  Brande’s  ‘ Chemistry,’  vol.  ii. 
page  1168,  we  find  it  stated  that  a variety  of  names  had  been  given  to  inuline,  such 
as  “dahline,  datiscine,”  &c.  In  Lowig’s  ‘ Chemistry  of  Organic  Compounds,’  vol.  i. 
page  359,  the  same  error  is  repeated,  where,  under  the  article  ‘inuline,”  the  syn- 
onyms given  are  “dahline  and  datiscine.” 

The  bruised  roots  were  extracted  in  a Mohr’s  apparatus  by  long-continued  diges- 
tion with  wood-spirit.  The  liquor  obtained,  which  had  a dark  brown  colour,  was 
concentrated  by  distilling  off  a portion  of  the  wood-spirit.  The  brown  syrupy  liquid 
remaining  in  the  retort,  on  being  poured  into  open  vessels  and  standing  for  some 

* Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique  (1830),  iii.  277. 


MDCCCLVI. 


U 


142 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 

time,  deposited  a resinous  matter  containing  merely  traces  of  a crystalline  substance. 
When  this  syrupy  liquid,  however,  was  treated  with  about  half  its  bulk  of  bot  water, 
the  greater  portion  of  the  brown  resin  was  rapidly  deposited,  and  the  mother-liquor, 
having  been  poured  off  and  left  to  slow  spontaneous  evaporation,  deposited  a con- 
siderable quantity  of  an  imperfectly  crystallizable  substance  resembling  grape-sugar. 
These  crystals  are  impure  datiscine,  still  retaining  a considerable  amount  of  resinous 
matter,  to  which  the  dark  brown  colour  is  owing. 

They  may  be  purified  in  various  ways,  advantage  being  taken  of  the  greater  solu- 
bility of  the  resinous  matter  in  alcohol  or  ether,  than  that  of  the  datiscine.  By 
repeated  crystallizations,  therefore,  from  either  of  these  liquids,  the  datiscine  may  be 
rendered  almost  perfectly  colourless,  the  impurities  remaining  in  the  mother-liquor. 
The  following  is  the  method  which  I have  found,  on  the  whole,  most  convenient. 
The  crude  datiscine,  while  still  moist,  is  strongly  pressed  between  folds  of  blotting- 
paper ; it  is  then  dissolved  in  alcohol,  and  again  treated  with  water,  which  throws 
down  the  resin.  'I'lie  diluted  alcoholic  solution,  after  standing  some  time,  yields  the 
datiscine  in  a much  finer  state.  On  repeating  this  operation  several  times,  the  datis- 
cine may  be  obtained  perfectly  pure.  In  order  to  separate  any  traces  of  tannic  acid 
which  might  have  been  present,  I repeatedly  added  a concentrated  solution  of  gela- 
tine to  the  alcoholic  solution  of  the  datiscine,  and  after  careful  filtration,  precipitated 
the  datiscine  in  the  way  already  described.  I could  not,  however,  observe  that  the 
crystals  of  the  datiscine,  when  gelatine  had  been  employed  in  its  preparation,  were 
in  the  least  degree  dissimilar  from  the  datiscine  obtained  in  the  usual  way. 

Properties  of  Datiscine. — Datiscine,  when  quite  pure,  is  perfectly  colourless,  but 
unless  great  attention  is  paid  to  its  purification,  it  usually  has  more  or  less  of  a yellow 
colour,  varying  from  pale  to  deep  yellow,  according  to  circumstances.  It  is  very 
soluble  in  alcohol,  even  in  the  cold,  boiling  alcohol  dissolving  almost  any  amount 
of  it. 

By  slow  spontaneous  evaporation,  its  alcoholic  solutions  yield  small  silky  needles 
arranged  in  groups.  Cold  water  does  not  dissolve  much  of  it,  but  it  is  tolerably 
soluble  in  boiling  water,  the  hot  solutions  on  cooling  depositing  it  in  shining  scales. 
Ether  does  not  dissolve  much  datiscine,  but  an  ethereal  solution,  when  allowed  to 
evaporate  as  slowly  as  possible,  yielded  it  in  larger  crystals  than  I could  have  obtained 
in  any  other  way.  When  water  is  added  to  an  alcoholic  solution  of  datiscine,  no 
precipitate  is  immediately  formed,  uidess  the  solution  is  greatly  concentrated ; but 
on  standing  for  some  time,  the  datiscine  separates  in  a very  pure  state,  consisting  of 
fine  crystals  having  a pale  yellow  colour.  The  datiscine  prepared  by  this  process 
was  found  to  contain  but  a minute  trace  of  ash.  When  datiscine  is  heated  to  about 
180°  C.,  it  melts,  and  if  the  heat  is  still  further  increased,  it  burns,  evolving  an  odour 
of  caramel,  and  leaves  a voluminous  charcoal.  If  datiscine  be  heated  in  a close 
vessel  while  a stream  of  dry  air  is  slowly  passed  over  it,  a small  quantity  of  a crystal- 
line substance  sublimes.  Datiscine  and  its  solutions  have  a very  bitter  taste ; and 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


143 


though  it  does  not  produce  any  change  upon  test  paper,  I think  there  is  reason  to 
regard  it  as  a feebly  acid  body.  It  dissolves  in  solutions  of  the  fixed  alkalies  and 
ammonia,  as  well  as  in  lime  and  baryta  water.  Their  solutions  have  a deep  yellow 
colour,  which  they  lose  on  the  addition  of  an  acid,  when  the  datiscine  is  precipitated, 
even  acetic  acid  precipitating  datiscine.  When  its  alkaline  solutions  are  not  too 
concentrated,  and  are  neutralized  while  hot,  the  datiscine  on  cooling  is  deposited  in 
small  crystals.  The  aqueous  solution  of  datiscine  is  precipitated  by  neutral  and  basic 
acetates  of  lead,  or  chloride  of  tin.  These  precipitates  have  a bright  yellow  colour. 

Salts  of  copper  produce  greenish  precipitates  ; those  of  peroxide  of  iron  deep  brown- 
ish-green precipitates.  The  datiscine  employed  in  these  experiments  had  been  puri- 
fied with  gelatine. 

The  lead  salts  form  such  gelatinous  precipitates,  that  they  could  not  be  washed, 
and  therefore  I was  unable  to  employ  them  in  determining  the  equivalents  of 
datiscine. 

Action  of  dilute  Sulphuric  Acid  on  Datiscine. 

When  an  aqueous  solution  of  datiscine  is  treated  with  a small  quantity  of  sulphuric 
acid,  the  clear  liquid,  after  being  boiled  for  a few  minutes,  becomes  turbid,  and  depo- 
sits a crystalline  substance.  This  is  collected  on  a filter,  and  the  clear  liquid  which 
passes  through,  after  it  has  been  made  strongly  alkaline  by  the  addition  of  potash, 
and  after  being  heated  to  212°,  throws  down  suboxide  of  copper.  When  the  excess 
of  sulphuric  acid  is  removed  from  another  portion  of  the  solution,  by  neutralizing 
with  carbonate  of  lead  or  baryta,  it  acquires  a sweet  taste;  and  when  evaporated  to 
the  consistence  of  a syrup,  on  standing  for  some  time,  it  formed  a semi-crystalline 
mass,  closely  resembling  honey.  This  experiment  showed  therefore  that  datiscine, 
like  salicine  and  similar  bodies,  belongs  to  the  class  of  glucosides,  and  is  a copulated 
compound  of  sugar  and  another  substance  which  1 shall  call  datiscetine. 

Datiscetine. — Datiscetine  in  its  general  appearance  and  properties  closely  resem- 
bles datiscine.  On  a closer  examination,  however,  these  two  substances  are  found 
to  differ  essentially,  both  in  composition  and  properties.  Datiscine,  when  prepared 
by  boiling  a solution  of  pure  datiscine  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  precipitates  in  the 
state  of  fine  needles,  which  are  nearly  colourless.  It  is  easily  soluble  in  alcohol;  a 
hot  alcoholic  solution,  on  cooling,  depositing  the  greater  portion  of  it  in  crystalline 
groups.  It  is  almost  insoluble  in  water,  and  consequently  datiscetine  is  abundantly 
precipitated  from  its  alcoholic  solutions  by  the  addition  of  water.  It  dissolves  in 
ether  to  almost  any  extent,  and  is  deposited,  on  the  evaporation  of  that  liquid,  in 
needles. 

These  properties  of  datiscetine  enable  us  to  obtain  it  in  a tolerably  pure  state  when 
even  very  impure  datiscine  is  employed  in  its  preparation.  The  mother-liquors  out 
of  which  datiscine  has  been  crystallized,  and  which  retain  a large  amount  of  impu- 
rities, can  be  used  in  the  following  way  for  the  preparation  of  datiscetine.  These 

u 2 


144 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


liquors  are  first  treated  with  basic  acetate  of  lead,  the  precipitate  is  collected  on  a 
filter  and  washed,  and  then,  having  been  distributed  through  water,  is  decomposed 
by  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  The  solution  which  has  filtered  from  the  precipitated 
sulphide  of  lead,  is  then  concentrated,  and  boiled  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid.  The 
datiscetine  produced  in  this  way  can  be  easily  separated  from  the  resinous  matter, 
as  the  latter  is  precipitated  before  the  formation  of  the  datiscetine  by  the  acid,  and 
adheres  to  the  bottom  of  the  flask.  By  dissolving  the  datiscetine  thus  obtained  in 
alcohol,  and  precipitating  it  by  the  addition  of  water,  it  is  rendered  tolerably  pure. 

Properties  of  Datiscetine. — Datiscetine  has  no  taste.  When  heated  it  melts  like 
datiscine,  but  the  heat  required  is  much  higher  than  is  necessary  for  that  body.  It 
crystallizes  again  on  cooling.  By  operating  very  cautiously,  a portion  of  the  datis- 
cetine may  be  sublimed  in  crystals.  This  sublimate,  however,  appears  to  be  altered 
datiscetine,  for,  when  recrystallized  out  of  ether,  it  has  a sweet  taste.  Datiscetine  on 
burning  does  not  emit  the  smell  of  caramel. 

Datiscetine,  like  datiscine,  dissolves  in  alkaline  solutions,  and  is  reprecipitated  by 
the  addition  of  an  acid.  When  an  alcoholic  solution  of  acetate  of  lead  is  added  to 
one  of  datiscetine,  also  dissolved  in  alcohol,  a finely  coloured  deep  yellow  precipitate 
is  obtained,  which  can  be  easily  washed  both  by  alcohol  and  water. 

This  precipitate  therefore  was  subjected  to  analysis. 

Analysis  of  Datiscine  and  Datiscetine. — The  lead  salt  of  datiscetine,  when  subjected 
to  analysis,  gave  the  following  results : — 

I.  0‘4555  grm.  gave  0 2060  grm.  PbO. 

0 2655  grm.  gave  0'3515  grm.  CO2  and  0'0405  grm.  HO. 

II.  0‘4310grm.  gave  0T945  grm,  PbO. 

III.  (from  another  preparation). 

0'4170  grm.  gave  O' 1907  grm.  PbO. 

0’3170  grm.  gave  0*4195  grm.  COg  and  0 0460  grm.  HO. 

These  analyses  give  the  formula  C30  Hg  Oio-l-2PbO. 


Required. 

Found. 

1. 

II. 

III. 

C,o  = 180-0 

36-63 

36-11 

36-09 

Hg  = 8-0 

1-63 

1-69 

1-61 

Ojg  = 80-0 

16-28 

— 

2PbO  = 223-4 

45-46 

45-22 

45-13 

45-73 

Analysis  of  Datiscetine. — The  different  preparations  were  all  dried  at  100'^  C.  in  a 
current  of  dry  air,  and  burned  in  the  gas  furnace. 

Datiscetine  crystallized  out  of  Alcohol. 

I.  0*3970  grm.  gave  0*9155  grm.  CO2  and  0*1280  grm.  HO. 

II.  0*4455  grm.  gave  1*0275  grm.  CO2  and  0*1485  grm.  HO. 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


145 


Datiscine  prepared  from  its  alcoholic  solution  hy  the  addition  of  IVater. 

III.  0”2045  giTti.  gave  0'4715  gnu.  CO2  and  0’0665  grrn.  HO. 

IV.  0*3680  grrn.  gave  O’S.'iOS  grrn.  CO2  and  0*1245  grm.  HO. 

The  per-centage  results  calculated  fi-om  these  analyses  agi’ee  very  closely  with  the 
formula  deduced  from  the  analyses  of  the  lead  salt,  as  shown  in  the  following  Table  : — 


Required. 

Found. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

€30=  180  62-94 

Hio=  10  3-49 

Oi2=  96  33-57 

62-89 

3-58 

62-90 

3-70 

62-88 

3-61 

63-03 

3-76 

Analysis  of  Datiscine  dried  in  a Liebig’s  drying  tube. 

A.  Datiscine  crystallized  out  of  alcohol. 

I.  0*3890  grm.  gave  0*7815  grm.  CO2  and  0*1780  grm.  HO. 

II.  0*3395  grm.  gave  0*6770  grin.  COg  and  0*1585  grm.  HO. 

B.  Datiscine  crystallized  out  of  alcohol  from  another  preparation. 

I.  0*2785  grm.  gave  0*5595  grm.  CO2  and  0*1315  grm.  HO. 

II.  0*2905  grm.  gave  0*5830  grm.  CO2  and  0*1385  grm.  HO. 

C.  Datiscine  prepared  with  gelatine  and  out  of  alcohol. 

0*4145  grm.  gave  0*8355  grm.  CO2  and  0*1925  grm.  HO. 

D.  Datiscine  separated  from  its  alcoholic  solution  by  the  addition  of  water. 

I.  0*1580  grm.  gave  0*3135  grm.  CO2  and  0*0770  grm.  HO. 

II.  0*1980  grm.  gave  0*3955  grm.  CO2  and  0*0925  grm.  HO. 

E.  Datiscine  precipitated  from  its  potash  solution  by  the  addition  of  acetic  acid. 
0*2985  grm.  gave  0*5940  grm.  CO2  and  0*1375  grm.  HO. 

The  substance  analysed  in  A.  contained  0*3  to  0*4  per  cent,  of  ash  ; that  in  B.  0 2 
to  0*25  per  cent. ; and  that  in  C.  0*12  per  cent.  No  allowance,  however,  was  made 
for  these  amounts  of  ash  in  calculating*  the  following*  numbers. 

The  datiscine  used  for  the  analyses  D.  and  E.  did  not  contain  any  appreciable 
quantity  of  ash. 

The  following  are  ihe  per-centage  numbers  calculated  from  the  above  analyses: — 


A. 

B. 

c. 

D. 

E. 

I. 

II. 

I. 

II. 

I. 

II. 

C 

54-79 

54-38 

54-79 

54-73 

54-97 

54-11 

54-48 

54-27 

H 

n 

5-08 

5-19 

5-25 

5-29 

5-16 

5-41 

5-19 

6-12 

146 


DK.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


When  the  decomposition  of  datiscine  into  datiscetine  and  sugar  is  taken  into  con- 
sideration, it  seems  probable  that  the  formula  for  datiscine  is — 

Datiscetine+Sugar  =:Datiscine 

C30H10OJ2  -1-Ci2  Hj2  Oj2~C42  H22  O24. 

That  formula  requires 

€42=252  54-08 

H22=  22  4-72 

024=192  41*20 

If  the  formula  C42H22O24  be  correct,  the  decomposition  of  datiscine  would  be 
analogous  to  salicine,  which,  when  treated  with  dilute  acid,  gives 

Salicine  =Sugar  -fSalicetine 
€25  Oh=C,2  H,2  0.2+C,4  He  O2 ; 

whilst  when  treated  with  emulsine, 

Salicine  = Sugar  -{-Saligenine— 2HO. 

C26  H,s  0,4=C,2  H42  0.2+Ch  Hs  O4  -2HO. 

The  above  formula  for  datiscine  is  confirmed  by  the  following  determinations  of 
sugar  formed  by  treating  a weighed  quantity  of  datiscine  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid. 
The  quantity  of  sugar  produced  was  estimated  by  Fehling’s  method  with  a standard 
solution  of  sulphate  of  copper.  Four  determinations  made  in  this  way  gave  the 
following  quantities  of  sugar  for  100  parts  of  dry  datiscine  ; — 

I.  41*6 

II.  39-5 

III.  39*3 

IV.  37*8. 

The  calculation  for  the  formula  C42  H22O24  requires  38'6  per  cent,  of  sugar. 

An  attempt  was  made  to  confirm  these  determinations  by  the  direct  estimation  of 
the  datiscetine  formed  during  the  decomposition  of  a given  weight  of  datiscine  by 
dilute  sulphuric  acid.  The  numbers  obtained,  however,  during  different  experiments 
did  not  correspond  with  each  other,  and  were  all  much  lower  than  theory  required. 
This  however  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  as  the  datiscetine,  though  very  differently 
soluble,  is  by  no  means  absolutely  insoluble  in  water.  Dilute  hydrochloric  acid  was 
found,  like  sulphuric  acid,  to  decompose  the  datiscine  into  sugar  and  datiscetine, 
and  even  on  boiling  an  aqueous  solution  of  pure  datiscine  for  some  hours  traces  of 
sugar  could  be  detected  ; thus  showing  that  a small  portion  of  the  datiscine  had  been 
decomposed.  It  has  been  shown  by  previous  experiments,  and  analysis  No.  8,  that 
datiscine  may  be  dissolved  in  cold  solutions  of  potash  without  decomposition.  When 
boiled,  however,  with  a concentrated  potash  lye  for  some  time,  decomposition  takes 
place,  and  the  precipitate,  thrown  down  by  the  addition  of  an  acid,  has  all  the  pro- 
perties of  datiscetine.  In  this  respect,  therefore,  datiscine  agrees  with  tannin  and 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


147 


similar  glucosides,  which  yield  the  same  products  when  acted  upon  by  acids  and 
alkalies ; tannin  from  nut-galls  being  equally  resolved  by  acid  and  alkalies  into 
gallic  acid  and  grape-sugar.  A solution  of  datiscetine,  when  left  for  some  time  in  a 
warm  place  in  contact  with  yeast,  did  not  ferment,  and  though  emulsine  was  also 
tried  no  separation  of  datiscetine  was  observed. 

Action  of  Nitric  Acid  on  Datiscine  and  Datiscetine. 

When  datiscetine  is  treated  in  the  cold  with  nitric  acid  of  ordinary  strength,  a 
violent  reaction  takes  place,  brown  vapours  are  disengaged,  and  a resinous  substance 
produced.  The  heat  evolved  by  the  reaction  is  sufficient  to  continue  it  till  all  the 
resinous  matter  is  dissolved  and  a dark  red  liquid  produced,  which  after  boiling 
becomes  yellow,  and  when  cautiously  evaporated,  deposits  on  cooling  crystals  of 
nitropicric  acid.  If  the  reaction  is  not  carried  too  far  no  oxalic  acid  is  formed,  and 
the  nitropicric  acid  obtained  is  very  pure,  forming  large  crystals  of  a pale  yellow 
colour.  The  following  experiments  show  that  these  crystals  are  really  nitropicric 
acid. 

When  treated  in  the  cold  with  a concentrated  solution  of  hypochlorite  of  lime,  the 
very  characteristic  smell  of  chloropicrine  is  instantaneously  observed.  The  addition 
of  a solution  of  potash  to  a second  portion  of  the  acid  threw  down  crystals  of  very 
pure  nitropicrate  of  potash,  which,  when  subjected  to  analysis,  gave  ]8‘04  per  cent, 
of  potash,  the  calculated  quantity  required  for  nitropicrate  of  potash  being  17‘66  per 
cent.  Datiscine  treated  in  the  same  way  yields  nitropicric  acid  as  well  as  oxalic  acid. 
The  formation  of  nitropicric  acid  by  the  action  of  strong  nitric  acid  on  datiscine  and 
datiscetine,  rendered  it  highly  probable,  that,  by  employing  dilute  nitric  acid,  less 
highly  oxidized  products  of  decomposition  might  be  obtained.  Datiscetine  was  there- 
fore boiled  with  dilute  nitric  acid,  i.  e.  nitric  acid  with  ten  parts  of  water;  the  crystals 
of  datiscetine  soon  dissolved,  and  a yellow  liquid  was  obtained,  which  when  treated 
with  a solution  of  perchloride  of  iron  gave  a blood-red  colour.  When  the  original 
solution  had  cooled,  pale  yellow  crystals  were  deposited.  These  crystals  were  very 
soluble  in  hot  water,  and  recrystallized  on  cooling. 

They  were  likewise  very  soluble  in  alcohol  and  ether,  and  when  deposited  by  slow 
evaporation  from  their  alcoholic  solutions,  they  formed  nearly  colourless  crystals  of 
considerable  size,  having  a fine  silky  lustre.  When  treated  with  hypochlorite  of  lime 
they  did  not  evolve  chloropicrine  in  the  cold,  but  readily  produced  that  compound 
when  gently  heated.  When  they  were  cautiously  heated  between  two  watch-glasses, 
a portion  of  the  substance  sublimed  in  colourless  needles.  When  this  acid  was 
heated  with  an  insufficient  quantity  of  water  to  dissolve  it,  it  melted  and  recrystallized 
on  cooling.  These  properties  agree  with  those  of  nitrosalicylic  acid.  In  order  to 
confirm  this  hypothesis  the  following  salts  were  prepared. 

On  saturating  a solution  of  the  acid  with  carbonate  of  baryta,  the  baryta  salt  was 
obtained  in  yellow  crystals.  From  their  solution  ammonia  threw  down  another 


148 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


yellovT-coloiired  baryta  salt.  A solution  of  the  acid  likewise  produced  a crystallized 
lead  salt.  The  ammoniacal  salt  was  obtained  in  orange-coloured  needles  by  satu- 
rating the  acid  with  ammonia  and  crystallizing  in  vacuo.  By  double  decomposition 
with  tlie  ammoniacal  salt  I prepared  the  silver  combination,  which,  like  all  the  others, 
agreed  in  its  properties  with  Marchand’s  description  of  nitrosalicylic  acid  salts. 
When  subjected  to  analysis,  0-1695  grm.  of  the  silver  salt  gave 

0-0630  grm.  of  silver,  equal  to  37' 17  per  cent., 
the  quantity  of  silver  in  nitrosalicylate  of  silver  being  37*24  per  cent.  When  datis- 
cine  was  allowed  to  stand  in  contact  with  dilute  nitric  acid  in  the  cold  it  gradually 
dissolved,  and  the  liquid  assumed  a yellow  colour.  The  solution,  when  left  to  evapo- 
rate in  vacuo,  was  found  to  contain  a mixture  of  oxalic  and  nitropicric  acids. 

Action  of  Potash  on  Datiscine  and  Datiscetine. 

It  was  stated  in  a previous  part  of  this  paper  that  datiscine  and  datiscetine  dis- 
solve in  solutions  of  caustic  alkalies  without  decomposition,  and  that  datiscine,  when 
boiled  for  some  time,  is  decomposed  with  the  formation  of  datiscetine.  It  only 
remained  therefore  to  try  the  action  of  fused  hydrate  of  potash.  Datiscetine,  when 
added  in  small  successive  portions  to  fused  hydrate  of  potash,  assumed  a deep  orange 
colour,  and  then  dissolved  with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen  gas.  When  the  disengage- 
ment of  hydrogen  ceased,  the  mass  was  dissolved  in  water  and  supersaturated  with 
hydrochloric  acid.  A partly  crystalline  resinous  substance  separated,  which,  by 
sublimation,  yielded  perfectly  colourless  long  crystals,  closely  resembling  benzoic 
cicid.  Their  solution  in  water  assumed,  on  the  addition  of  perchloride  of  iron,  that 
deep  violet  tint  which  disappears  on  the  addition  of  hydrochloric  acid,  and  is 
characteristic  of  salicylic  acid. 

Action  of  Chromic  Acid. 

Datiscetine  was  likewise  distilled  with  bichromate  of  potash  and  sulphuric  acid; 
the  liquid  which  came  over  did  not  contain  oily  drops,  but  had  the  smell  of  salicylous 
acid,  and  formed  with  persalts  of  iron  a purple-coloured  solution. 

A trace  of  salicylous  acid  appeared  therefore  to  have  been  produced. 

It  follows  therefore,  I think,  from  the  experiment  already  detailed,  that  datiscine, 
like  salicine,  phloridzine,  &c.,  is  a glucoside,  and  that  it  approaches  nearer  tosalicine 
than  any  other  glucoside,  with  the  exception  of  populine,  yet  known.  In  fact  I am 
not  aware  of  any  glucoside,  with  the  exception  of  salicine  and  populine,  which,  when 
treated  with  nitric  acid,  yields  nitrosalicylic  or  even  nitropicric  acid.  Phloridzine 
and  phloretine,  for  instance,  when  treated  with  nitric  acid,  are  stated  by  different 
experimenters  to  yield  only  oxalic  acid.  I repeated  the  experiment  with  phloretine, 
and  obtained  much  oxalic  acid,  while  the  residual  liquor  yielded  not  a trace  of  chlo- 
ropicrine  when  treated  with  hypochlorite  of  lime,  and  consequently  contained  no 
nitropicric  acid.  Quercitrine,  when  likewise  treated  with  nitric  acid,  was  also  found 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


149 


to  yield,  as  Rigaud  states,  only  oxalic  acid.  I had  no  opportunity  of  trying  escule- 
tine,  but  it  is  stated  by  those  who  have  investigated  it  to  yield  only  oxalic  acid. 

I will  conclude  this  account  of  datiscine  by  proposing  the  following  practical 
application.  As  is  well  known,  the  colouring  matter  of  madder  when  boiled  with 
dilute  sulphuric  acid  is  changed  into  sugar  and  garancine,  a new  dye-stuff,  which 
for  many  purposes  is  found  superior  to  that  originally  present  in  the  madder. 

Within  the  last  twelve  months,  Mr,  Lieshing,  by  treating  the  colouring  matters  in 
weld  and  quercitron  bark  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  has  resolved  them  into  new 
colouring  matters,  which  are  but  slightly  soluble  in  water,  and  are  found  nearly  three 
times  more  powerful  as  dye-stuffs  than  the  original  colouring  matters  from  which 
they  had  been  produced.  As  datiscine,  when  boiled  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  under- 
goes a perfectly  similar  transformation,  being  resolved  into  sugar  and  datiscetine, 
which  has  a much  higher  colouring  power  than  the  datiscine  which  has  produced  it, 
I have  not  the  least  doubt  that  silk  dyers,  who  may  hereafter  employ  solutions  of 
Datisca  cannahina,  will  find  it  highly  advantageous  to  convert  their  datiscine  into 
datiscetine  by  boiling  it  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid  ; as  the  process  is  an  extremely 
simple  one,  and  as  the  datiscetine,  from  its  sparing  solubility  in  water,  can  be  very 
readily  obtained  in  a state  of  comparative  purity. 

Ptychotis  Ajowan. 

The  Ptychotis  Ajowan  is  an  umbelliferous  plant,  well  known  in  India  for  its  aro- 
matic and  carminative  properties.  Its  seeds,  which  very  much  resemble  in  appear- 
ance those  of  the  caraway,  only  being  much  smaller,  have  a very  agreeable  odour, 
resembling  oil  of  thyme. 

On  distilling  these  seeds  repeatedly  with  water,  the  essential  oil  is  very  easily 
obtained,  amounting  to  between  five  and  six  per  cent,  of  the  weight  of  the  seeds. 
This  oil  has  a light  brown  colour,  and  possesses  an  agreeable  aromatic  odour.  Its 
specific  gravity  is  0'896  at  12°  C.,  and  upon  leaving  the  oil  for  some  time  in  an  open 
dish  to  spontaneous  evaporation,  the  temperature  at  the  time  being  comparatively 
low,  large  beautiful  crystals  were  deposited,  which  on  examination  were  found  to 
be  identical  with  the  stearopten  brought  from  India  by  the  late  Dr.  Stocks,  and 
described  by  me  in  a short  notice  published  in  the  number  of  the  ‘Pharmaceutical 
Journal’ for  December  1854.  When  the  crude  oil  is  submitted  to  distillation,  it 
begins  to  boil  at  160°  C.,  the  thermometer  rising  rapidly  to  174°  C.  The  thermo- 
meter then  rises  to  220°  C.,  and  the  oil  which  comes  over  at  this  temperature  crystal- 
lizes on  cooling.  The  residue,  which  does  not  immediately  crystallize,  on  remaining 
at  rest  for  some  time,  solidifies  into  a crystalline  mass,  the  crystals  having  precisely 
the  same  form  as  those  obtained  by  spontaneous  evaporation,  and  amounting,  in 
weight,  to  from  one-third  to  one- fourth  of  the  crude  oil.  As  it  seemed  probable  from 
these  experiments,  therefore,  that  Ptychotis  oil,  like  many  other  essential  oils,  is  a 


WDCCCLVI. 


x 


150 


DR.  JOHN  S'fENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


mixture  of  a liquid  hydrocarbon  and  of  a less  volatile  oxygenated  stearopten,  I pro- 
ceeded to  separate  these  compounds. 

The  Hydrocarhon. — The  more  volatile  portion  of  the  oil  was  redistilled,  that 
part  of  it  which  boiled  at  176°  C.  being  separately  collected.  After  having  been 
dried  with  chloride  of  calcium,  it  was  distilled  over  caustic  potash.  It  was  then 
repeatedly  treated  with  sodium,  and  again  cautiously  rectified.  The  hydrocarbon 
thus  obtained  was  perfectly  colourless,  refracted  light  strongly,  and  had  a pungent, 
aromatic  odour,  quite  dissimilar,  however,  from  that  of  oil  of  thyme.  Its  boiling- 
point  was  found  to  be  172°  C.,  a thermometer  being  placed  in  the  vapour,  and  its 
specific  gravity  0'854  at  12°  C.  The  following  analyses  show  that  it  is  isomeric  with 
oil  of  turpentine. 

I.  0T280  grrn.  gave  0'4145  grm.  carbonic  acid  and  0*1335  grm.  water. 

II.  0*1765  grm.  gave  0*5705  grm.  carbonic  acid  and  0*1825  grm.  water. 

Required.  Found. 

r , ^ . 

I.  II. 

C,o  = 60  88.23  88*31  88*15 

Hg  = 8 11*77  11*59  11*49 

Wlien  the  oil  was  treated  with  hydrochloric  acid  no  crystalline  compound  was 
obtained,  but  a brown  mobile  liquid,  having  an  agreeable  smell  similar  to  the  oil 
itself. 

The  Stearopten. — I have  already  mentioned  that  the  portion  remaining  in  the  retort 
from  the  distillation  of  the  crude  oil,  solidified  on  cooling  into  a crystalline  mass. 
When  cautiously  rectified  it  began  to  boil  at  218°  C.,  the  thermometer,  towards  the 
latter  part  of  the  distillation,  rising  to  225°  C.,  and  even  higher.  The  greater  por- 
tion, however,  came  over  at  about  222°  C.  The  first  portion  which  came  over  was 
quite  colourless,  and  had  a mild  aromatic  smell,  but  the  subsequent  portions  had  a 
more  pungent  odour,  and  a yellowish  colour.  The  more  volatile  and  by  far  the 
larger  portion  of  the  distillate  crystallized  on  cooling,  especially  when  agitated,  the 
crystals  assuming  a rhombohedral  form.  When  it  was  kept  quite  quiet,  however,  it 
remained  liquid  for  several  days,  but  on  being  plunged  into  a freezing  mixture  it 
immediately  solidified.  The  less  volatile  and  more  coloured  portion  of  the  distillate 
could  not  be  made  to  crystallize,  even  when  kept  in  a mixture  of  snow  and  salt. 
The  form  of  the  crystals,  obtained  by  the  solidification  of  the  distilled  stearopten, 
appeared  at  first  sight  to  differ  from  that  of  the  stearopten  from  India  given  me  by 
Dr.  Stocks  ; but,  upon  these  crystals  being  dissolved  in  the  hydrocarbon  of  the  oil, 
they  were  obtained  in  forms  precisely  similar  to  those  of  the  Indian  stearopten. 
This  was  also  the  case  when  either  the  crude  or  the  distilled  crystals  were  deposited 
from  their  solutions  in  alcohol  or  ether. 

Through  the  kindness  of  Professor  Miller  of  Cambridge,  I am  enabled  to  submit 
the  following  very  accurate  description  and  measurements  of  these  crystals. 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


151 


“The  white  crystals,  which  were  the  purer  portions  of  the  distilled  stearopten, 
have  the  following  figure  and  measurements: — 

“ Oblique-. — Symbols  of  the  simple  forms  : — 

a 100,  h 010,  c 001, 

m 1 1 0,  e 2 1 0,  r'  1 1 1 . 


Angles  between  normals  to  the  faces  : — 


be 

90 

0 

ca 

103 

23 

ab 

90 

0 

ea 

42 

17 

ec 

61 

6 

ma 

49 

21 

mb 

40 

39 

me 

98 

40 

cm' 

81 

20 

rc 

49 

18 

rm 

49 

22 

em 

61 

1 1 

re 

42 

13 

rm' 

76 

36 

mm' 

81 

18 

rr' 

108 

50 

“ Cleavage : — m,  c very  perfect. 

“ The  brown  crystals. 

Rhombohedral-. — Symbols  of  the  simple  forms,  a Oil,  r 100,  e OIL 
Angles  between  normals  to  the  faces : — 

aa!  60  0 

rr'  98  38 
re'  49  19 
ra!  40  41 

The  faces  e,  a,  are 


Cl" 


“ Cleavage  : — r very  perfect, 
narrow. 

“The  white  crystals  are  very  thin  in  a direction  perpendicular  to  the  faces  c.  It  is 
remarkable,  that  though  they  have  the  character  of  crystals  of  the  oblique  system, 
the  cleavages  make  with  each  other  very  nearly  the  same  angles  as  the  cleavages  of 
the  brown  crystals.  The  differences  fall  within  the  probable  errors  of  observation  : 
for  the  crystals,  being  very  tender,  and  frequently  having  lost  a portion  of  the  origi- 
nal surface  by  evaporation,  do  not  admit  of  very  accurate  measurement. 

“ In  the  brown  crystals  the  cleavages  are  parallel  to  the  faces  r,  r',  r",  and  the 

X 2 


152 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


angle  between  normals  to  rt^  is  98°  38'.  In  the  white  crystals  the  cleavages  are 
parallel  to  the  faces  c,  m,  m'.  The  angle  between  normals  to  m,  c is  98°  40',  and  the 
angle  between  normals  to  m and  the  face  parallel  to  rrJ  is  98°  42'.  I should  almost 
be  inclined  to  suppose  the  brown  crystals  to  have  actually  the  same  form  as  the  white 
ones,  the  difference  of  the  angles  rr',  r'r",  rr"  escaping  observation,  and  as  a conse- 
quence, that  they  have  the  same  chemical  constitution,  a slight  amount  of  impurity 
excepted.” 

The  following  are  the  results  of  the  analyses  of  the  stearopten  obtained  from  dif- 
ferent sources. 

A.  Stearopten  from  India*. 


I.  0'2385  grm.  gave  0*6955  grm.  CO^  and  0*2025  grin.  HO. 

II.  0*3405  grm.  gave  0*9910  grm.  COg  and  0*2815  grm.  HO. 

III.  0*1870  grm.  gave  0*5440  grm.  CO2  and  0*1550  grm.  HO. 


B.  Stearopten  obtained  by  the  spontaneous  evaporation  of  the  oil. 
0*3355  grm.  gave  0*9780  grm.  CO2  and  0*2735  grm.  HO. 


C.  Distilled  stearopten  recrystallized  from  the  oil. 

I.  0*2720  grm.  gave  0*8015  grm.  CO2  and  0*2225  grm.  HO. 

II.  0*3115  grm.  gave  0*9175  grm.  CO2  and  0*2630  grm.  HO. 

The  most  simple  formula  agreeing  with  the  numbers  obtained  by  the  above  analy- 
ses is  C,o  H7O,  as  shown  by  the  following  Table: — 


Required. 

Found. 

Cio  = 60  80-00 

H;  = 7 9*33 

0 = 8 10-67 

A. 

B. 

c. 

I. 

79*53 

9*43 

II. 

79*38 

9*19 

III. 

79*34 

9*19 

79*50 

9*06 

1. 

80*36 

9*09 

II. 

80-33 

9*38 

D.  Analysis  of  the  distilled  stearopten  not  recrystallized  out  of  the  oil. 

I.  0*4125  grm.  gave  1*1885  CO2  and  0*3375  grm.  HO.  * 

II.  0*3030  grm.  gave  0*8655  CO2  and  0*2475  grm.  HO. 


E.  Analysis  of  the  same  crystals  recrystallized  out  of  ether  and  pressed  between  folds 

of  blotting-paper. 

I.  0*5915  grm.  gave  1*7100  grm.  CO2  and  0*4860  grm.  HO. 

II.  0*2385  grm.  gave  0*6900  grm.  CO2  and  0*1975  grm.  HO. 

* In  the  December  Number  of  the  ‘Pharmaceutical  Journal’  for  1854  I published  an  analysis  of  the  stea- 
ropten made  from  a small  portion  of  the  substance  given  me  by  the  late  Dr.  Stocks.  'Phis  I have  subse- 
quently found  to  be  inaccurate,  and  the  analyses  given  above  are  substituted  in  its  stead. 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


153 


F.  Analysis  of  the  last  {now  crystallizahle)  part  of  the  distillation. 

I.  0*3980  griu.  gave  1*1195  grm.  CO2  and  0*3395  grm.  HO. 

II.  0*3875  grm.  gave  1*0930  grm.  CO2  and  0*3225  grm.  HO. 

From  the  foregoing  analyses  the  following  per-centage  results  were  obtained*. — 


n. 

E. 

F. 

I. 

II. 

I. 

II. 

I. 

II. 

C =78*58 

78*26 

78*84 

78*90 

76*71 

76*92 

H=  9*09 

9*06 

9*09 

9*20 

9*48 

9-25 

It  will  be  seen,  by  the  above  analyses,  that,  during  distillation,  the  stearopten 
undergoes  partial  decomposition,  the  amount  of  carbon  being  thus  decreased. 

The  analyses  D.  and  E.  were  evidently  made  with  an  impure  substance,  but  the 
analysis  F.  agrees  in  a surprising  manner  with  the  numbers  calculated  from  the 
formula  CisHnOj,  which  requires 

Ci5=:90  76*92 

H„=ll  9*40 

O2  =10 

I do  not  however  wish  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  formula  given  above,  or  the  double 
of  it,  viz.  C30  H22  O4,  is  the  true  formula  for  that  substance  ; nevertheless  I may  observe 
that  it  bears  a very  simple  relation  to  the  formula  of  the  stearopten  itself.  The  one 
may  be  regarded  as 

3C,o  He+4HO, 

and  the  other 

SCio  H6-1-3HO, 

that  is,  as  two  different  hydrates  of  the  same  hypothetical  hydrocarbon  Hg,  or 
C20  Hi2,  which  perhaps  might  have  been  obtained  by  distilling  the  stearopten  with 
anhydrous  phosphoric  acid. 

All  the  experiments  which  I made,  v/ith  a view  of  determining  the  basic  or  acid 
properties  of  the  stearopten,  gave  negative  results.  When  an  alcoholic  solution  of 
the  crystals  was  mixed  with  one  of  acetate  of  lead,  no  precipitate  was  formed,  and  the 
same  was  the  case  with  nitrate  and  ammonio-nitrate  of  silver.  The  crystals  of  the 
stearopten  dissolve  when  gently  warmed  in  oil  of  vitriol,  heat  being  evolved,  and  a 
purple  colour  produced.  On  standing  the  whole  solidified,  and  the  mass  thus  obtained 
was  very  soluble  in  water,  yielding  a colourless  solution,  with  drops  of  a red  oily  liquid 
floating  in  it,  produced  probably  by  the  action  of  the  sulphuric  acid  on  some  of  the 
hydrocarbon  adhering  to  the  stearopten.  When  dissolved  in  a small  quantity  of  hot 
water  the  copulated  acid  was  deposited,  on  the  cooling  of  the  solution,  in  fine  colour- 
less scaly  crystals.  I regret  that  the  small  quantity  of  the  substance  at  my  disposal 
prevented  me  from  determining  the  equivalent  of  the  stearopten  by  means  of  the  acid 
or  one  of  its  salts.  I obtained  both  the  baryta  and  the  lead  salt  in  a crystallized 


154 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


State  by  neutralizing  the  solutions  of  the  aeicl  with  the  carbonates  of  those  bases. 
Their  analysis,  however,  gave  irregular  results,  as,  owing  to  the  smallness  of  their 
quantity,  I could  not  prepare  them  in  a state  of  perfect  purity.  In  the  former  notice 
of  the  stearopten,  already  mentioned,  it  was  stated  that  by  long-continued  digestion 
with  concentrated  nitric  acid,  the  stearopten  was  dissolved,  and  a colourless  crystal- 
line acid  produced.  This  acid  is  neither  oxalic  acid,  nor,  apparently,  any  of  the 
nitrogenated  acids.  At  least  when  warmed  with  hypochlorite  of  lime  it  gives  off  no 
chloropicrine.  I suspect,  therefore,  that  it  will  be  found  to  be  a new  acid,  the 
examination  of  which  I hope  ere  long  to  lay  before  the  Society.  From  the  physical 
properties  and  the  elementary  composition  of  the  stearopten  of  the  Ptychotis  Ajowan, 
it  struck  nie  that  it  was  very  similar  to,  if  not  identical  with,  the  solid  portion  of  oil 
of  thyme,  described  by  Lallemand  in  his  recent  papers  on  that  substance* * * §.  This 
idea  induced  me  to  distil  the  stearopten  dissolved  in  oil  of  vitriol  with  an  excess  of 
peroxide  of  manganese.  As  anticipated,  besides  formic  acid,  there  came  over  yellow 
drops  which  solidified  on  cooling,  forming  large  crystals,  having  a peculiar  odour 
somewhat  resembling  iodine  or  kinone,  and  agreeing  in  every  respect  with  the  sub- 
stance described  by  Lallemand  as  thymol. 

Before  Lallemand  has  published  his  experiments  in  detail,  which  are  now  only 
known  from  the  two  notes  in  the  ‘Comptes  Rendus,’  I do  not  think  it  possible  to 
decide  with  perfect  certainty  whether  thymol  and  the  stearopten  of  the  Ptychotis 
are  really  identical  substances,  and  even  then,  perhaps,  it  will  be  found  necessary  to 
make  more  complete  experiments  with  the  stearopten  of  the  Ptychotis.  The  hypo- 
thesis of  their  identity,  however,  appears  to  me  highly  probable  from  the  great  simi- 
larity existing  in  the  most  important  properties  of  those  substances.  I may  add,  that 
I agree  with  Gerhardt'I'  in  considering  the  crytallizable  substance  obtained  by 
Arppe:}:  from  the  essential  oil  of  the  Horse-mint  {Monarda  pimctata,  huile  de  monarde), 
to  be  identical  with  Lallemand’s  thymol  and  Doveri’s§  less  volatile  portion  of  the 
oil  of  thyme. 

All  these  substances  gave  nearly  the  same  numerical  results  w^hen  subjected  to 
analysis. 

Doveri  observed  two  boiling-points,  one  between  175°  and  180°  C.,  and  the  other 
between  230°  and  235°  C. 

Lallemand  found  the  boiling-point  of  his  thymene  to  be  105°C.,  and  obtained  a 
liquid  hydrochloric  acid  compound. 

Arppe’s  crystallizable  substance  from  the  horse-mint  oil,  was  found  to  melt  at 
48°  C.,  to  solidify  at  38°  C.,  and  to  boil  at  224°  C. 

'riie  crystals  were  rhombohedral,  having  one  angle  of  97°  30'  and  another  of  82°  30'. 

* Compt.  Rend,  de  I’Acad.  xxxvii.  498,  and  xxxviii.  1022. 

t Traitd  de  Chimie  Organique,  iii.  610. 

I Annalen  der  Chemie  und  Pharmacie,  Iviii.  41  ; Chem.  Gaz.  December  1846. 

§ Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  [3]  xx.  174. 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


155 


The  Ptychotis  oil,  according  to  my  experiments,  contains  a hydrocarbon  boiling  at 
172°,  and  forming  a liquid  hydrochloric  acid  compound,  and  a crystallizable  sub- 
stance melting  at  44°  C.,  and  boiling  at  about  222°  C.  The  principal  angles  are  stated 


by  Professor  Miller  to  be — 

o > 

“ Crystallized  on  cooling  . . . rr'  =98  38 

Indian  crystals me  =98  40 

Indian  crystals mm'  = 8I  18 

Indian  crystals m'c  =81  20.” 


Two  properties,  however,  I observed  different  from  those  given  by  Lallemand,  viz. 
that  the  stearopten  oHhe  Ptychotis  is  precipitated  (in  aliquid  state)  from  its  alcoholic 
solutions  by  water,  and  that  potash  does  not  dissolve  it,  but  merely  causes  it  to 
assume  the  liquid  state. 

From  the  results  of  these  experiments,  therefore,  I think  we  may  confidently  infer 
that  the  stearopten  of  the  Ptychotis  oil,  and  the  crystallizable  oxygenated  portion  of 
oil  of  thyme,  examined  by  Lallemand,  if  not  identical,  as  I apprehend  they  are,  are 
certainly  extremely  similar  bodies. 

Gum  of  the  Gardenia  lucida,  Roxb.  {the  Decamalee  Gum  of  Scinde). 

The  specimen  of  this  gum  on  which  I operated  was  evidently  very  old.  It  formed 
a hard,  dry  mass,  of  a dark  brown  colour,  with  numerous  patches  of  greenish-yellow 
matter  disseminated  through  it.  It  had  but  a faint  odour,  unless  freshly  fractured  or 
gently  heated,  when  it  smelt  like  the  urine  of  the  oat.  A comparatively  recent  spe- 
cimen of  this  gum,  which  I saw  in  the  hands  of  the  late  Dr.  Stocks,  had  nearly  the 
consistence  of  candied  honey,  and  an  exceedingly  offensive  odour.  Dr,  Stocks 
informed  me  that  the  recent  gum  was  employed  as  a dressing  for  wounds,  as  it  kept 
off  the  flies. 

The  resin  was  digested  in  strong  spirits  of  wine  till  a saturated  solution  was 
obtained.  This,  on  cooling,  immediately  deposited  some  yellow,  amorphous  flocks. 
These  were  separated  by  filtration,  and  the  clear  liquid  slowly  evaporated  in  vacuo. 
On  standing  a few  days,  it  deposited  slender  golden-yellow  crystals,  about  half  an 
inch  in  length.  The  crystals  had  considerable  lustre,  and  were  very  brittle.  To  this 
crystalline  substance  I propose  giving  the  provisional  name  of  Gardenine. 

Gardenine  is  nearly  insoluble  both  in  cold  and  hot  water.  It  dissolves  pretty 
readily  in  alcohol,  but  much  less  easily  in  ether,  yielding  bright  yellow  solutions,  out 
of  which  it  crystallizes  on  cooling.  Alkalies,  such  as  ammonia,  do  not  appear  to 
increase  its  solubility.  It  is  slightly  soluble  in  hot  hydrochloric  acid.  Strong  oil  of 
vitriol  dissolves  gardenine  in  the  cold  with  the  production  of  a beautiful  dark  red 
colour.  On  adding  water  to  this  solution  the  gardenine  is  precipitated  apparently 
unchanged.  Its  alcoholic  solutions  give  no  precipitates  with  ammonio-nitrate  of 
silver,  or  with  basic  acetate  of  lead.  When  gardenine  is  digested  with  concentrated 


156 


DR.  JOHN  STEN HOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


nitric  acid,  it  is  rapidly  decomposed,  nitropicric  acid,  but  apparently  no  oxalic  acid, 
being  produced. 

Unfortunately,  from  the  very  small  quantity  of  resin  at  my  disposal,  I was  unable 
to  prepare  a suflScient  amount  of  the  gardenine,  either  to  subject  it  to  analysis,  or  to 
examine  it  more  particularly.  Dr.  Royle  has,  however,  already  commissioned  a large 
quantity  of  the  resin  from  India,  which  I trust  will  ere  long  enable  me  to  complete 
its  examination. 

Gardenine  appears  to  belong  to  the  tolerably  numerous  class  of  indifferent  crystal- 
lizable  resins,  of  which  it  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  beautiful. 

St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital, 

November  \Ath,  1855. 


Notes  on  Datisca  cannahina,  Ajowan  and  Decamalee  Gum,  received  from  Dr.  Royle, 

March  12,  1856. 

Ihl-heer,  the  stems  and  roots  of  Datisca  cannahina. 

“ Datisca  is  found  both  in  the  Old  and  New  World,  existing  in  the  latter  in  Penn- 
sylvania. D.  cannahina,  so  named  from  its  great  resemblance  to  the  Hemp-plant, 
extends  from  the  south  of  Europe  and  Asia  Minor  through  Iberia  to  the  valleys  of 
the  Himalaya.  I have  obtained  it  from  Cashmere  and  Kunawm,  and  found  it  at  the 
foot  of  the  Choor  and  Kedarkanta  mountains.  It  spreads  also  to  Nepal ; D.  nepa- 
lensis,  Don,  being  the  same  species.” — Royle,  Himal.  Bot.  p.  340. 

The  Ihl-heer  is  much  esteemed  in  the  Punjab  for  dyeing  silk  of  a yellow  colour. 
It  is  probable  that  some  of  the  silk  scarves  of  a lemon-yellow  colour,  which  were 
much  admired  by  artists  for  the  delicacy  of  their  colour,  had  been  dyed  by  this  sub- 
stance, as  it  is  there  esteemed  for  dyeing  silk  of  this  colour. 

Ajwain. 

“The  remaining  Umbelliferee,  which  are  known  in  India,  are  those  found  only  in 
a cultivated  state;  but  this  from  so  remote  a period  as  to  have  become  perfectly 
naturalized,  and  known  to  the  natives,  as  well  as  to  have  names  given  to  them  in  the 
languages  of  different  parts  of  the  country;  some  also  have  not  as  yet  been  found  in 
other  parts  of  the  world  ;” — “ as  Ptychotis  Ajowan,  known  everywhere  by  the  name 
Ajwain,  slightly  varied  in  different  districts.” — “ In  addition  to  these,  Ptychotis  syl- 
vestris,  nob.,  called  arub  ajwain,  is  used  as  a carminative  by  the  natives.” — Royle, 
Himalaya  Bot.  p.  229. 

“Dr.  Roxburgh,  in  describing  Ligusticum  Ajowan,  states,  he  cannot  conceive 
that  this  famous  Indian  plant,  arotnatic  in  smell,  pungent  in  taste,  used  both  by 
natives  and  Europeans  for  culinary  and  medicinal  purposes,  can  be  unknown  to 


DR.  JOHN  STENHOUSE  ON  VEGETABLE  PRODUCTS  FROM  INDIA. 


157 


European  botanists.  To  Ajwain  Persian  authors  assign  nankhwah  as  tlie  Arabic 
name.  This  is  the  (Nankhwah)  of  Avicenna,  written  nanachua  and  nanachue 

in  the  marginal  translation  of  Ammi,  in  the  Latin  edition  of  his  works  ; which  names 
are  quoted  under  Ammi  by  Mathiolus,  in  his  Commentaries  on  Dioscorides.  But 
in  Persian  works  on  Materia  Medica,  Aammi  is  also  given  as  the  Greek  synonym 
of  nankhwah,  that  is,  of  Ajwain,  which  Dr.  Roxburgh  justly  supposed  could  not  be 
unknown  to  Europeans.  This  plant  has  been  referred  by  M.  DeCandolle  to  the 
genus  Ptychotis,  which  brings  it  near  P.  copticum,  called  at  one  iuweAnmii  coptlcum: 
the  Ammi  itself  is  called  Cuminum  JEthiopicuni  and  regiiim ; the  latter  name  is 
translated  by  Kumoon  Mullookee,  and  is  given  as  a synonym  of  nankhwah  in 
Persian  authors.” — L.  c.  p.  230.  It  is  probable  therefore  that  this  Indian  species  of 
Ptychotis  has  long  been  employed  as  the  Aammi  of  the  Greeks. 

Decamalee. 

“ This  is  the  gum  of  the  Gardenia  lucida.  It  exudes  in  amber-coloured  trans- 
parent drops,  at  the  ends  of  the  young  shoots,  and  from  thence  is  collected.  It  is 
most  useful  in  preventing  vermin  from  breeding  in  wounds.  It  is  brought  to  Bombay 
from  the  interior.” — Bombay  List  of  Articles  for  Exhibition  of  \d>b\,  p.  30. 


MDCCCLVI 


Y 


i. 


Vvv;if 


'■  • yyi-^y-S  .,  ■ (i '$y-  y ■ 


I’l  ■ i'f  ■■/  :'’ -r  ^ ■ -rii  j 
. j i';-j!iJ  ■ ■-  ' '■  - 


. " '’I’i 

■;i,K'  :;Ura\iplfV; 

.■■■'-  i'.  'i  “ ■'7  "'  ■■.,■•.  ■ 

■'-,i  "il  ; : S'i.v ; ! , .>■  • 

. -■  - ■■'’  ■ • 

. . 'V  -i',/  . . ■ . r 

. ■ > r .,•  ■ • ^ 


.j ; . 


r,  .•■i-J  L ,'.  w.  '.=  'fi'i  ■ ■ ■ 


t;:  ■ '■''  '"'■  . ' 


i‘. 


V'Af.^iS!.4w4S'  'A-:'. 


;•'  ;■ ; 


. ■■>^'  ^ : 


'A 


-V; 


J- 


. • • > V'.  ■;...  - 


'■ ' ';.  .■■'■',■  ■ .,  ■ v-'’,7'  ■ v Vli, 

■V  ■ ,.  .,  :..t^.'-v.i:./,- 

' ’ •'--  ■ r 

..A, A -' ' ' 


7 


J. 


''■n 


'.if\ 


'Ja.. 


. M' 


[ 159  ] 


IX.  Experimental  Researches  in  Electricity. — Thirtieth  Series.  By  Michael 
Faraday,  Esq.,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Fullerian  Prof.  Chem.  Royal  Institution,  Foreign 
.Associate  of  the  Acad.  Sciences,  Paris,  Ord.  Boruss.  Pour  le  Mirite,  Eq.,  Memb. 
Royal  and  Imp.  Acadd.  of  Sciences,  Petershurgh,  Florence,  Copenhagen,  Berlin, 
Gottingen,  Modena,  Stockholm,  Munich,  Bruxelles,  Vienna,  Bologna,  Commander 
of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  Sfc.  Sfc. 

Received  October  24, — Read  November  15  and  22,  1855. 


§ 38.  Constancy  of  differential  magnecrystaUic  force  in  dfferent  media. 

§ 39.  Action  of  heat  on  magnecrystals. 

§ 40.  Effect  of  heat  upon  the  absolute  magnetic  force  of  bodies. 

3363.  Whilst  using-  lines  of  force  as  a true,  searching,  and  as  yet,  never-failing 
representative  of  the  one  form  of  power  possessed  by  paramagnets,  diamagnets,  and 
electric  currents, — and  whilst  endeavouring  simultaneously  to  make  the  principle  of 
representation  a key  to  new  phenomena,  and  subjecting  the  principle  itself  to  rigid 
cross  examination, — I have  had  occasion  to  examine  the  action  of  certain  magnetic 
bodies  in  different  media  and  at  different  temperatures ; and  as  the  results  are  true, 
and  must,  therefore,  be  valuable  in  any  view  of  the  cause  of  magnetic  action,  I 
have  thought  them  worthy  of  presentation  to  the  Royal  Society. 

3364.  When  an  unmagnetized  but  magnetic  body,  placed  in  a magnetic  field,  is 
affected  by  the  forces  thrown  upon  it,  and  under  their  action  sets,  or  takes  up  a 
definite  position,  the  effect  may  depend  upon  its  peculiar  molecular  condition,  or 
upon  its  relation  to  the  surrounding  medium,  or  upon  both  conjointly,  or  upon  one 
or  both  combined  with  temperature.  Some  of  each  of  these  conditions  have  been 
the  objects  of  my  investigations. 

§ 38.  Constancy  of  differential  magnecrystaUic  force  in  dfferent  media. 

3365.  When  a sphere  or  cylinder  formed  from  a crystal  of  calcareous  spar  or  of 
bismuth  is  suspended  in  a particular  direction  in  the  magnetic  field,  it  points  with 
considerable  power,  whereas  if  formed  out  of  amorphous  or  granular  carbonate  of 
lime  or  bismuth,  it  has  no  such  tendency.  In  the  latter  case,  it  (by  reason  of  its 
relation  to  the  surrounding  medium)  is  urged  to  move  from  stronger  to  weaker  places 
of  force ; in  the  former  case,  also,  it  has  the  same  tendency,  but  the  power  of  point- 
ing, which  it  possesses  in  addition,  has  no  relation  to  the  medium  about  it,  but  only 
to  the  difference  in  strength  of  the  magnetic  force,  as  developed  in  different  directions 
within  the  sphere  itself.  Such  effects  constitute  the  branch  of  science  known  under 

Y 2 


160  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 

the  name  of  magnecrystallic  action.  Early  experiments  (2499-2501.)  showed  that, 
with  respect  to  bismuth,  the  relation  between  the  magnetic  force  in  the  axial  and 
equatorial  directions,  was  unchanged  by  varying  the  surrounding  medium  from  water 
to  a solution  of  sulphate  of  iron.  This  equality  has,  perhaps,  been  confirmed  by 
other  philosophers,  and,  it  may  be,  with  other  substances ; but  not  being  aware  of 
any  strict  investigation,  I found  it  needful  in  relation  to  my  own  views,  which 
required  just  now  proofs  more  certain  than  those  quoted,  to  enlarge  and  extend  the 
experimental  results. 

3366.  The  method  I have  employed  to  compare  the  possible  variations  of  force 
produced  by  different  circumstances,  has  been  to  suspend  the  object,  a magnecrystal 
for  instance,  by  a torsion  fibre  or  wire  ; — to  place  it  in  the  magnetic  field  ; — to  adjust 
the  torsion  index  so  that  it  should  be  at  zero  when  the  crystal  had  taken  its  position 
of  stable  equilibrium  ; — then  to  put  on  right-handed  torsion  until  the  crystal  had 
attained  the  point  of  unstable  equilibrium,  or  the  upsetting  point,  on  that  side ; and 
after  having  noted  the  torsion  required,  to  reverse  the  motion  and  put  on  left-handed 
force  until  the  upsetting  point  on  the  opposite  side  was  attained.  Either  of  these 
forces,  minus  the  deflection,  is  the  measure  of  the  upsetting  force;  and  therefore  the 
sum  of  these  two  observations,  minus  the  number  of  degrees  through  which  the 
crystal  has  moved  in  passing  from  one  upsetting  point  to  the  other,  may  be  con- 
sidered as  expressing  the  force  which  solicits  the  crystal  to  retain  its  stable  position 
of  rest.  By  thus  making  the  observations  on  both  sides  of  zero,  the  effect  of  set  in 
the  suspending  torsion  thread  could  be  included  in  a regular  and  compensatory 
manner ; — two  definite  starting-points  (the  upsetting  positions)  were  ensured  ; — and 
also  a large,  i.  e.  a sensitive  expression  of  the  force  to  be  measured  was  obtained. 

3367.  It  is  evident,  that,  when  a magnecrystal  is  suspended  in  the  magnetic  field, 
and  torsion  force  is  gradually  applied  to  deflect  it  from  its  position  of  rest,  that  force 
will  grow  up  and  carry  the  crystal  round,  until  at  last  the  latter  will  attain  a position 
at  which  the  setting  forces  of  the  crystal  are  equal  to  the  torsion  force,  but  beyond 
Avhich  the  former  will,  by  further  motion  of  the  crystal,  fall  more  rapidly  than  the 
latter,  so  that  the  least  additional  torsion  force  will  carry  the  crystal  past  that  posi- 
tion and  cause  it  to  revolve  through  many  degrees.  This  position  (the  upsetting' 
point)  being  one  of  unstable  equilibrium,  is  easily  observed  experimentally;  and,  by 
careful  manipulation  with  the  torsion  index,  it  is  also  easily  attained.  When  the  two 
upsetting  points  are  observed,  the  whole  number  of  degrees  of  torsion  required  to 
proceed  from  one  to  the  other,  is  an  excellent  measure  of  the  setting  force  of  the 
object.  When  the  crystal  is  in  the  form  of  a cube  or  sphere  and  suspended  between 
flat-faced  poles,  the  two  upsetting  points  are  nearly  at  an  angle  of  45°  with  the  axial 
line,  and  tlie  angle  between  them  is  near  upon  90°.  I have  found  this  angle  to  vary 
for  the  different  objects  employed  ; but,  whilst  the  position  of  the  poles,  &c.  remained 
the  same,  not  for  the  same  object,  however  the  force  might  vary.  It  has  therefore  to 
be  ascertained,  experimentally,  for  each  object,  in  any  one  series  of  observations  where 


CONSTANCY  OF  MAGNECRYSTALLIC  FORCE  IN  DIFFERING  MEDIA.  161 

the  force  only  varies ; for  being  included  in  the  motion  of  the  torsion  index  it  has  to 
be  subtracted,  as  a constant  quantity,  from  the  observed  result,  and  then  leaves  the 
true  expression  of  the  torsion  force  exerted  between  the  upsetting  points. 

3368.  The  magnet  employed  was  that  great  one  constructed  by  Logeman,  and 
sent  to  the  Exhibition  of  1851.  It  could  sustain  a weight  of  430  lbs.,  and  is,  I 
believe,  very  constant  in  power.  It,  with  the  torsion  balance  now  used,  is  described  in 
the  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution*.  The  sliding  pole-pieces  were  of  square  iron, 
and  presented  either  pointed  terminations  towards  each  other,  or  two  flat  faces,  1*7  inch 
square,  which  could  be  brought  up  to  the  opposite  sides  of  the  troughs  or  vessels 
containing  the  different  fluids  and  media  required  for  the  experiments.  These  vessels 
were  of  various  sizes  and  kinds  ; but  the  outer  ones  were  usually  of  copper,  with  flat 
sides,  that  the  pole-pieces  might  bear  against  them,  and  be  thus  preserved  in  their 
position  during  the  progress  of  a single  experiment  or  a series  of  comparative  results. 

3369.  The  torsion  suspender  was  about  24-5  inches  in  length  ; and  was  either 
a fine  platinum  wire,  of  which  28‘5  inches  weighed  1 grain,  or  a finer  wire  of  silver; 
or  a bundle  of  cocoon  silk  fibres.  The  last  was  useful  for  certain  delicate  experi- 
ments, but  could  not  be  employed  except  in  limited  cases ; for  its  torsion  force  is 
liable  to  much  variation  under  the  influence  of  the  vapour  of  water,  camphine,  &c. 
All  these  suspenders  are  liable  to  more  or  less  of  set,  and  that  varies  with  the 
vibrations  to  which  the  apparatus  is  snbjeet ; but,  by  equalizing  the  time,  by 
paying  attention,  and  especially  by  alternating  and  combining  right-  and  left-handed 
observations  (3366.),  the  effect  of  this  set  may  be  obviated  to  a very  great  degree. 
The  torsion  wire  terminated  below  by  a hook,  made  out  of  a flat  piece  of  copper 
foil,  intended  to  receive  on  its  edge  a corresponding  hook,  attached  to  the  object 
submitted  to  experiment. 

3370.  The  crystal,  or  other  object,  was  held  by  one  turn  of  a fine  copper  wire, 
which  was  continued  upwards  for  5’7  inches,  and  terminated  by  a flat  hook  like  that 
just  described.  In  this  way  different  objects  could  be  attached  to  the  torsion  wire, 
yet  without  any  possibility  of  loose  or  uncertain  motion  about  the  point  of  attach- 
ment. Each  loop  had  a horizontal  bristle  fixed  to  it,  and  this,  by  its  position,  not 
only  showed  the  place  of  the  crystal  or  other  object  beneath,  but  being  retained 
between  moveable  stops  associated  with  a horizontal  scale,  it  indicated  when  the 
crystal  was  approaching  the  upsetting  points,  and  being  held  within,  and  governed 
by,  the  stops,  allowed  them,  through  it,  to  govern  the  crystal. 

3371.  The  balance  was  enclosed  by  glass,  to  shut  out  currents  of  air  as  much  as 
possible  and  prevent  their  production. 

3372.  Experiments  on  the  differential  magnecrystallic  force  of  bodies  surrounded 
by  different  media  required  the  bodies  to  be  immersed  in  those  media;  and,  as  the 
latter  varied  from  one  another  in  specific  gravity,  so  they  exerted  different  degrees 
of  buoyancy  upon  the  same  crystal,  and  thereby  caused  different  degrees  of  tension 

* January  21,  1853,  vol.  i.  p.  230. 


162  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 


upon  the  torsion  wire ; — thus,  a crystal  of  tourmaline,  which  in  air  hung  with  the 
weight  of  40‘4  grains  upon  the  wire,  would  in  water  hang  with  the  weight  of  27‘3 
grains,  and  in  phosphorus  with  the  weight  of  only  15’5  grains.  As  this  variation 
would  slightly  change  the  value  of  the  torsion  degrees,  compensating  weights  of  pure 
copper  were  added  at  the  lower  end  of  the  torsion  wire  (3369.),  ?.  e.  5*7  inches  above 
the  place  of  the  crystal  and  magnetic  poles. 

3373.  Bismuth  crystal. — A piece  of  uniformly  crystallized  bismuth  was  reduced  to 
the  form  of  an  octagonal  prism,  the  height  of  which  was  0*45,  and  its  average 
diameter  about  0‘28  of  an  inch ; its  weight  was  77  grains.  When  suspended  per- 
pendicularly its  magnecrystallic  axis  was  horizontal,  and  therefore  set  in  the  magnetic 
field,  which  existed  between  the  flat  faces  of  the  pole-pieces  (3368.)  fixed  at  the 
distance  of  1 inch  apart.  The  torsion  suspender  was,  in  this  case,  a bundle  of  ten 
cocoon  silk  fibres,  only  5 inches  in  length.  The  temperature  was  68°  Fahr.  The 
torsion  between  the  upsetting  points  was  as  follows,  for  four  different  media,  differing 
much  in  their  magnetic  relation  : — 


Air 2250 

Absolute  alcohol 2269 

Water 2230 


Saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  . . 2234 

In  another  set  of  experiments,  carbonic  acid  gas  was  compared  with  alcohol  and 
water,  and  the  result  was  the  same  in  it  as  in  them. 

3374.  Desiring  to  include  a highly  diamagnetic  medium  in  the  list,  I employed 
phosphorus  ; but, as  the  heat  required  to  melt  it  is  competent  to  change  the  magnetic 
force  of  the  bismuth  crystal  (3399.),  it  was  requisite  to  compare  it  with  water  at  a 
like  temperature : — this  was  done,  the  temperature  of  160°  Fahr.  being  chosen.  The 
results  came  forth  as  follows torsion  force  in  water  1945°;  in  melted  phosphorus 
1950°;  and  are  therefore  to  be  considered  alike. 

3375.  The  liquids  employed  as  surrounding  media  were  contained  in  wide  thin 
glass  tubes,  placed  within  the  copper  trough  against  which  the  magnetic  poles  rested 
(3368).  Much  care  was  requisite  in  the  use  of  phosphorus.  This  substance  was 
covered  with  water,  and  when  the  bismuth  was  passed  through  the  water  into  the 
phosphorus,  although  it  did  not  wet  with  phosphorus,  still  the  latter  acted  slightly 
upon  it,  producing  a few  minute  bubbles  of  adhering  gas.  These  were  not  found  on 
after  occasions,  when  the  same  crystal  was  employed.  It  was  also  necessary  that 
the  phosphorus  should  be  perfectly  clean  and  good.  Films  soon  form  in  it,  and 
more  especially  at  the  contact  of  the  phosphorus  and  the  covering  water ; and  these, 
clinging  to  the  suspending  wire,  embarrass  the  vibrations  of  the  immersed  crystal 
and  render  them  uncertain;  the  least  portion  of  burnt  phosphorus  makes  these  films 
abundant.  Whenever  they  appeared,  fresh  clean  phosphorus  was  employed. 

3376.  From  these  results  and  from  many  others  not  described,  it  follows  that  the 
differential  magnecrystallic  force,  i.  e.  the  relations  of  the  magnetic  force  in  different 


CONSTANCY  OF  MAGNECIIYSTALLIC  FORCE  IN  DIFFERING  MEDIA. 


163 


directions  in  a crystal  of  bismuth,  is  not  altered  by  great  changes  in  the  magnetic 
character  of  the  medium  surrounding  it;  since  they  remain  the  same  in  phosphorus, 
alcohol,  water,  carbonic  acid  gas,  air,  and  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  a list 
which  includes  both  diamagnetic  and  paramagnetic  substances. 

3377.  Tourmaline. — As  a paramagnecrystal,  and  therefore  in  contrast  with  bismuth, 
a black  tourmaline  was  selected,  regular  in  form,  and  nearly  0’37  of  an  inch  in 
diameter.  A piece,  0-36  in  length,  was  cut  off  with  flat  ends;  its  weight  was  40*4 
grains,  and  its  specific  gravity  3*076.  When  suspended  between  the  flat-faced  poles 
with  the  axis  of  the  prism  horizontal,  that  axis  set  strongly  in  the  equatorial  direction, 
by  virtue  of  the  differential  magnecrystallic  force.  On  using  a silk  suspension  (3369.) 
the  necessary  upsetting  torsion  force  was  as  follows : — 


Temp.  Torsion  force. 

In  air 57°  ...  2534 

In  alcohol * . . 56  ...  2546 

In  water 56  ...  2541 


In  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron  saturated  ...  57  ...  2632 

3378.  These  results  sufficiently  indicate  that  the  torsion  force,  and  therefore  the 
differential  magnecrystallic  force,  was  alike  for  the  same  temperature,  whatever  the 
character  of  the  surrounding  medium.  But  to  give  more  certainty,  the  fine  silver 
torsion  wire  (3369.)  was  employed,  and  with  the  following  results : — 


Water . . . . 

Olive  oil 

Alcohol 

Air 

Saturated  solution  of  protosuljihate  of  iron 


Temp. 

Torsion  for 

65° 

. . . 1082 

. 65 

. . . 1085 

. 65 

. . . 1081 

. 65 

. . . 1079 

. 65 

. . . 1081 

which  sufficiently  prove  that  the  magnecrystallic  force  remained  the  same  in  degree, 
notwithstanding  great  variations  in  the  character  of  the  surrounding  media.  The 
angle  between  the  upsetting  points  was  90° ; but  it  has  not  been  abstracted  from  the 
experimental  results,  inasmuch  as  that  correction  would  make  no  difference  in  their 
character. 

3379.  The  native  'protocarhonate  of  iron  is  very  magnecrystallic,  being  also  as  a 
whole  highly  paramagnetic.  A rhomboid  was  selected,  and,  being  placed  with  its 
greatest  length  vertical  and  its  shortest  axis  horizontal,  was  reduced,  by  grinding  at 
the  sides,  to  a rough  octagonal  prism,  having  an  upright  length  of  0*6  of  an  inch,  and 
an  average  horizontal  breadth  of  0*37 ; — the  weight  was  47*5  grains  ant!  the  magne- 
crystallic axis  horizontal.  The  magnetic  force  of  this  cr3^stal  was  so  great,  that 
though  the  fine  silver  torsion  wire  (3369.)  was  employed  with  it,  the  pole-pieces  had 
to  be  opened  to  the  full  extent  of  the  magnet,  i.  e,  to  4*7  inches,  before  the  torsion 
force  was  sufficiently  reduced  to  render  the  set  of  the  crj^stal  manageable.  To  lessen 
the  power  of  the  magnet  by  a cross  bar  of  iron  at  the  sides,  I considered  objection- 


164  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 


able;  inasmuch  as  that  bar  might  take  more  or  less  of  charge  during  the  course  of 
the  experiments,  and  so  render  the  magnetic  power  of  the  field  in  some  degree  variable. 
When  the  crystal  was  placed  in  succession  in  different  media  at  the  temperature  of 


66°FAHfi.,  the  results  were  as  follows; — 

In  water 542  of  torsion, 

In  air 543  of  torsion, 

In  saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  . 542  of  torsion, 


results  which  perfectly  accord  with  those  obtained  in  the  former  cases. 

3380.  The  red ferroprussiate  of  potassa  is  a prismatic  salt,  which  sets  most  strongly 
in  the  magnetic  field,  when  the  axis  of  the  prism  is  horizontal  and  the  plane  passing- 
through  the  obtuse  linear  angles  is  vertical.  A crystal,  reduced  in  length  and  width 
until  these  were  nearly  alike,  and  having  therefore  little  or  no  mere  paramagnetic  or 
diamagnetic  set  (for  the  salt  is  very  slightly  paramagnetic  in  air),  was  placed  in  the 
magnetic  field,  surrounded  first  by  air  and  then  by  camphine ; the  results  were  as 
follows: — in  air  the  tension  force  was  314,  and  in  camphine  316;  the  accordance 
being  most  close  with  the  results  before  obtained. 

3381.  Thus  the  old  conclusions  (2499-2501.)  are  confirmed  ; there  appears  to  be 
no  experimental  difference  in  the  proportion  of  the  force  developed  in  different  direc- 
tions in  a magnecrystal  by  the  action  of  magnetic  induction,  whatever  the  nature  of 
the  medium  surrounding  it,  and  whatever  the  difference  in  paramagnetic  and 
diamagnetic  character  of  the  crystals,  or  the  media  employed ; crystals  differing  as 
much  as  bismuth  and  carbonate  of  iron,  and  media  differing  as  greatly  as  phosphorus 
and  saturated  solution  of  sulphate  of  iron,  having  been  employed. 

3382.  Theoretically,  however,  there  ought  to  be  small  differences  produced,  and 
according  to  my  view  of  the  lines  of  force,  as  true  representations  of  the  magnetic 
power,  they  ought  to  be  of  the  following  nature.  If  a magnecrystal  be  subjected  to 
the  action  of  a constant  magnet,  whilst  the  magnetic  field,  and  the  whole  space 
around  the  magnet,  are  occupied  by  a common  medium,  as  air,  and  then  a small  part 
of  the  field  around  the  crystal  be  occupied  by  another  medium  as  in  the  experiments 
described,  then,  if  the  mediiun  be  a better  conductor  of  the  force,  i.  e.  be  more  para- 
magnetic than  the  former  medium,  it  ought  to  determine  more  force  across  that 
place  ; and  that  increase  of  force  would  be  the  same  as  if  a stronger  magnet  had  been 
employed,  and  so  the  magnecrystal  should  show  a variation: — acting  as  if  more  highly 
affected  than  before,  its  differential  power  in  two  directions  should  appear  greater. 
Or,  if  the  part  of  the  medium  around  the  crystal  were  replaced  by  a medium  more 
diamagnetic,  /.  e.  a worse  conductor,  then  less  force  would  pass  in  that  direction  and 
the  magnecrystal  should  appear  weaker  than  before,  and  so  point  with  less  force. 
Even  the  very  shape  of  these  partial  substitutions  should  have  an  influence,  according 
as  it  might  extend  in  the  axial  or  the  equatorial  direction, 

3383.  But  if  uU  the  medium  reached  by  the  powers  of  the  magnet  were  changed 
at  once,  and  not  that  part  only  about  the  magnecrystal  in  the  magnetic  field,  then 


CONSTANCY  OF  MAGNECRYSTALLIC  FORCE  IN  DIFFERING  MEDIA. 


165 


the  use  of  a more  paramagnetic  or  better  conducting  medium  should  have  a con- 
trary effect  and  make  the  magnecrystal  appear  less  affected ; for  the  transmission  of 
power  would  be  increased  (proportionally)  everywhere  else,  more  than  through  it. 
On  the  contrary,  the  use  of  a more  diamagnetic  medium  would  have  the  reverse 
effect,  and  the  transmission  of  force  decreasing  everywhere  else  more  than  through 
the  crystal,  would  make  the  latter  appear  to  increase  in  its  peculiar  condition  of  force. 
I am  assuming  that  the  magnet  is  unchangeable  in  power,  and  therefore  must  exert 
the  like  external  force  in  every  case  ; and  after  all,  I conclude  that  these  effects  would 
be  so  small,  as  not  to  be  observable  except  by  the  use  of  media  differing  far  more 
from  each  other  than  those  we  at  present  possess.  For  my  own  part,  I feel,  even  now, 
that  the  hypothesis  of  magnetic  fluids  cannot  exist  in  the  presence  of  conjoint  para- 
tnagnetic  and  diamagnetic  phenomena;  but  considerations  such  as  those  above,  may 
be  able  to  do  good  service  in  arranging  hypotheses  in  their  right  places  and  giving 
them  their  true  value. 

3384.  The  aptitude  of  a magnecrystal,  when  in  the  magnetic  field,  to  assume  a 
maximum  conductive  state  in  a given  direction,  makes  it  similar  in  action  to  a per- 
manently magnetized  sphere ; and  therefore,  however  diamagnetic  it  may  be,  and 
however  slight  its  magnecrystallic  condition,  still  it  will  set  in  a definite  direction, 
i.  e.  with  its  chief  magnecrystallic  axis*  parallel  to  the  magnetic  axis  of  the  field, 
even  if  it  could  be  surrounded  by  a fluid  medium  having  a paramagnetic  condition 
equal  to  that  of  iron.  And  here  I wish  to  correct  an  expression  which  has  been 
allowed  in  aformer  series  of  these  Researches  (3158.),  where  it  is  said,  that  ‘^an  ordi- 
nary magnetic  needle  cannot  show  polarity  in  a field  of  equal  force.”  It  cannot  of 
course  exist  in  association  with  a field  of  equal  force,  for  it  would  itself  destroy  the 
eqaalityof  the  force,  unless  the  medium  around  it  were  iron  as  high  in  paramagnetic 
power  as  itself;  but  even  in  such  a case  it  would  show  polarity  when  deflected,  for  its 
magnetic  axis  would  correspond  in  quality  with  a chief  magnecrystallic  axis,  and  it 
would  always  set  or  point  in  the  accordant  direction,  i.  e.  axially  in  the  magnetic  field. 

3385.  Magnecrystals  may  be  employed  in  experiments  to  measure  magnetic  force 
just  as  needles  are,  but  in  some  points  of  view  they  are  philosophically  more  accurate. 
A magnecrystal  is  equal  in  quality  in  all  its  parts;  it  appears  to  take  up  precisely 
the  same  state  under  the  same  inductive  force  and  to  have  no  coercitive  or  retentive 
faculty;  whereas  the  force  of  a needle  changes  easily  under  inductive  action,  and 
when  that  action  ceases  the  return  towards  its  former  condition  is  uncertain.  It  is 
also  independent  of  the  surrounding  medium.  Hence  it  may,  in  some  cases,  be 
found  to  supply  a more  true  and  certain  standard  of  force,  in  the  amount  of  tension 
required  for  its  deflection. 

3386.  That  magnecrystals  are  attracted  or  repelled  wdth  different  degrees  of  force 
in  different  directions,  has  been  long  ago  established  by  myself  (2841.)  and  others. 

* Thomson  on  Magnecrystallic  Axis,  Philosophical  Magazine,  1851,  vol.  i.  p.  177. 


MDCCCLVI. 


Z 


166  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 

As  the  difference  of  force  remains  constant  when  the  surrounding'  medium  is  varied 
(338L),  it  follows  that  the  possibility  exists  of  finding'  a magnecrystal  and  a medium 
so  related,  that  the  attraction  and  repulsion  of  the  crystal,  as  a whole,  should  be  con- 
vertible terms  depending  upon  the  position  of  the  crystal  in  regard  to  the  lines  of 
force.  I was  desirous  of  verifying  this  result  experimentally,  and  especially  in  rela- 
tion to  the  case  of  mere  space  or  a vacuum  about  the  crystal,  and  therefore  seleeted 
certain  magnecrystals  which  promised  favourable  results,  and  yielded  the  following 
illustrations. 

3387-  The  tourmaline  crystal  already  employed  (3377-)  was  found  paramagnetic,  not 
merely  in  water  and  air,  but  also  in  a saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  ; and 
though  the  difference  in  degree  of  attraction  according  to  its  position  was  very  striking 
in  all  the  media,  the  substance  was  for  the  present  dismissed. 

3388.  Red  ferroprussiate  of  potassa,  being  attracted  in  water  or  camphine,  was 
repelled  in  the  solution  of  iron,  and  therefore  promised  the  desired  result  if  it  could 
be  protected  from  the  action  of  aqueous  solutions*.  Some  good  crystals  were  selected, 
and  shortened  by  grinding  until  the  length  was  little  more  than  the  breadth  ; then 
the  angles  were  removed  until  each  crystal  became  a rounded  mass,  after  which  they 
were  made  fast  to  suspending  copper  wires  (3370.),  6 inches  in  length,  so  that  the 
axis  of  the  crystal  prism  should  be  in  the  horizontal  plane,  and,  when  in  place  in  the 
magnetic  field,  either  axial  or  equatorial  at  pleasure.  Some  wax  was  melted  and 
kept  at  a temperature  above  the  fusing-point,  and  the  crystals  being  introduced  and 
retained  in  the  wax  until  they  were  above  its  fusing  temperature,  were  then  removed 
and  carefully  hung  up.  Afterwards  a wax  bath  was  prepared,  of  which  part  was 
fluid  and  part  solid,  and  the  cold  crystals  being  suddenly  dipped  in  and  removed, 
brought  away  a congealed  coat  of  wax  which  in  the  course  of  a few  minutes  became 
a compact  envelope.  Being  left  for  a few  hours,  1 found  that  they  might  afterwards 
be  immersed  and  left  in  water,  or  in  a solution  of  iron,  for  two  or  three  days  without 
any  action  between  the  crystal  and  the  medium  around  it.  No  varnishing  could 
thus  protect  them. 

3389.  A small  torsion  balance  with  a single  cocoon  thread  was  constructed.  The 
end  of  the  arm  intended  to  sustain  the  crystal,  was  bent  at  an  angle  of  90°,  so  that 
the  crystal  could  be  suspended  from  it  in  either  of  two  positions  at  right  angles  with 
each  other.  A counterpoise  to  the  crystal  was  placed  on  the  other  arm,  and  the 
balance  was  covered  with  ajar  to  screen  it  from  air  currents.  The  crystal,  when  in 
place,  hung  down  below  the  edge  of  the  jar,  descending  into  a vessel  arranged  at  one 
pole  of  a great  electro-magnet  (2247.),  so  that  it  could  be  surrounded  by  any  medium 
in  which  its  actions  were  to  be  observed.  The  pole-piece  terminated  either  in  a cone, 
or  an  upright  edge,  oi'  a face  inch  square ; the  cone  was  the  best,  and  the  crystal 

* Vai'nished  crystals  are  not  protected  ; when  put  into  water  the  salt  dissolves  through  every  part  of  the  coat ; 
for,  being  soluble  in  alcohol,  the  eoating  matter  is  a mixture  of  resin  and  the  salt.  In  solution  of  iron  this 
substance  dissolves  in  a very  interesting  manner  whether  unprotected  or  imperfectly  coated. 


ATTRACTION  AND  REPULSION  OF  THE  SAME  MAGNETIC  SUBSTANCE.  167 


was  then  able  to  approach  the  pole  until  separated  only  by  the  thickness  of  the  glass 
of  the  vessel. 

3390.  A saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  was  prepared  at  a temperature 
of  65°  Fahr.,  and  a little  sulphuric  acid  added  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  turbidness 
upon  the  addition  of  water.  This  solution,  more  or  less  diluted,  was  put  into  the 
glass  vessel,  and  when  its  motion  had  ceased,  the  crystal  was  placed  on  the  balance 
and  adjusted  near  the  pole;  then  the  magnet  was  excited  by  a voltaic  battery  and 
the  elfect  observed.  When  the  axis  of  the  prism  was  in  the  magnetic  axis,  the  crystal 
was  repelled  in  all  solutions  stronger  than  one  consisting  of  about  eleven  volumes  of 
the  saturated  solution  and  six  of  water;  in  weaker  solutions  it  was  attracted,  the 
force  of  attraction  and  repulsion  varying,  of  course,  as  the  medium  varied.  When 
the  crystal  axis  was  equatorial,  i.  e.  when  the  chief  magnecrystallic  axis  coincided 
with  the  magnetic  axis  of  the  field,  then  the  crystal  was  repelled  in  all  solutions 
stronger  than  one  consisting  of  about  eighteen  volumes  of  the  saturated  solution  and 
six  of  water.  Hence  there  is  a range  of  medium,  varying  in  strength  from  that 
produced  by  adding  either  two  or  three  volumes  of  the  saturated  solution  to  one 
volume  of  water,  within  which  the  crystal  in  one  position  is  attracted  and  in  the 
other  repelled ; and,  as  might  be  expected,  a mixture  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  volumes 
of  solution  with  six  of  water,  forms  a medium  in  which  the  attraction  and  repulsion 
were  nearly  equal  to  each  other.  It  was  very  easy  in  any  of  these  media,  to  find 
a position  for  the  crystal  (by  turning  it  on  the  vertical  axis)  in  which  it  was  neither 
attracted  nor  repelled.  A second  and  a third  crystal  were,  in  succession,  put  upon 
the  balance  and  gave  exactly  the  satne  results. 

3391.  The  red  ferroprussiate  of  potassa  is  a crystal  so  paramagnetic  as  to  be 
attracted  in  all  positions  in  space.  I therefore  turned  to  calcareous  spar,  which, 
though  it  be  diamagnetic  in  air,  is  not  necessarily  so  in  space,  since  air  is,  because  of 
its  oxygen,  a magnetic  body  (2791.).  Possessing  a sphere  of  calcareous  spar,  given 
to  me  by  Professor  W.  Thomson,  I tried  it  first  in  water,  and  found,  that  whether  the 
optic  axis  was  placed  equatorial  or  axial  in  relation  to  the  magnetic  field,  the  sphere 
was  attracted,  though  more  in  the  former  case  than  in  the  latter.  Hence  the  body  is 
less  diamagnetic  than  water  and  so  approaches  to  a vacuum.  In  order  to  compare 
it  with  a vacuum  I employed  carbonic  acid  as  the  medium  *,  but  then  found  that  in 
both  positions  it  was  repelled  ; hence  its  differential  range  as  a magnecrystal  cannot 
include  the  magnetic  force  exerted  in  space  merely. 

3392.  This  sphere  is  repelled  in  all  positions  in  alcohol ; therefore  it  would  be  easy, 
by  the  addition  either  of  alcohol  or  a little  solution  of  iron  to  water,  to  obtain  a 
liquid  intermediate  in  force  between  the  forces  of  the  sphere  in  its  two  positions. 

3393.  But  though  pure  calcareous  spar  will  not  include  space,  yet  it  is  probable 
that  some  crystals  may  be  found  by  trial  which  will  do  so.  I have  various  specimens 
of  calcareous  spar,  which  contain  in  combination  minute  portions  of  iron,  and  being 

* Royal  Institution  Proceedings,  Jan.  21,  1853,  p.  233  ; or  Experimental  Researches,  Svo,  vol.  hi.  p.  502. 

z 2 


168  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 

magneciystallic,  set,  in  the  magnetic  field,  with  the  optic  axis  axially,  as  Tyndall  and 
Knoblauch  describe*.  As  wholes  they  are  attracted  in  every  position,  whether  sur- 
rounded by  air  or  carbonic  acid  (more  strongly  in  the  latter  than  in  the  former)  ; and 
when  free  to  revolve  they  set  with  the  optic  axis  axially,  even  in  solutions  of  iron. 
But  there  seems  no  reason  why  calcareous  spars,  intermediate  between  these  and  the 
sphere,  should  not  be  found  by  search;  nor  any  reason  to  doubt  that,  being  crystal- 
lized, they  would  be  magnecrystallic.  The  further  suggestions  of  hypothesis  are, 
however,  not  very  clear,  inasmuch  as  we  are  not  quite  sure,  without  other  experiments, 
whether  such  bodies  may  be  accepted  magnetically  as  simple  bodies,  or  whether  the 
optic  axis  would  always  point  axially  or  equatorially  as  the  body  was  paramagnetic 
or  diamagnetic  in  relation  to  space ; or  whether  the  body  would  disappear  from 
the  list  of  magnecrystals  altogether.  For  suppose  such  a body  coincident  in  its 
general  magnetic  condition  (as  when  pulverized  or  amorphous)  with  carbonic 
acid  or  space;  and  that  being  in  its  crystallized  condition  it  should  be  magne- 
crystallic, and  when  formed  into  a sphere  should,  according  to  the  results  just 
given  (3381.),  point  in  the  same  direction  and  with  the  same  degree  of  force, 
whether  surrounded  by  water,  or  carbonic  acid,  or  solution  of  iron  ; — what  direction 
should  the  optic  axis  of  such  a sphere  take?  It  cannot  take  that  of  the  pure  cal- 
careous spar,  and  also  that  of  the  small  rhomboids  of  ferrocarbonate  of  lime,  for 
they  are  at  right  angles  to  each  other  in  the  magnetic  field ; neither  does  any  reason 
appear  why  it  should  take  one  more  than  the  other.  I would  willingly  think  that 
some  valuable  considerations  and  evidence  regarding  the  true  zero  of  magnetic 
force  would  arise  in  the  investigation  of  this  matter;  but  the  former  results  with 
different  media  make  me  fear  that  the  subject,  when  closely  examined  experiment- 
ally, will  resolve  itself  into  something  of  less  importance.  This  matter  is  carried  a 
little  further  in  the  relations  of  temperature  (3416.)  ; for  if  we  consider  a true  zero 
as  independent  of  temperature,  then  one  temperature  may  be  assigned  for  it  as  well 
as  another;  and  it  will  be  seen  that,  in  the  mixed  substance  presented  by  ferrocar- 
bonate of  lime,  we  have  a body  that  can  be  placed  as  non-magnecrystallic  in  carbonic 
acid  at  a given  temperature ; whereas  at  higher  temperatures  it  is  magnecrystallic 
as  carbonate  of  lime,  and  at  lower  temperatures  as  carbonate  of  iron. 

§ 39.  Action  of  heat  on  magnecrystals. 

3394.  Heat  affects  the  degree  and,  perhaps,  the  disposition  of  the  induced  forces 
in  magnecrystals  (2569-2573.).  There  is  as  yet  little  or  no  experimental  evidence 
bearing  upon  this  subject,  so  that  the  following  contribution  for  temperatures  between 
0°  and  300°  Fahb.  may  be  acceptable.  Some  new  arrangements  of  apparatus  were 
required,  the  following  brief  description  of  which  will  probably  be  sufficient. 

3395.  Baths  for  the  application  of  heat  and  cold  were  necessary.  One,  frequently 


* Philosophical  Magazine,  1850,  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  178. 


ACTION  OF  HEAT  ON  MAGNECRYSTALS. 


169 


employed,  was  a copper  vessel  1*15  inch  broad  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  axis, 
3'5  long  and  7 deep.  When  in  its  place  between  the  magnetic  poles,  they  could 
either  bear  against  its  sides  or  against  blocks  placed  between  it  and  them,  so  that  the 
pole  distances  should  be  unchangeable  for  the  time.  The  upper  part  was  clothed 
in  flannel  and  was  within  the  balance  box  (3368.)  ; the  lower  part  passed  through  a 
hole  in  the  magnet  table,  and  could  be  heated  by  a spirit-lamp  applied  below.  Oil 
was  most  frequently  employed  in  this  bath  for  high  temperatures,  but  sometimes 
water;  and  then  its  surface  was  covered  with  oil  to  prevent  evaporation  and  diminish 
the  production  of  currents.  A thermometer  was  inserted  in  this  bath  at  one  end  to 
indicate  its  temperature. 

3396.  A copper  cylinder,  T1  inch  in  diameter,  3 inches  in  depth,  closed  at  the 
bottom,  and  expanded  at  the  upper  edge,  so  as  to  rest  on  the  side  edges  of  the  bath, 
was  destined  to  hold  the  medium,  either  carnphine,  water,  or  oil,  which  was  immedi- 
ately around  the  crystal  or  other  magnetic  object.  Currents  were,  of  necessity, 
formed  in  the  fluid,  for  it  could  neither  be  heated  nor  cooled  without  them  ; but 
the  point  was  to  reduce  them  as  much  as  possible  about  the  object  to  be  observed, 
and  the  arrangement  described  was  found  very  useful  for  this  purpose.  It  was 
necessary  that  the  fluid  used  in  this  cylinder  should  be  very  clean  and  clear  from 
any  filaments  or  other  matters,  that  might  obstruct  the  motion  of  the  immersed 
object. 

3397.  Because  of  the  relative  positions  of  the  thermometer  and  the  object  to  be 
observed,  it  is  evident,  that,  with  rising  temperatures,  the  former  will  at  the  same 
moment  be  hotter  than  the  latter,  whilst  with  falling  temperatures  it  will  be  cooler. 
The  influence  of  this  circumstance  was  observed  in  many  of  the  experiments  (3408.)  ; 
but  as  the  cooling  was  much  slower  and  far  more  regular  than  the  heating,  the  chief 
observations  were  made  as  the  temperature  fell.  The  greatest  source  of  errors  existed 
in  the  currents,  and  could  only  be  overcome,  and  then  only  in  part,  by  slow  and 
numerous  observations.  These  currents  were  often  found  to  have  prevalent  sets,  but 
these  were,  to  a large  extent,  remedied  by  the  observations  in  two  positions,  i.e.  at 
the  upsetting  points.  For  low  temperatures  a smaller  trough  was  employed,  well 
clothed  in  flannel  and  filled  with  an  excellent  frigorific  mixture. 

3398.  Bismuth  crystal.— The  crystal  before  described  (3373.)  was  placed  on  the 
torsion  balance;  its  upsetting  angle  was  then  ascertained  to  be  105°;  and  being 
observed  from  time  to  time,  it  was  found  to  remain  the  same  both  for  low  and  high 
temperatures.  The  torsion  force  was  measured,  first  at  common  temperatures,  then 
as  the  temperature  rose,  and  also  as  it  fell  ; it  was  observed  to  be  greater  at  the  same 
upper  temperature  when  rising  than  when  falling;  an  eflPect  referred  by  particular 
examination  to  the  fact  that  the  lower  the  temperature  of  the  bismuth  the  greater 
the  torsion  force;  and  that,  as  before  said,  as  the  bismuth  gained  its  temperature 
later  than  the  oil  and  thermometer  in  the  bath,  so  it  was  cooler  in  the  first  case  than 
in  the  second,  for  the  same  thermometer  indication.  As  the  cooling  was  purposely 
rendered  slow,  that  the  temperature  of  the  bismuth  might  be  near  to  that  indicated 


170  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 

by  the  thermometer  and  the  currents  in  the  fluid  weaker,  so  the  observations  were 
always  considered  best  when  made  with  a standing’  or  a falling  temperature. 

3399.  The  following  are  the  actual  observations  of  one  series  made  with  the  silver 
torsion  wire  as  the  temperature  fell.  The  crystal  was  surrounded  by  oil.  The 
upsetting  angle  is  subtracted  as  before  described  (3367.) : — • 


Temp. 

Torsion 

force. 

Temp. 

Torsion 

force. 

Temp. 

Torsion 

force. 

Temp. 

Torsion 

force. 

279°  F. 

82 

225°  F. 

...  105 

1 90°  F. 

...  118 

152°  F. 

...  133 

272 

82 

219 

...  117 

186 

...  121 

149 

...  138 

265 

80 

215 

...  117 

183 

...  120 

141 

...  137 

258 

81 

212 

...  105 

180 

...  119 

133 

...  142 

251 

89 

209 

...  107 

177 

...  119 

131 

...  145 

245 

93 

204 

...  108 

173 

...  128 

119 

...  151 

240 

...  97 

199 

...  116 

165 

...  136 

104 

...  160 

235 

...  97 

197 

...  119 

156 

...  134 

92 

...  175 

230 

...  100 

193 

...  119 

It  will  be  understood  that  each  of  the  numbers  under  torsion  force,  increased  by  105, 
will  give  the  number  of  degrees  of  torsion  experimentally  observed.  The  observa- 
tions at  219°  and  215°  are,  1 have  no  doubt,  influenced  by  currents;  but  I kept 
myself  purposely  ignorant  of  what  might  be  expected,  and  I give  them  as  they  were 
obtained.  When  these  numbers  are  laid  down  on  a scale  (Plate  III.  See  bismuth 
crystal  C),  having  temperature  in  one  direction  and  torsion  force  at  right  angles  to 
it,  and  when  a mean  line  is  drawn  through  them,  it  appears  to  be  a straight  line;  at 
least  there  is  nothing  in  the  results  to  justify  the  assej’tion,  that  the  change  of  force 
at  one  temperature  was  different  in  degree  from  the  change  at  another,  within  the 
range  employed.  The  force,  as  expressed  by  such  a line,  was  at  100°  equal  to  162, 
and  at  280°  it  was  77 ; the  whole  loss  within  that  range  being  85,  or  above  half  the 
power  it  possessed  at  the  lower  temperature;  in  other  words,  an  average  alteration 
of  4*7  for  every  10°Fahr. 

3400.  Another  set  of  observations  was  made  with  the  same  bismuth  crystal 
surrounded  by  water.  Seventy-one  observations  were  taken  between  40°  and  207°; 
and,  by  the  substitution  of  a cold  bath,  some  others  were  added  on  for  temperatures 
between  5°  and  70°,  which  were  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  former.  These,  when 
laid  down  (see  Plate  III.,  bismuth  crystal  A and  B),  also  gave  a straight  mean  line, 
even  more  close  to  the  various  observations  than  the  former  one.  The  force  at  5° 
was  168  ; at  270°  it  was  90  ; at  100°  it  was  131.  The  whole  change  of  force  between 
5°  and  207°  is  78,  or  nearly  one-half  of  the  force  at  5°;  it  is  at  the  rate  of  3’86  for 
every  10°  of  temperature,  which  correspond  very  closely  to  the  former  result ; for  the 
rate  becomes  4 8 if  the  force  be  converted  into  a scale  of  number  corresponding 
with  that  of  crystal  C, 

3401.  It  is  not  to  be  expected  (without  extreme  care)  that  the  numbers  in  the  dif- 
ferent series  of  observations  with  the  same  object  should  coincide.  The  variation  of 
the  medium,  which  in  one  case  was  oil  and  in  the  other  water,  should  not,  for  the 


ACTION  OF  HEAT  ON  M AGNECRYSTALS. 


reasons  given  (3381.),  produce  any  effect ; neither,  for  the  same  reasons,  should  their 
possible  variation  by  change  of  temperature  produce  any  effect ; but  any  change  in 
the  distance  of  the  magnetic  poles  would  produce  an  alteration,  and  I have  no  doubt 
that,  in  the  first  case,  the  poles  were  a little  nearer  to  each  other,  and  therefore  the 
force  at  the  same  temperature  greater.  It  was  very  satisfactory  also  to  see  that  the 
two  mean  lines  (selected  only  by  the  eye)  converged  towards  each  other  with  rising 
temperatures  ; thus  at  100°  the  difference  of  torsion  force  is  31,  whilst  at  200°  it  is  21 
nearly;  as  if  they  were  indeed  only  the  tangents  of  curves,  and,  at  much  higher 
temperatures,  would  coincide  or  become  parallel  nearly. 

3402.  These  first  observations  are  sufficient  to  show,  that  the  differential  magne- 
crystallic  force  of  bismuth  diminishes  with  elevation  of  temperature,  and  that  to  a 
large  extent ; that  this  occurs  by  a regular  progression,  which  presents  no  appear- 
ance of  any  change  of  sign  within  the  limits  of  temperature  employed  ; that  the  pro- 
gression appears  within  these  limits  to  be  represented  by  a straight  line,  or  rather  by 
a portion  of  a large  curve,  a supposition  favoured  by  the  approximation  of  the  lines 
at  higher  temperatures;  and  that  the  return  of  the  bismuth  to  its  original  degree 
of  power  is  perfect  upon  the  recurrence  of  the  original  temperature. 

3403.  It  is  of  importance,  not  merely  to  examine  the  effect  of  temperature  upon  a 
crystal  of  bismuth,  as  one  of  different  raagnecrystals,  but  to  compare  the  manifesta- 
tion of  magnetic  force  in  bismuth  when  in  this  state  with  the  corresponding  mani- 
festations when  the  metal  is  in  other  conditions,  as  in  the  compressed  state ; or  in  the 
amorphous  or  granular  state,  at  which  time  it  is  affected  merely  as  a diamagnetic 
body.  I therefore  proceeded  to  compress  a piece  of  granular  bismuth  in  one  direc- 
tion, and  then  cut  out  of  it  a short  square  prism,  which,  when  suspended,  was  0‘5  of 
an  inch  in  height  and  0'36  in  thickness,  the  line  of  pressure  being  horizontal  and 
parallel  to  two  of  the  sides  ; when  in  the  magnetic  field  this  line  set,  of  course,  equa- 
torially,  and  the  piece  therefore,  which  weighed  128'5  grains,  could  be  subjected  to 
experiment  in  the  same  manner  as  the  crystal  before  it  (3398.). 

3404.  This  compressed  bismuth  acted  very  well,  the  difference  of  torsion  force 
being  abundantly  large  enough  for  observation.  The  upsetting  angle  was  109°  and  not 
very  definite,  so  that  currents  in  the  surrounding  heated  medium  (oil)  interfered  more 
with  its  exact  observance  than  in  the  case  of  the  crystal.  Such  a result  was,  perhaps, 
to  be  expected  ; for  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  a piece  of  bismuth,  so  squeezed  in  a 
hydraulic  press,  should  have  the  line  of  compressing  force  of  equal  intensity  and  like 
direction  in  all  its  parts,  and  therefore  comparable,  in  that  respect,  to  a crystal.  The 


results  corrected  for  the  upsetting  angle  were  at 

70°  F.  torsion  force  was  . . 157 

121°  F.  torsion  force  was  . . 140 

157°  F.  torsion  force  was  . . 119 

194°  F.  torsion  force  \vas  . . 116 

211°  F.  torsion  force  was  . . 106 


and  are  laid  down  upon  the  plate  of  lines  (see  bismuth  compressed,  D). 


172  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 

3405.  It  so  happens,  that  the  size  of  the  bismuth  and  the  force  of  the  magnet 
place  the  observations  between  those  of  the  crystal  before  obtained,  and  the  results 
show  how  parallel  the  three  are  in  their  direction  and  nature.  These  seem,  also,  to 
be  in  a line,  straight  or  nearly  so.  The  force  is  at  70°  equal  to  159,  and  at  210°  only 
to  105,  being  a loss  of  54  for  the  140°  of  difference  between  the  two  temperatures. 
If  we  take  the  loss  of  power  for  equal  differences,  at  the  same  temperature,  the 
results  are  very  accordant. 


Torsion  force. 

Loss  of  power. 

At  90° 

At  207° 

0 

Bismuth  crystal,  A . . 

135 

90  . 

. 45  or  ^ of  the  power  at  90 

Bismuth  crystal,  C , 

167 

112  . 

. 55  or  ^ of  the  power  at  90 

Bismuth  compressed,  D. 

149 

107  . 

. 42  or  ^ of  the  power  at  90 

3406.  The  compressed  bismuth  data  are  few  in  number,  and  do  not  afford  so  good 
an  indieation  as  those  obtained  with  the  crystal;  but  the  results  are  such  as  to 
give  an  additional  reason  to  those  advanced  by  Tyndall,  that  the  magnetic  force 
in  compressed  bismuth  is  of  precisely  the  same  nature  in  disposition,  &c.  as  in  cry- 
stallized bismuth.  I have  endeavoured  to  obtain  some  additional  physical  evidence, 
of  another  kind  but  in  the  same  direction,  by  subjecting  crystallized  and  compressed 
bismuth  to  the  slow  dissolving  aetion  of  dilute  nitric  acid;  but  though  signs  of 
crystalline  structure  appear  in  both  cases  they  are  not  clear  or  satisfactory. 

3407.  Tourmaline. — This  substance,  as  a paramagnetic  crystal,  was  then  submitted 
to  the  action  of  heat,  the  crystal  employed  being  that  already  described  (3377-) ; 
its  upsetting  angle  was  90°.  A series  of  observations  with  the  crystal  in  water  was 
made,  extending  from  39°  to  206°,  which  are  entered  in  the  plate  of  measurements  as 
“Tourmaline  crystal  I.”  A second  series  was  made  with  this  crystal  in  oil,  the 
temperatures  reaching  from  79°  to  289°;  they  are  entered  as  “Tourmaline  crystal  K.” 
A third  short  series  with  the  crystal  in  brine  and  extending  from  7°  to  69°,  is  entered 
as  “ Tourmaline  crystal  L.”  These  results  are  recorded,  not  with  the  torsion  numbers 
obtained,  which,  though  occurring  with  the  silver  torsion  wire,  ranged  from  640  to 
1200  degrees  of  force,  but  in  other  numbers  which  conveniently  entered  within  the 
range  of  the  table  adopted,  and  which  were  obtained  by  reducing  the  experimental 
results  proportionately.  It  will  be  understood,  of  course,  that  the  different  entries  in 
the  diagram  offer  no  absolute  comparison  between  one  body  and  another,  that  not 
being  possible  for  equal  bulks  or  weights  of  the  substances,  in  a table  like  the  present ; 
but  only  a result  for  each  particular  body  during  change  of  temperature,  the  source  of 
magnetic  power  and  the  measure  of  torsion  force  remaining  irivariable  for  the  time. 

3408.  The  precedence  which  the  tiiermometer  takes  of  the  body  (3397.)3  'S  here 
very  manifest  in  the  first  observations  of  K.  The  progression  of  the  numbers  is 
generally  good,  either  with  rising  or  falling  temperatures.  The  magnetic  force  in 
the  crystal  diminishes  continually  with  increase  of  temperature ; there  is  no  change 
of  sign.  The  loss  of  force  between  7°  and  289°  is  nearly  half  the  force  possessed  by 
the  crystal  at  the  lower  temperature;  and,  therefore,  almost  as  much  as  that  left  at 


ACTION  OF  HEAT  ON  MAGNECilYSTALS. 


173 


the  higher  temperature.  The  force  returns  perfectly  upon  the  restoration  of  a lower 
temperature.  There  is  no  permanent  disturbance  of  the  specific  magnetic  capacity, 
nor  anything  like  magnetic  charge.  The  loss  is  not  in  arithmetical  progression,  but 
greater  for  an  equal  number  of  degrees  at  lower  than  at  higher  temperatures ; and 
is  best  represented  by  a regular  curve  as  the  mean  line.  The  two  chief  series  agree 
very  well  together,  and  the  third  series,  at  low  temperatures,  is  in  near  accordance 
with  either.  The  loss  of  power  at  low  temperatures,  as  0°,  is  for  the  same  number  of 
degrees  of  elevation,  three  times  as  much  as  it  is  for  temperatures  about  270°  or  280°. 

3409.  The  return  of  this  and  other  crystals  to  their  first  condition  by  return  of 
temperature,  combined  with  the  observations  made  with  iron,  nickel,  &c.  (3424.), 
shows  that  the  magnet,  as  a source  of  power,  remained  unchanged  by  the  variation 
of  temperature  from  0°  to  300°  in  the  magnetic  field. 

3410.  This  tourmaline  crystal  (33/7.)  being  hung  between  the  poles  of  the  great 
electro-magnet,  was  raised  by  a spirit-lamp  to  a full  red  heat,  and  then  set  well  with 
its  axis  equatorially,  though  with  diminished  power ; so  that  high  temperature  does 
not  take  away  its  magnecrystallic  character : on  cooling  it  returned  to  its  first  higher 
condition.  On  a former  occasion  I found  that  a like,  short,  thick,  black  crystal  lost 
part  of  its  power  by  the  heat  of  a spirit-lamp  flame,  but  on  cooling,  the  tourmaline 
became  very  magnetic,  pointed  axially,  and  was  strongly  attracted.  The  latter 
effects  were  traced  to  a portion  of  peroxide  of  iron  on  one  part  of  the  crystal,  which 
had  been  reduced  to  protoxide  or  even  lower,  by  the  vapour  and  heat  of  the  spirit- 
lamp:  digestion  in  hydrochloric  acid  removed  this  iron  and  restored  the  crystal  to 
its  first  condition.  The  fact  shows,  that  a temperature  which  takes  away  the  high 
paramagnetic  condition  of  iron  or  its  protoxide  could  not  destroy  the  peculiar  con- 
dition of  tourmaline  as  a magnecrystal. 

3411.  Carbonate  of  iron. — The  crystal  of  this  substance  before  described  (3379.) 
was  suspended  in  an  oil  bath,  and  carried  through  temperatures  varying  from  4° 
to  293°.  Its  upsetting  angle  was  96°.  The  results  are  in  the  diagram  marked  F. 
In  another  set  of  experiments,  results  were  obtained  about  0°  and  60°,  and  are  added, 
being  marked  G.  The  whole  forms  a very  consistent  series  of  observations,  showing 
progressive  loss  of  power  with  elevation  of  temperature,  the  diminution  being  much 
greater  at  low  than  at  high  degrees ; and,  on  the  whole,  very  great  for  the  range  of 
temperature  employed.  The  loss  of  power  about  0°  and  32°,  is  four  times  as  much 
as  it  is  at  280°  for  an  equal  number  of  degrees.  The  whole  power  at  300°  is  135  ; 
at  0°  it  is  nearly  tripled,  being  380. 

3412.  When  carbonate  of  iron  crystallized,  is  heated,  either  in  air  or  oil,  up  to  or 
above  a certain  high  temperature,  it  is  almost  sure  to  fly  to  pieces  like  a Rupert’s 
drop.  By  perseverance,  and  by  selecting  the  larger  fragments  when  the  breaking-up 
took  place  in  oil,  I obtained  three  pieces,  which  could  be  raised  by  the  flame  of  a 
spirit-lamp  to  a red  heat.  Below  a very  dull  red  heat  these  crystals  were  always 
magnecrystallic;  more  at  lower  temperatures  and  less  at  higher: — regaining  power 

MDCCCLVI.  2 A 


174  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 

as  the  heat  fell  and  losing  it  when  temperature  inereased,  and  that  repeatedly.  When 
the  temperature  was  further  raised  and  continued  for  a minute  or  more,  the  crystal 
ceased  to  be  magnecrystallic,  and  lost  nearly  all  magnetic  power ; but  when  lowered 
beneath  a certain  temperature,  it  became  intensely  magnetic,  and  was  found  to  have 
lost  its  carbonic  acid  and  become  converted  into  magnetic  oxide  of  iron. 

3413.  Carbonate  of  lime. — The  sphere  of  calcareous  spar  was  comparatively  so 
weak  in  magnetic  force,  as  to  give  no  sufficient  indication  when  a metallic  torsion 
wire  was  employed  with  the  Logeman  magnet ; to  employ  a silk  torsion  thread 
would  have  been  unsafe.  A very  high  temperature,  amounting  to  full  ignition  (being 
the  highest  that  a spirit-lamp  flame  could  communicate  to  a small  rhomboid),  did 
not  take  away  the  magnecrystallic  condition  of  calcareous  spar,  or  interfere  with  the 
pointing  of  the  optic  axis  equatorially ; for  though  the  heat  was  sufficient  to  convert 
the  exterior  of  the  crystal  (to  which  the  aqueous  vapour  from  the  flame  had  access) 
into  quick  lime,  still  the  internal  crystalline  part  pointed  magnecrystallically,  and 
carried  the  altered  part  with  it.  This  permanency,  coupled  with  the  low  magne- 
crystallic state  possessed  by  the  crystal  at  common  temperatures,  shows  that  the 
power  would  decrease  at  a very  low  rate  and  in  a very  small  degree,  whilst  rising 
from  0°  of  temperature  to  300°. 

3414.  When  a crystal  of  red  ferroprussiate  of  potassa  is  heated,  either  in  air  or  oil, 
it  flies  to  pieces  at  a certain  high  temperature;  beneath  that  degree,  however,  it 
retains  its  magnecrystallic  character  unaltered,  except  that  the  pointing  is  with  less 
force  at  the  higher  temperatures  than  at  the  lower. 

3415.  The  f err o calcareous  spar  before  described  (3393.)  suggested  some  very 
curious  points  of  inquiry.  It  seemed  probable  that  the  iron  within  the  crystal  would 
retain  its  state  of  chemical  combination  under  the  action  of  heat,  if  the  crystal  as  a 
whole  should  preserve  its  integrity  at  high  temperatures:  and  if  so,  then,  because  of 
the  slow  alteration  of  calcareous  spar  by  heat,  and  the  much  quicker  alteration  of 
carbonate  of  iron,  as  regarded  magnetic  force,  it  seemed  further  probable,  that  such 
a magnecrystal  being  heated  sufficiently,  would  change  its  character ; and  that  the 
axis  of  magnetic  power,  which  at  low  temperatures  was  the  maximum,  would  at  high 
temperatures  become  the  minimum  axis,  or  line  of  minimum  force:  which  indeed 
upon  investigation  proved  to  be  the  case. 

3416.  It  was  very  difficult  to  raise  these  crystals  above  a certain  temperature; 
near  a given  point,  about  300°Fahr.,  they  either  broke  up  suddenly  like  a Rupert’s 
drop,  or  crumbled  to  pieces.  No  previous  slow  elevation  of  temperature  appeared 
to  prevent  this  disruption.  Nevertheless  some  pieces  were  obtained,  both  in  air  and 
in  oil,  which,  though  much  fissured,  still  adhered  together,  so  as  to  represent  the 
crystal.  When  these  were  properly  suspended  in  the  magnetic  field,  the  short  axis 
of  the  rhomboid  (or  optic  axis)  pointed  axially  at  common  temperatures,  but  when 
raised  by  a spirit-lamp  to  a point  clearly  below  a red  heat,  the  short  axis  pointed 
equatorially.  When  the  crystal  was  allowed  to  cool,  it  again  pointed  axially,  and 


ACTION  OF  HEAT  ON  MAGNECRYSTALS. 


175 


when  reheated  its  direction  was  equatorial ; and  this  change  could  be  repeated  many 
times,  without  the  crystal  appearing  to  be  at  all  altered,  either  by  the  production  of 
caustic  lime  or  of  free  oxide  of  iron : — its  state  and  peculiar  qualities  were  preserved. 
It  was  magnecrystallic  at  high  and  at  low  temperatures  ; but  at  the  upper  it  was  like 
pure  calcareous  spar  and  at  the  lower  like  carbonate  of  iron.  At  the  lower  tempe- 
rature it  was,  as  a whole,  paramagnetic  in  air  and  therefore  in  carbonic  acid  gas. 
Whether  at  a given  intermediate  temperature  it  would  cease  altogether  to  be  magne- 
crystallic, and  would  in  carbonic  acid  gas  be,  as  a whole,  neither  paramagnetic  nor 
diamagnetic,  and  therefore  in  part,  and  for  a given  temperature,  answer  the  inquiry 
before  made  (3393.),  I cannot  jsay. 

3417.  In  the  carbonate  of  lime  and  carbonate  of  iron,  the  short  axis  of  the  rhom- 
boid is,  emphatically,  a line  of  direction,  and  points  either  equatorially  or  axially 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  crystal.  A plane  at  right  angles  to  it  does  not  present 
sensible  differences  in  particular  parts,  the  force  appears  to  be  equal  in  all  directions. 
So  the  whole  change  in  the  ferrocarbonate  of  lime  appears  to  depend  upon  the 
circumstance,  that,  in  the  direction  of  the  short  axis,  the  aptness  for  magnetic  in- 
duction decreases  by  heat  more  rapidly  than  in  i\\%  plane  at  right  angles  to  it;  so  as 
not  merely  to  overtake  the  latter  but  to  pass  hy  it,  and  that  in  cooling  it  again 
returns  towards,  by,  and  beyond  it: — the  force  in  the  equatorial  plane  or  direction  is 
probably  varied,  but  nevertheless  its  whole  range  appears  to  be  intermediate  to  that 
which  the  axial  direction  supplies. 

3418.  It  would  seem  that  such  crystals  as  these  could  not  have  been  formed  at  a 
high  temperature  and  common  pressures,  inasmuch  as  they  cannot  sustain  such  a 
temperature  now.  They  may  even  be  considered,  physically,  as  different  substances 
at  high  and  low  temperatures ; for  a body  which  cannot  expand  and  keep  its  inte- 
grity must  have  a very  different  arrangement  of  its  molecular  forces,  when  they  are 
just  about  to  burst  the  mass  into  particles,  to  that  which  exists  when  they  are 
employed  in  giving  permanency  to  the  state  into  which  they  have  brought  them. 
The  variations  in  magnetic  relations  are  very  striking  for  the  two  cases ; perhaps 
some  of  the  optical  characters  may  be  found  to  be  affected  also.  The  crystals  are, 
I think,  harder  than  those  of  calcareous  spar,  and  always  more  fissured.  Such 
calcareous  spar  as  contains  veins  of  minute  crystals  of  pyrites  is  almost  sure  to  prove 
of  this  peculiar  nature. 

3419.  It  would  appear  that  magnecrystals  (with  the  exception  of  the  ferrocarbo- 
nate of  iron),  whether  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic,  are  all  generally  alike  in  their 
affections  by  heat;  the  differences  of  force  in  two  given  directions  diminishing  as  the 
temperature  is  raised,  increasing  as  temperature  is  lowered,  and  being  constant  for  a 
given  temperature.  Such  alterations  might  take  place  in  various  ways  ; a diminution 
by  heat  of  the  force  of  the  stronger  axis  would  account  for  it,  so  also  would  an 
increase  of  the  force  of  the  weaker  axis ; such  doubtful  points  might  be  settled  by 
combining  with  results  like  those  I have  given,  others  upon  the  whole  paramagnetic  or 

2 A 2 


176  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 


diamagnetic  force  of  a crystal  in  a given  position  at  different  temperatures.  1 have  little 
doubt,  however,  that,  according  to  the  general  action  of  heat,  the  power  of  the  crystal 
to  suffer  a certain  amount  of  induction  in  a given  direction  through  it,  is  lessened  in 
every  direction  as  the  temperature  rises,  and  that  the  effects  I have  measured  are 
simply  the  differences  between  the  whole  changes  in  each  of  two  directions.  Expe- 
riment only  can  decide,  whether  a sphere  of  tourmaline,  or  carbonate  of  lime,  would 
remain  affected  by  the  magnet  at  temperatures  which  would  cause  the  magnecrystallic 
character  of  these  bodies  to  disappear ; but  it  seems  almost  certain  that  the  diamagnetic 
force  of  a granular  piece  of  bismuth  must  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  forces  of  the 
variously  arranged  crystalline  parts  of  which  it  is  composed,  and  would  disappear 
when  their  magnecrystallic  character  was  taken  from  them  by  heat ; and  it  is  also 
certain  that  the  magnecrystallic  character  of  such  crystals  as  can  hold  together,  is 
retained  at  very  high  temperatures. 

3420.  If  the  absolute  magnetic  and  the  magnecrystallic  character  of  bodies  should 
be  found  to  coincide,  then  the  examination  of  rnagnecrystals  by  heat  would  acquire 
increased  interest.  In  many  cases  we  can  examine  the  magnecrystallic  disposition 
of  force  better  than  the  whole  sum  of  force,  and  an  examination  of  a part  of  the  rate 
of  diminution  might  give  us  a considerable  insight  as  to  the  nature  of  the  whole. 
Further,  if  the  magnecrystallic  and  tlie  magnetic  indications  agree,  so  that  the  one 
set  may  be  accepted  as  representing  the  other,  then  we  have  tfie  advantage  in  magne- 
crystals,  of  dismissing  the  influence  (changeable  as  it  is  by  temperature)  of  the 
surrounding  medium  altogether  (3376.).  It  is  remarkable,  that  as  no  unmixed  body 
has  as  yet  altered  in  the  character  of  its  magnetism  by  heat,  i,  e.  has  not  passed  by 
heat  from  the  paramagnetic  to  the  diamagnetic  class  (assuming  space,  or  its  magnetic 
equivalent  carbonic  acid  gas,  to  be  at  zero),  or  vice  versa,  so  no  simple  magnecrystal 
has  shown  any  inversion  of  this  kind;  nor  have  any  of  the  three  chief  axes  of 
power  changed  their  character  or  relation  to  each  other.  This  has  to  be  borne  in 
mind  when  considering  the  possible  case  of  a magnecrystal  at  zero,  before  referred 
to  (3393.). 

It  does  not  appear,  from  the  direction  of  the  lines  in  the  diagram,  that  much  increase 
in  the  diamagnetic  power  of  the  bismuth  is  to  be  expected  from  the  application  of 
any  low  temperature  within  our  reach.  Being  the  chief  diamagnetic  substance,  and 
a metal,  one  would  have  wished  it  to  have  given  a curve  rather  like  that  of  carbonate 
of  iron  or  even  tourmaline. 

§ 40.  Effect  of  heat  upon  the  absolute  magnetic  force  of  bodies. 

3421.  The  time  is  coming  on  when  we  shall  require  to  know  the  effect  of  heat  on 
the  total  magnetic  force  (under  induction)  of  such  bodies  as,  being  paramagnetic  or 
diamagnetic,  are  near  to  zero,  i.  e.  as  near  as  bismuth  or  oxygen  ; so  that,  amongst 
other  points,  we  may  examine  the  relation  of  the  whole  change  of  power  to  the  change 
of  the  differential  condition  which  occurs  in  rnagnecrystals.  A difficulty,  not  met 


CHANGE  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE  MAGNETIC  FORCE  BY  HEAT. 


177 


with  before,  is  included  in  such  investigations,  by  the  dependence  in  a greater  or 
smaller  degree  of  the  motions  of  the  body  upon  the  medium  around  it ; for  if  the 
latter  were  to  change  by  differences  of  temperature,  the  former  would  seem  to  have 
suffered  a change  though  none  might  have  occurred.  The  statement  made  on  a 
former  occasion  (2359.),  that  paramagnetic  solutions  were  not  affected  by  heat,  can 
hardly  be  accepted,  without  further  confirmation,  in  the  present  state  of  the  subject. 
If  bodies  at  magnetic  zero  suffer  no  alteration  by  heat,  then  a fluid  having  that  con- 
dition might  be  selected  as  a bath  in  which  to  try  the  changes  of  solid  bodies  not  at 
zero ; and  a solid  at  zero  might  in  like  manner  be  employed  to  ascertain  the  varia- 
tions by  heat  in  the  fluids  surrounding  it* : further,  if  paramagnetic  solutions  suffer 
no  change,  they  may  be  employed  to  exalt  the  indications  of  diamagnetic  bodies,  such 
as  bismuth  or  phosphorus.  In  the  mean  time  the  following  results  may  be  useful  and 
acceptable. 

3422.  Being  very  desirous  of  knowing  whether  the  variation  of  a piece  of  amor- 
phous, i.  e.  granular,  bismuth  had  the  same  progression  for  the  same  temperatures  as 
a crystal  of  bismuth,  I endeavoured  to  obtain  some  measures,  but  did  not  satisfy 
myself.  I employed  a bar  of  the  metal  about  0’55  of  an  inch  long  and  0T2  of  an 
inch  thick,  between  pointed  poles;  but  the  force  of  the  bismuth  under  the  influence 
of  the  Logeman  magnet  was  not  sensible  with  a metallic  torsion  wire,  and  when  a 
silk  suspender  was  used  (uncertain  in  itself),  the  indications  were  altogether  over- 
come by  currents  in  the  surrounding  fluid.  A tourmaline  crystal  was  just  as  un- 
favourable under  the  like  circumstances ; besides  which,  it  must  be  understood  that 
as  tourmalines  differ  much  from  each  other,  specimens  from  the  same  crystal  can 
only  properly  be  compared, 

3423. *  Carbonate  of  iron. — I found  this  substance  sufficiently  paramagnetic  to 
supply  indications  with  the  Logeman  magnet,  when  the  pointed  poles  were  employed 
and  placed  r95  inch  apart.  The  crystal  formerly  described  (3379.)  was  therefore 
reduced  by  grinding  to  a plate,  which  being  suspended  with  the  optic  axis  or  short 
diameter  vertical,  was  then  0'6  of  an  inch  in  length,  0T7  in  breadth,  and  0‘37  in 
height ; a small  copper  cube  was  hung  to  it  beneath,  so  as  to  give  it  weight  in  the 
oil-bath,  and  prevent  its  approach  as  a whole  to  either  one  or  the  other  pole.  The 
results  obtained  are  entered  in  the  diagram  of  curves  (see  carbonate  of  iron  bar,  E). 
They  are  not  accordant  with  those  given  by  the  same  substance  as  a magnecrystal. 
In  the  ascending  part  of  the  series  the  force  at  126°  is  157,  and  at  288°  it  is  133  ; the 
diminution  24  being  only  of  the  force  at  126°.  In  the  descending  part,  the  force 
at  96°  is  182,  and  at  292°  it  is  125,  the  difference  57  being  of  the  force  at  96°: 
both  differences  are  much  less  than  that  with  the  crystal  of  carbonate  of  iron,  for 
then  the  force  at  96°  was  255,  and  at  292°  was  137,  the  difference  118  being  almost 
half  of  the  force  at  96°.  It  is  evident  therefore  that  the  forces  of  the  bar  do  not 
diminish  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  forces  of  the  crystal ; or  else  that  the  medium  alters 

* Royal  Institution  Proceedings,  Jan.  1853,  p.  232  ; or  Experimental  Researches,  8vo.  vol.  iii.  p.  500. 


178  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERIMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 

importantly  though  in  an  unknown  manner ; or  else  that  the  bar  as  a whole  exhibits 
some  peculiar  change  connected  perhaps  with  the  crossing  of  the  diagram  lines 
indicating  the  ascending  and  descending  results.  If  the  oil  of  the  bath  had  lost 
diamagnetic  power  by  elevation  of  temperature  (and  gain  is  not  to  be  expected),  then 
the  carbonate  of  iron  should,  on  that  account  alone,  have  seemed  to  suffer  a loss 
which  would  be  added  to  its  own  loss ; such  an  effect  would  have  tended  to  give  a 
result  the  reverse  of  that  which  in  reality  appears. 

3424.  Experiments  were  then  made,  as  additions  to  former  results*,  upon  the  metals 
iron,  nickel,  cobalt,  and  with  much  facility,  in  the  following  manner.  A copper  cube 
0-25  of  an  inch  in  the  side,  had  a fine  hole  made  through  it,  in  a direction  perpen- 
dicular to  two  of  the  faces,  and  a piece  of  clean  soft  hon  wire  0‘05  of  an  inch  in 
length  and  0‘0166  in  diameter,  was  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  hole.  The  cube, 
which  weighed  46  grains,  was  then  suspended  as  before  between  the  magnetic  poles, 
they  being  4'86  inches  apart.  The  power  of  the  iron,  thus  subjected  to  the  magnet, 
was  such  as  to  permit  the  employment  of  the  platinum  torsion  wire  (3369.),  and  so 
remove  every  objection  as  to  any  possible  change  of  the  torsion  force.  The  upsetting 
points  were  very  definite  and  were  108°  apart.  The  results  of  the  observations,  at 
temperatures  varying  from  30°  to  288°,  are  entered  in  the  chart  (see  iron  bar,  P),  and 
it  will  be  seen  that  they  present  no  sensible  variation ; as  if  the  inductive  force  in 
the  iron  underwent  no  change  during  this  alteration  of  temperature,  but  had  obtained 
and  kept  its  maximum  degree.  We  know  from  other  experiments,  that  at  higher 
temperatures  the  force  would  decrease;  that  at  a certain  temperature  the  decrease, 
though  progressive  and  not  instantaneous  (2345.),  would  be  very  rapid  ; and  that  at 
still  higher  temperatures  it  would  again  become  slow  and  at  last  almost  insensible: 
and  we  have  reason  to  suppose  that  with  tourmaline  and  carbonate  of  iron  we  should 
have  a like  inversion  of  the  curvature  if  we  could  descend  to  very  low  temperatures. 

3425.  Nickel. — A small  square  bar  of  pure  nickel  was  prepared;  it  was  0’09  of  an 
inch  in  length,  and  0’036  in  thickness.  A cube  of  copper  like  the  former  (3424.)  had 
a cavity  formed  in  its  upper  surface,  in  which  the  nickel  was  placed,  and  retained 
immoveable  by  the  suspending  wire,  and  the  whole  was  submitted  to  changes  of 
temperature.  The  upsetting  angle  was  112°.  The  results  are  given  in  the  chart 
marked  “Nickel  bar  M,”  beginning  at  the  higher  temperatures  and  descending  to 
lower.  It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  a diminution  of  force  at  the  upper  temperature, 
which  accords  with  the  general  effect  of  heat ; and  as  we  know  that  the  temperature 
of  boiling  oil  is  enough  to  render  even  large  masses  of  nickel  insensible  to  the  action 
of  common  magnets,  we  may  believe  that  a very  rapid  and  interesting  series  of  changes 
would  come  on  between  300°  and  600°* 

3426.  Cohalt. — A small  bar  of  pure  cobalt,  0-08  of  an  inch  in  length  and  0-027 
square,  was  in  like  manner  attached  to  a cube  of  copper,  and  subjected  to  the  action 
of  the  magnet  and  heat.  The  upsetting  angle  was  118°.  One  reason  for  the  differ- 

* Experimental  Researches,  2344-2347  ; also  8vo,  vol.  iii.  p.  444. 


CHANGE  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE  MAGNETIC  FORCE  BY  HEAT.  1/!) 

ence  of  the  upsetting'  angles  of  these  metals,  was  the  different  proportions  of  length 
and  thickness ; another  reason  will  appear  further  on  (3427.).  Two  sets  of  results 
are  entered  in  the  chart  of  lines  (marked  N and  ()),  both  of  which  present  an  im- 
portant indication.  It  may  be  observed,  in  the  first  place,  of  the  results  O,  that 
ascending  from  66°  and  then  returning  to  nearly  the  same  temperature,  the  cobalt 
seems  to  have  gained  a permanent  increase  of  power  of  about  30  degrees  of  torsion 
force,  the  whole  being  about  380.  This  was  ultimately  referred  to  charge  or  coercitive 
power;  for  when,  after  the  observations  at  79°,  the  cube  with  the  cobalt  was  turned 
round  180°,  so  as  to  reverse  the  ends  as  respects  the  magnetic  poles,  and  then  brought 
back  into  their  first  position  and  observed,  the  power  of  the  whole  seemed  to  have 
fallen,  as  is  seen  by  the  six  results  marked  R on  the  scale;  and  this  condition  the 
cobalt  retained  though  left  in  the  last  position  for  some  time.  1 found,  indeed,  that 
small  pieces  of  the  iron,  nickel,  and  cobalt,  when  ignited  to  remove  charge,  and  then 
held  for  a moment  in  any  position  in  the  magnetic  field,  acquired  a ciiarge,  which 
they  retained  when  out  of  the  field.  It  would  seem,  that,  even  when  afterwards 
reversed  in  the  magnetic  field,  this  first  charge,  or  the  effect  of  it,  is  in  part  retained, 
but  that  at  high  temperatures  the  metal  loses  more  or  less  of  it;  and  hence  the 
difference  between  the  results  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  series  of  observations 
marked  O.  In  those  marked  N the  metal  was,  probably,  either  in  such  a condition 
as  to  have  no  permanent  loss  occasioned  by  heat,  or  not  to  have  had  the  heat  (of  290° 
only)  continued  long  enou§;h  for  the  purpose. 

3427.  I think  it  very  probable  that  iron  and  nickel  would  show  like  phenomena 
as  the  cobalt  if  they  were  sought  for;  and  also  that  this  quality  of  charge  may  affect 
the  upsetting  angle  of  pieces  of  metal  differing  in  their  proportions  of  length  and 
thickness  (3426.). 

3428.  Admitting  all  the  effect  of  this  charge,  there  is  still  another  result  evident 
in  both  the  cobalt  series,  and  in  both  parts  of  the  series  O;  that  is,  the  increase  of 
power  with  elevation  of  temperature.  This  is,  I believe,  the  first  instance  in  which 
such  a result  has  been  recognized ; and  even  though  we  might  think  for  a moment 
that,  whilst  ascending  from  66°  to  300°,  the  higher  temperatures  had  set  the  metal 
more  free  to  give  up  adverse  charge,  as  above  supposed  (3426.),  still  that  would  not 
account  on  descending  for  a diminution  of  force,  without  admitting  that  heat  was 
also  able  to  make  the  metal  more  favourable  to  receive  charge  ; which  is  in  fact  to 
say  that  the  power  is  greater  at  higher  than  at  lower  temperatures.  This  effect 
cannot  depend  upon  any  change  in  the  surrounding  medium,  for,  such  is  the  enormous 
disproportion  between  it  and  the  cobalt  in  equal  volumes,  that  if  its  powers  were 
either  annihilated  or  doubled,  the  effect  would  be  insensible  amongst  the  results. 
If  such  be  the  truth  with  cobalt,  then  it  is  probable  that  a like  result  would  occur 
with  iron  and  nickel  at  some  temperatures,  and  that  in  passing  to  lower  temperatures 
than  those  employed  we  should  arrive  at  one  presenting  the  maximum  magnetic 
induction  for  each,  and  below  which  their  inductive  force  would  diminish.  Within 


180  DR.  FARADAY’S  EXPERLMENTAL  RESEARCHES  IN  ELECTRICITY.  (SERIES  XXX.) 

the  range  employed,  i.  e.  from  0°  to  300°,  the  three  metals  seem  to  be  in  different  parts 
of  their  course  ; nickel  has  passed  the  period  of  its  maximum  force,  iron  is  in  it,  and 
cobalt  has  not  yet  attained  to  it ; and  this  accords  with  the  further  change  by  tem- 
perature ; for  by  greater  elevation  nickel  first  loses  its  distinctive  power  at  about 
635°Fahr.*;  then  iron  at  a moderate  red  heat'f',  and  cobalt  at  a far  higher  tempe- 
rature than  either,  near  the  melting-point  of  copper.  Such  a view  as  this  increases 
very  much  the  interest  of  the  relation  between  heat  and  magnetism  ; especially  as,  if 
it  be  well  founded,  it  v/ill  probably  apply  to  substances  in  all  states;  to  gases  as 
oxygen  as  well  as  to  metals  like  cobalt ; in  which  case  it  may  be  that  all  bodies, 
whether  paramagnetic  or  diamagnetic,  have  a certain  temperature  at  winch  their 
induced  magnetic  condition  being  most  favoured  is  a maximum,  and  above  or  below 
which  tlseir  state  diminishes. 

3429.  The  effect  of  heat  upon  iron  and  steel,  and  therefore  upon  magnets  generally, 
will  have  hereafter  to  be  distinguished  into  that  which  it  may  produce  in  the  case  of 
iron  considered  as  perfectly  soft;  and  that  which  it  may  produce  in  the  case  of  per- 
fectly hard  steel  whether  charged  magnetically  or  not.  It  may  be  that  its  action  upon 
a magnet,  consisting  of  parts  all  equally  hard  and  equally  charged,  may  be  very  dif- 
ferent from  its  action  upon  another  magnet,  having  superficial  or  terminal  parts 
harder  and  more  charged  than  the  rest ; or  as  is  usually  the  case,  of  which  the  parts 
are  not,  as  steel,  exactly  alike,  but  give  a resultant  of  many  different  actions 

3430.  In  considering  these  remarkable  effects  of  heat,  the  question  still  recurs,  can 
substances  be  made  to  pass  each  other  magnetically  by  any  change  of  temperature? 
ft  does  not  appear  as  yet  that  any  of  them,  being  unmixed,  can  pass  the  zero  pre- 
sented by  a vacuum  or  carbonic  acid  gas,  i.  e.  none  can  be  converted  from  the  para- 
magnetic to  the  diamagnetic  state,  or  vice  versa,  these  states  being  defined  by  that 
zero ; and  so  far  that  would  appear  to  be  a true  and  natural  zero.  The  further 
question  may  be  asked,  whether,  if  equal  volumes  of  different  bodies  in  the  same 
shape  were  subjected  to  an  equal  magnetic  force,  at  various  temperatures,  so  that 
their  forces  might  be  expressed  in  their  full  and  true  relation,  upon  one  diagram 
scale,  would  the  lines  expressing  these  forces  ever  cross  each  other?  as  far  as  I can 
see  they  would  not ; but  the  results  are  as  yet  far  too  few  in  number,  and  too  imper- 
fect in  their  nature,  to  justify  any  serious  conclusion. 

* Experimental  Researches,  8vo,  vol.  ii.  p.  219.  t Ibid,  vol,  iii.  p.  444. 


Royal  Institution,  October  9th,  1855. 


[ 181  ] 


X.  Researches  on  the  Foramimfera. 

By  William  B.  Carpenter,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.  ^c. 

Received  May  21, — Read  June  14,  1855. 

PART  I. 

CONTAINING  GENERAL  INTRODUCTION,  AND  MONOGRAPH  OF  THE  GENUS  ORBITOLITES. 


page 

General  Introduction 181 

Monograph  of  the  Genus  Orlitolites. 

Section  I.  History 187 

H.  General  Plan  of  Organization 193 

HI.  Physiology  206 

IV.  Variations  213 

V.  Essential  Characters,  &c 223 

VI.  Species 224 

VH.  Concluding  Remarks  226 


General  Introduction. 

The  tribe  of  Animals  in  regard  to  certain  members  of  which  I propose  to  offer  to 
the  Royal  Society  the  results  of  my  detailed  investigations,  is  almost  unknown,  save 
by  name,  to  many  well-informed  Naturalists ; and  has  only  of  late  received  even  a 
small  measure  of  that  attention,  which  its  zoological  and  its  geological  importance, 
and  its  physiological  interest,  may  fairly  claim  for  it.  Of  the  bodies  which  are  now, 
on  account  of  their  general  conformity  to  a certain  plan  of  organization,  grouped 
together  under  the  designation  Foraminifera,  the  greater  proportion,  being  spiral 
rnultilocular  shells,  were  long  associated  with  Nautili  and  Ammoriites,  and  were  thus 
ranked  as  Cephalopodous  Mollushs  in  the  classifications  of  Lamarck  and  Cuvier; 
whilst  a few  others,  bearing  more  resemblance  to  certain  kinds  of  corals,  seemed 
naturally  to  take  their  places  among  Zoophytes. 

Down  to  a comparatively  recent  period,  scarcely  anything  has  been  known  beyond 
the  external  characters  presented  by  these  testaceous  or  coral-like  bodies ; their 
internal  organization  has  been  very  imperfectly  examined  ; of  their  intimate  structure, 
no  attempt  at  elucidation  has  been  made  ; and  as  to  the  nature  of  the  animals  of  which 
they  are  the  skeletons,  the  grossest  misapprehensions  and  errors  have  prevailed.  And 
though  many  important  steps  have  been  recently  made  in  this  direction,  it  is  obvious 
that  the  methods  which  have  been  proposed  for  the  classification  of  the  large  number 
of  forms  (apparently  distinct  from  each  other)  that  have  been  collected,  described, 

2 B 


MDCCCLVI. 


182 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


and  systematized,  must  be  provisional  merely.  No  general  foundation  has  yet  been 
laid  for  that  due  appreciation  of  the  value  of  characters,  which,  in  the  case  of  every 
natural  group,  must  be  based  on  the  careful  study  of  its  own  plan  of  organization, 
and  of  the  modifications  which  this  may  undergo,  and  which  cannot  be  safely  deduced 
by  analogy,  from  the  study  of  any  other  group,  however  closely  related.  Far  less 
can  any  such  analogy  be  truly  available,  that  is  drawn  from  the  higher  forms  of 
Mollusca,  and  applied  to  one  of  those  simple  types  of  animal  structure,  which  are 
now  commonly  included  under  the  general  designation  Protozoa. 

Having  been  myself  convinced,  by  the  careful  examination  and  extensive  com- 
parison which  I have  had  the  opportunity  of  making,  as  to  the  external  characters 
and  internal  structure  of  certain  Forarninifera,  that  neither  in  regard  to  the  limitation 
of  species,  nor  the  association  of  these  into  genera,  nor  the  grouping  of  genera  into 
Fa7niUes  and  Orders,  is  such  an  analogy  to  be  in  the  least  degree  relied  upon,  I am 
prepared  to  show  that  the  whole  fabric  which  has  been  erected  on  the  basis  of  it,  is 
utterly  insecure ; and  that  every  attempt  to  erect  a new  classification  of  the  group, 
without  a far  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  anatomical  structure  and  of  the  physio- 
logieal  history  of  the  animals  composing  it,  than  has  yet  been  sought  for,  must  neces- 
sarily be  premature  and  therefore  unsound. 

If,  therefore,  notwithstanding  the  large  amount  of  labour  which  has  been  given  to 
the  study  of  this  group,  we  are  really  as  yet  only  at  the  very  commencement  of  an 
exact  acquaintance  with  it,  I venture  to  think  that  any  contribution  towards  a more 
intimate  knowledge  will  be  welcomed,  by  all  such  as  consider  that  systematic  arange- 
ments  can  only  be  of  value,  when  based  on  an  extensive  comparison,  not  merely  of 
the  external  forms,  but  of  the  internal  organization,  of  the  objects  to  be  classified, 
and  when  carried  out  under  the  guidance  of  a competent  knowledge  of  their  Physi- 
ology as  living  beings.  It  may  be  well  for  me  here  to  state,  that  the  greater  part  of 
the  results  which  I purpose  to  communicate  in  successive  Memoirs,  are  based  upon 
the  examination,  not  of  a limited  number  of  individuals,  but  of  three  very  extensive 
suites  of  specimens,  which  have  been  liberally  placed  at  my  disposal ; the  first  of  these 
series  having  been  formed  from  the  dredgings  of  Mr.  J.  Beete  Jukes  on  the  coast  of 
Australia,  into  the  possession  of  which  I came  through  the  instrumentality  of  my  late 
friend  Professor  E.  Forbes  ; the  second  having  been  furnished  by  the  collection  of 
Forarninifera  made  by  Mr.  Hugh  Cuming  on  the  shores  of  the  Philippine  Islands, 
and  unreservedly  given  up  to  me  by  that  gentleman  for  the  purposes  of  scientific 
investigation  ; and  the  third  being  the  admirably-arranged  series  in  the  possession  of 
my  friend  Mr.  W.  K.  Parker,  who  has  for  several  years  been  patiently  and  industri- 
ously bringing  together  from  various  sources  a set  of  illustrations  of  this  group,  which 
in  many  departments  may  be  safely  pronounced  to  be  quite  unique.  The  import- 
ance of  the  first  two  of  these  collections  consists,  not  in  the  number  of  species  they 
include,  for  this  is  comparatively  limited  ; but,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  extraordi- 
nary development  as  to  size  which  most  of  these  species  present ; and  on  the  other, 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION. 


183 


in  the  immense  aggregation  of  individuals  they  contain,  thus  presenting  the  materials 
for  a most  full  and  complete  investigation  into  that  hitherto  comparatively  neglected 
subject,  the  range  of  variation  ivithin  the  limits  of  species.  And  the  great  value  of 
Mr.  Parker’s  collection  lies  in  his  having  followed  out  this  inquiry  (first  suggested  to 
him  by  myself  as  the  result  of  my  examination  of  the  other  two  collections)  in  regard 
to  a much  larger  number  of  species,  and  with  materials  brought  together  from  a 
much  wider  geographical  area. 

The  question  has  been  anxiously  considered  by  me,  in  what  mode  I might  render 
these  materials  most  beneficial  to  the  progress  of  science ; and  I have  come  to  the 
conclusion,  with  the  full  concurrence  of  some  of  the  most  eminent  Naturalists  both 
of  this  country  and  of  the  continent,  that  I should  be  doing  the  most  acceptable 
service,  by  instituting  a searching  investigation  into  the  entire  history  of  such  typical 
forms  of  this  remarkable  group,  as  should  be  most  fitted  to  afford  satisfactory  data 
for  reasoning  with  regard  to  the  rest; — including  in  this  history,  a minute  exami- 
nation of  the  structure,  not  only  of  the  testaceous  skeletons,  but  also  (where  this 
might  be  possible)  of  the  soft  animal  body  ; a careful  survey  of  the  differences  of  form 
and  aspect  presented  at  different  ages,  so  as  to  enable  the  history  of  any  individual  to 
be  traced  from  its  origin  to  its  decline ; a comparison  of  the  variations  both  in 
external  form  and  internal  structure,  presented  by  different  specimens,  sufficiently 
extensive  to  admit  of  the  determination  how  far  these  variations  are  of  value  as 
specific  characters,  or  how  far  they  must  be  accounted  merely  individual  departures 
from  the  ordinary  type ; a like  comparison  between  the  series  collected  in  different 
geographical  areas,  so  as  to  afford  a safe  basis  for  the  determination  of  the  range  of 
the  species,  and  the  amount  of  its  variation  in  space ; and  a further  extension  of  this 
comparison  to  similar  series  obtained  from  the  various  geological  strata  in  which  the 
like  forms  may  present  themselves,  so  as  to  ascertain  the  range  of  the  species  and  the 
extent  of  its  variation  in  time.  And  if  I should  seem,  in  following  out  this  plan,  to 
have  erred  on  the  side  of  over -minuteness,  I trust  to  receive  credit  for  the  real  motive 
which  has  induced  me  to  bestow  so  much  elaboration  on  the  work  I have  under- 
taken,— namely,  the  desire  to  furnish  a thoroughly  secure  foundation,  on  the  basis 
of  which  the  labours  of  others,  in  whatever  department  of  the  inquiry,  may  be  safely 
utilized  in  building  up  a complete  and  harmonious  superstructure. 

It  had  been  my  intention  to  preface  the  account  of  my  own  Researches,  with  a 
summary  of  the  History  of  our  knowledge  of  the  group  generally.  This  subject, 
however,  has  been  so  fully  and  satisfactorily  worked  out,  in  two  of  the  most  recent 
treatises  on  the  subject, — that  of  MM.  d’Archiac  and  Haime  on  Nummulites*,  and 
that  of  Professor  Schultze  on  certain  forms  of  existing  Foraminifera-I”,  the  latter 

* See  their  “ Monographie  des  Nummulites,”  forming  part  of  their  “ Description  des  Animaux  Fossiles  du 
Groupe  Nummulitique  de  ITnde,”  Paris,  1853. 

t Uber  den  Organismus  der  Polythalamien  (Foraminiferen)  nebst  Bermerkungen  uber  die  Rhizopoden  im 
allgemeinen.  Leipzig,  1854. 


2 B 2 


184 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


containing  a most  complete  Bibliography, — that  I do  not  feel  it  necessary  to  offer  more 
than  a mere  sketch,  marking  out  the  principal  periods  into  which  this  History  may 
be  divided. 

The^r^^  period  includes  all  the  observations  made  and  published  in  regard  to  these 
minute  polythalamous  bodies,  from  the  time  when  they  first  attracted  attention,  down 
to  the  date  (1825)  when  M.  d’Orbigny  grouped  them  together,  as  constituting  a 
distinct  type  of  structure.  The  observers  whose  labours  during  this  period  did  most 
to  prepare  the  way  for  their  successors,  were  Soldani*.  Fichtel  and  Moll'|~,  Mon- 
tague:J:,  and  Denys  de  Montfort§. 

The  second  period  commences  with  the  presentation  to  the  Academie  des  Sciences, 
in  1825,  of  M.  d’Orbigny’s  “Tableau  Methodiqiie  de  la  Classe  des Cephalopodes  in 
which  he  first  separated  these  chambered  shells,  under  the  title  of  Foraminifera,  from 
the  Siphonifera  ; still  retaining  the  former,  however,  like  the  latter,  as  an  order  of 
Cephalopods.  A large  number  of  new  forms  were  added  l)y  M.  d’Orbfgny  to  the  list 
of  those  previously  known  ; and  he  laid  the  basis  of  the  classification  which  he  has  since 
more  fully  elaborated.  No  suspicion  appears  then  to  have  crossed  his  mind,  that 
the  place  of  these  bodies  might  be  amongst  the  lowest,  instead  of  among  the  highest, 
of  the  Invertebrata ; and  if  his  determination  of  their  Molluscous  nature  was  based 
on  any  actual  observations  of  these  animals  in  their  living  state,  it  is  certain  that 
such  observations  must  have  been  of  the  most  superficial  character. 

The  third  period,  with  which  our  knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  the  Foraminifera 
really  commenced,  is  inaugurated  by  the  discovery,  first  announced  by  M.  Dujardin 
to  the  Academie  des  Sciences  in  June  1835,  of  the  Rhizopodoiis  nature  of  the  animal 
of  certain  simple  forms  of  Foraminifera,  and,  by  inference,  therefore,  of  that  of  the 
group  generally ; and  in  the  following  year  he  demonstrated  the  essential  identity 
between  the  Amoeba  and  other  simple  freshwater  Rhizopods  (described  by  Professor 
Ehrenberg  among  the  Polygastric  Animalcules)  and  the  Cristellaria  and  similar 
composite  forms  of  marine  Foraminifera,  which  had  been  previously  ranked  among 
Cephalopod  Mollusks|l. 

The  general  results  of  M.  Dujardin’s  observations  was,  that  the  animal  body  con- 
sists, in  every  instance,  of  a mass  of  sarcode, — a gelatinous,  somewhat  granular  sub- 
stance, not  enclosed  in  a distinct  membrane,  and  capable  of  extending  itself  into 
threads  of  extreme  tenuity  ; that  there  is  neither  mouth  nor  digestive  cavity,  but  that 
alimentary  particles,  received  into  the  very  substance  of  the  body,  are  gradually 
incorporated  with  it ; and  that  both  the  introduction  of  these  particles,  and  the  move- 

* Saggio  orittographico,  overo  osservazloni  sopra  la  terra  Nautiliche  e Ammonitiche  della  Toscana.  Sienne, 
1780. 

t Testacea  microscopica  allaque  minuta  ex  generibus  Argonauta  et  Nautilus,  ad  naturam  picta  et  descripta. 
VIndob.  1798,  1803. 

X Testacea  Britannica,  or  Natural  History  of  British  Shells.  London,  180.3-1808. 

§ Conchyologie  Systematique.  Paris,  1808. 

II  See  Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  2 s4r.,  Zool.  tom.  iii.  p.  312. 


GENERAL  INTRODUCTION. 


185 


merits  of  locomotion,  are  effected  by  means  of  pseiidopodial  prolongations  of  the 
sarcode^  put  forth  through  apertures  in  the  shell,  and  capable,  when  retracted  again, 
of  coalescing  with  the  general  mass.  In  the  case  of  the  composite  forms,  he  con- 
sidered the  entire  animal  to  be  made  up  of  a series  of  segments  which  are  essentially 
repetitions  one  of  another,  each  possessing  an  independent  vitality  of  its  own*. 
These  statements  have  been  subsequently  confirmed  and  rendered  more  precise  by 
several  other  observers;  their  truth  has  been  admitted  by  M.  d’Orbigny,  who,  in  ail 
his  recent  works,  has  described  the  animals  of  the  Foraminifera  in  accordance  with 
them  (though  without  any  allusion  to  the  fact,  that  he  had  himself  previously  laboured 
under  an  entire  misconception  of  their  character,  and  without  any  mention  of  the 
discoverer  of  their  real  nature) ; and  they  have  been  recently  placed  beyond  all  doubt, 
by  the  admirable  researches  of  Professor  Schultze  (O/i.  cvV.). 

It  cannot  but  seem  surprising,  that  notwithstanding  the  light  thrown  upon  this 
inquiry  by  M.  Dujardin  in  1 835,  Professor  Ehrenberg  should  in  1838  have  announced 
to  the  Academy  at  Berlin,  his  conclusion,  professedly  based  on  observations  of 
certain  forms  of  these  animals  in  their  living  state,  that  their  true  place  in  the  animal 
kingdom  is  among  the  Bryozoa^ic.  He  described  them  as  possessing  a distinct 
alimentary  canal,  which  extends  from  segment  to  segment;  this,  however,  instead  of 
being  single,  as  in  Nonionina,  may  (he  tells  us)  be  multiple,  as  in  Geoponiis;  so  that 
we  must  regard  each  segment  of  the  latter,  however  apparently  resembling  the  simple 
segment  of  the  former,  as  in  reality  composed  of  several  adhering  bodies.  In  one 
instance  (he  affirms)  he  found  the  mouth  surrounded  by  a plumose  sensory  and  pre- 
hensile apparatus,  like  that  of  the  Flustrce  and  Halcyonellie  (see  ultra,  ^ 4.),  but 
generally  speaking  be  admits  that  this  is  altogether  wanting,  the  mouth  being  a simple 
aperture.  He  saw  minute  extensile  tentacula  proceeding  from  all  parts  of  the  sieve- 
like shell,  as  described  by  Dujardin,  and  admitted  their  resemblance  to  the  pseudo- 
podia of  Dlfflugia,  &c.,  but  he  remarks,  “the  rest  of  their  organization,  which 
Dujardin  has  overlooked,  removes  them  from  the  Infusoria,  quite  as  far  as  from  a 
chaotic  primitive  substance.”  Besides  the  alimentary  canal.  Professor  Ehrenberg 
describes  a yellowish-brown  granular  mass  as  accompanying  and  sometimes  surround- 
ing it  up  to  the  last  of  the  spirals  ; this  he  considers  as  an  ovary. 

As  I have  reason  to  believe  that  Professor  Ehrenberg  stands  quite  alone  in  this 
opinion  (if,  indeed,  he  still  maintains  it),  and  that  the  real  nature  of  the  segments  of 
sarcode  and  of  their  connecting  threads,  is  no  longer  a matter  of  question  among 
those  Naturalists  who  have  given  their  unprejudiced  attention  to  the  subject,  I do 
not  think  it  requisite  to  occupy  either  time  or  space  with  any  further  discussion  of 
the  question,  and  therefore  dismiss  it  with  this  brief  mention. 

* See  his  “ Histoire  Naturelle  des  Infusoires,”  Paris,  1841  ; and  Art.  Rhizopodes  \n  Diet.  Univ.  d’Hist.  Nat., 
tom.  xi.  p.  115,  Paris,  1848. 

i'  See  his  Memoirs  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Berlin,  for  1839  and  1840;  also 
Taylor’s  Scientific  Memoirs,  vol.  iii.  p.  319. 


186 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


It  may,  however,  be  well  here  to  remark  in  limine,  that  it  obviously  makes  a most 
essential  difference  in  our  appreciation  of  the  value  of  the  characters  afforded  by  the 
form,  position,  and  multiplication  of  the  apertures  of  communication  between  the 
chambers  of  the  shell,  whether  we  regard  these  as  giving  passage  to  an  organ  of  such 
fundamental  importance  as  an  alimentary  canal,  or  whether  they  merely  serve  for  the 
connexion  of  the  different  segments  by  stolons  of  sarcode.  For  variations,  which  in 
the  former  case  must  be  regarded  as  indicative  of  such  essential  differences,  both  in 
structure  and  function,  as  would  rightly  characterize  distinct  genera  or  even  distinct 
families,  may  easily  be  admitted,  on  the  latter  view,  to  be  of  such  comparatively 
trivial  moment,  as  to  rank  no  higher  than  specific  characters,  or  perhaps  even  to  be 
matters  of  individual  difference.  That  the  latter  is  the  true  view  of  the  case,  I have 
become  completely  assured  in  the  course  of  my  researches ; and  I shall  hereafter  be 
able  to  adduce  some  curious  illustrations  of  it. 

Turning  now  to  the  more  recent  History  of  research,  I shall  briefly  notice  those 
investigations  which  have  done  most  towards  the  advance  of  our  knowledge  of  the 
organization  and  physiology  of  the  Foraminifera  ; the  mere  collection,  description, 
and  systematic  arrangement  of  new  forms,  without  any  such  advance,  being  no  more 
a feature  of  progress,  than  is  the  building-up  of  an  edifice,  which  must  necessarily 
fall,  through  the  insecurity  of  its  foundation,  before  it  shall  have  been  completed. 

The  first  series  of  these,  made  by  Professor  W.  C.  Williamson  of  Manchester,  upon 
Polystomella  crispa* * * §,  not  only  established  several  important  facts  in  regard  to  its 
minute  structure,  but  may  be  regarded  as  having  furnished  the  starting-point  for  all 
future  investigations  of  a like  kind.  Among  these  facts  were  several  that  became  of 
essential  value  to  myself,  in  the  inquiry  on  which  I was  engaged  at  the  same  time, 
in  regard  to  the  structure  of  Nummulites-,  and  served  to  confirm  the  inferences  which 
I had  deduced  from  the  other  features  of  that  important  type,  as  to  its  participation 
in  tlie  characters  of  the  Foraminifera  generally.  In  the  course  of  that  inquiry  I made 
the  discovery'}',  not  only  of  a most  elaborate  and  previously-unsuspected  structure  in 
the  shell  itself,  but  also  of  a system  of  interseptal  canals,  which  established  a com- 
munication between  the  inner  segments  and  the  external  surface,  much  more  direct 
than  that  which  they  possess  through  the  series  of  segments  which  form  the  outer  turns 
of  the  spire.  The  existence  of  this  system  of  canals  has  been  verified,  not  merely  in 
Nummulites  by  MM.  d’Archiac  and  Haime  {Op.  cit.),  but  also  in  several  recent  types  ; 
thus  Professor  Williamson  has  detected  \im  Amphistegina  and  Nonionina^,  and  more 
recently  in  Faujasina^  (which  furnishes  one  of  the  most  remarkable  examples  of  it) ; 
whilst  Mr.  Carter  of  Bombay  has  discovered  it  in  Operculina\\.  My  own  inquiries, 
which  have  been  carried-on  with  scarcely  an  intermission,  from  the  time  of  my  first 

* Transactions  of  the  Microscopical  Society,  1st  ser.  vol.  ii.  p.  159. 

t Quarterly  .Journal  of  the  Geological  Society  of  London,  vol.  vi.  February  1850,  p.  22. 

I Transactions  of  the  Microscopical  Society,  1st  series,  vol.  iii.  p.  105. 

§ Ibid.  2nd  series,  vol.  i.  p.  87.  1|  Annals  of  Natural  History,  2nd  series,  vol.  x.  p.  161. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES  : — HISTORY. 


187 


discovery  of  this  remarkable  point  of  structure,  have  been  specially  directed  to  the 
determination  of  the  extent  to  which  it  presents  itself  in  the  different  sections  of  the 
group,  and  of  its  value  as  a distinctive  character;  and  I think  that  I shall  be  able  to 
show  that  it  is  a feature  of  the  utmost  importance,  the  presence  of  which  marks  an 
elevation  of  type,  and  its  absence  a corresponding  degradation. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted,  that  the  recent  investigations  of  Professor  Schultze 
should  have  been  so  entirely  restricted  to  the  structure  of  the  animal,  which  can 
only  be  ascertained  in  a comparatively  small  number  of  cases ; and  that  he  should 
have  failed  so  completely  in  the  determination  of  the  internal  organization  of  the 
shell*,  which  in  a large  proportion  of  instances  is  the  only  guide  we  possess  to  the 
nature  of  the  being  which  formed  it.  The  new  classification  which  he  proposes, 
whilst  in  many  respects  an  improvement  upon  that  of  M.  d’Orbigny,  is  essentially 
vitiated  by  this  defect;  and  being  in  itself,  therefore,  just  as  provisional  as  that  for 
which  it  is  proposed  as  a substitute,  can  scarcely  be  expected  to  supersede  it.  My 
own  researches  I offer  simply  as  materials  to  serve  as  a basis  for  classification  ; feeling 
assured  that  the  time  is  not  yet  come,  in  which  the  superstructure  can  be  erected  with 
any  prospect  of  permanent  stability. 

I shall  commence  with  a minute  analysis  of  one  of  the  lowest  types,  Orbitolites ; 
and  propose  to  show  hereafter,  that  Orbiculina  and  Alveolina,  though  ranked  in  a 
different  order  by  M.  d’Orbigny,  are  in  reality  closely  allied  to  it ; whilst  a new  genus 
{Cycloclypeus),  which,  in  M.  d’Orbigny’s  arrangement,  would  rank  close  to  Orbitolites, 
is  physiologically  separated  from  it  by  the  widest  possible  interval. 

Genus  Orbitolites. 

I.  History. 

1.  The  Orbitolite  has  been  chiefly  known,  until  very  recently,  rather  by  its  fossil, 
than  by  its  existing  forms.  The  abundant  occurrence  of  its  disks  in  the  Calcaire 
grossier  of  the  Paris  basin,  early  attracted  attention  ; but  Orbitolites  were  not  clearly 
distinguished  by  the  older  observers  from  Nummulites,  and  their  true  nature  was 
entirely  misunderstood.  Thus  we  find  them  designated,  often  in  association  with 
Nummulites,  under  the  title  of  Umbilicus  marinus  by  Plancus  (Bianchi),  who 

* Professor  ScHUiiTZE  states  {op.  cit.  p.  15)  his  inability  to  discover  the  canal-system  above  described  ; and 
as  there  is  no  question  of  his  competency  and  accuracy  as  an  observer,  I can  only  impute  his  failure  to  his 
ignorance  of  the  proper  mode  of  preparing  thin  sections  of  these  minute  shells  ; — which  consists  in  cementing 
them  to  a slip  of  glass  by  hardened  Canada-balsam ; grinding  them  down  as  far  as  may  be  desirable  on  one 
side  ; then  loosening  them  by  heat  and  turning  them  over,  so  that  the  flattened  surface  shall  now  be  attached ; 
and  finally  grinding  down  the  other  side,  until  the  requisite  degree  of  thinness  shall  have  been  attained;  after 
which  a drop  of  liquid  Canada-balsam  is  laid  upon  the  specimen,  gentle  warmth  applied,  and  a cover  of  thin 
glass  put  on.  Having  myself  thus  prepared  sections  of  Favjasina,  which  answer  in  every  respect  to  the  figures 
accompanying  Professor  Williamson’s  memoir  above  cited,  I can  hear  the  most  explicit  testimony  to  their 
exactness. 


188 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINI FERA. 


imagined  them  to  be  opercula  of  Ammonites*;  of  Porpitce  nummulares  by  STOB^us-j- 
and  Bromell:|;,  who  seem  to  have  regarded  them  as  representing  the  disks  of  the 
existing  Porpitee  ; of  Helicites  and  Operculites  by  Guettard  §,  who  considered  them 
as  opercula  of  Gasteropods  ; of  DiscoUthes  by  Fortis  ||,  who  supposed  them  to  be 
skeletons  of  mollusks ; of  Madreporites  by  Deluc,  and  of  Milleporites  by  Faujas 
DE  St.  Fond,  whose  idea  of  their  nature  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  names  they 
assigned  to  them. 

2.  The  genus  OrhitoUtes  seems  first  to  have  been  erected,  and  distinctly  separated 

from  Nummulite,  by  Lamarck,  in  the  first  edition  of  his  ‘^Animaux  sans  Vert^bres,’ 
its  type  being  the  O.  complanata  of  the  Paris  basin.  The  following  is  his  definition 
of  the  genus,  which  he  ranks  between  Lunulites  and  Millepora,  among  his  “Polypiers 
Foraminfis”: — “Polypiarium  lapideum,  liberum,  orbiculare,  planum  seu  concavum, 
utrinque  vel  margine  porosum,  nummulitem  referens.  Pori  minimi,  adamussim  dis- 
positi,  conferti,  interdum  vix  conspicui.”  These  bodies,  he  says,  are  distinguished 
from  Nummulites  by  the  opening  of  their  marginal  pores,  and  by  the  absence  of 
spiral  arrangement  in  their  minute  chambers  or  cells.  In  his  second  edition  (1816), 
he  altered  the  name  from  OrhitoUtes  to  OrbuUtes ; but  the  latter  designation  having 
been  previously  employed  in  Malacology,  the  first  appellation  has  been  restored  by 
M.  Milne -Edwards  in  his  posthumous  edition  of  Lamarck’s  work.  Under  one  of 
the  designations,  OrhitoUtes  or  OrhuUtes,  the  genus  has  been  recognized  by  Schweig- 
GER^,  Brongniart  and  Cuvier**,  Lamouroux'|~'|',  Deslongchamps:|:|,  Defrance§^, 
Blainville  |1||,  Bronn  w,  Goldfuss***,  Michelin  Pictet  and  Dujar- 

DiN§§§;  none  of  whom,  however,  have  either  given  any  account  of  its  internal  struc- 
ture, or  made  any  essential  modification  in  the  definition  of  the  genus,  which  they  all 
left  in  the  place  which  Lamarck  had  assigned  to  it. 

3.  The  existence  of  more  than  one  recent  species  of  the  same  type  was  indicated 
or  expressly  mentioned  by  several  of  the  foregoing  writers.  Thus  Fortis  tells  us 

* De  Conchis  minus  notis,  1739  {fide  D’Archiac  et  Haime),  and  App.  Phytol.  F.  Coll.  1764  {fide  Rupeht 
Jones). 

t Dissertatio  epist.  ad  W.  Grothaus  de  nummulo  Brattenburgensi,  1732;  Opera  petrefactorum,  1752; 
Opusculis,  p.  6 {fide  D’Archiac  et  Haime). 

X De  Nummulo  Brattenburgico,  in  Act.  Litt.  Suec.,  vol.  ii.  p.  50  {fide  D’Archiac  et  Haime). 

§ Memoires  sur  differentes  parties  des  Sciences  et  des  Arts,  1770. 

II  Memoires  pour  servir  a I’Hist.  Nat.  de  I’ltalie,  1816,  vol.  ii. ; and  Journal  de  Physique,  1801,  vol.  Hi.  p.l06. 

^ Beobacht.  auf  Naturg.  (1819),  pi.  6. 

**  Ossemens  Fossiles  (1822),  vol.  ii.  pt.  2.  p.  270. 

tt  Expos.  Method,  des  gen.  des  Pol)"piers  (1821),  p.  44.  pi.  73. 

It  Encyclop.  Method.,  Zooph.  (1824),  p.  584. 

§§  Dictionn.  des  Sci.  Nat.  (1825),  vol.  xxxvi.  pp.  294,  295. 

III!  Manuel  d’Actinologie  (1830),  p.  411.  pi.  72.  Lethsea  Geognostica  (1836-37),  pi.  35. 

***  Petrefacten  (1826-33),  vol.  i.  p.  41.  pi.  12.  ftt  Icon.  Zoophyt.  (1845),  p.  167.  pi.  46. 

XXI  Traitd  Element,  de  Paleontologie  (1844-45),  tom.  iv. 

§§§  Diet.  Univ.  d’Hist.  Nat.,  tome  ix.  (1847),  p.  162. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES:  — HISTORY. 


189 


{op.  cit.),  on  the  authority  of  a voyager  in  the  Indian  seas,  that  living  Discolites 
have  been  found  there  ; and  as  there  are  no  existing  Nummulites,  this  statement 
probably  refers  to  an  Orbitolite.  Lamarck,  in  his  second  edition,  describes,  under 
the  title  of  O.  marginalis,  a small  form  of  Orbitolite,  only  2 millirns.  (‘08  inch)  in  dia- 
meter, found  upon  fuci,  corallines,  &c,  in  the  European  seas ; this  he  speaks  of  as 
the  only  living  example  of  the  genus  then  known,  and  he  defines  it  as  O.  utrinque 
plana,  marglne  poroso.  Besides  this  species,  however,  Defrance  {loc.  cit.)  mentions 
another,  more  closely  resembling  the  O.  complanata  of  the  Paris  basin,  as  existing  on 
the  shores  of  New  Holland ; and  this  seems  the  first  clear  indication  of  the  body 
(afterwards  found  by  MM.  Quoy  and  Gaimard  in  that  locality,  and  erected  by  them 
into  the  distinct  genus  Marginopora),  the  structure  of  which  constitutes  the  chief 
subject  of  my  present  communication.  Both  these  existing  forms  are  described  by 
Blainville  {op.  cit.),  the  first  from  actual  observation,  the  second  on  the  information 
of  MM.  Quoy  and  Gaimard,  to  the  manuscript  of  whose  ‘Voyage  de  I’Astrolabe’ 
(then  unpublished)  he  refers  as  his  authority.  It  is  singular,  however,  that  after  an 
attentive  search  through  the  published  “Zoology”  of  that  work,  I have  not  been  able 
to  find,  either  in  the  text  or  in  the  plates,  any  mention  of  Marginopora  or  of  Orhito- 
lites.  Of  the  OrhitoUtes  marginalis,  M.  de  Blainville  says  {op.  cit.  p.  412), — “ Nous 
I’avons  etudiee  avec  soin  ; et  nous  sommes  presque  convaincu  que  ces  petits  corps 
cretaces  ne  sont  pas  de  veritables  polypiers ; mais  bien  quelque  pi^ce  interieure,  qui 
s’accroit  par  la  circonference.  II  est  en  eflfet  evident,  qu’il  n’y  a pas  de  cellules  pro- 
prement  dites,  a moins  qu’on  ne  veuille  regarder  comme  telles  les  deux  plans  de 
locules  qui  occupent  le  bord,  et  qui  n’oflfrent  rien  determine.  Tout  le  reste  est  cou- 
vert  d’une  legere  croiite  cretacee,  qui  ferme  les  anciens  pores.”  I think  it  obvious, 
from  this  description,  that  it  was  founded  on  specimens  resembling  that  in  Plate  VII. 
fig.  8,  in  which  the  marginal  row  of  cells  has  been  laid  open  above  and  below  by 
accidental  abrasion  ; and  that  the  true  marginal  pores,  opening  between  the  protu- 
berances formed  by  the  cells  (Plate  V.  fig.  1),  were  overlooked.  The  genus  Margi- 
nopora, placed  by  M.  de  Blainville  in  immediate  sequence  to  Orbitolites,  is  thus 
characterized  {loc.cit.)-. — “ Animaux  inconnus,  contenus  dans  les  cellules  poriformes, 
excessivement  petites,  rondes,  serrees,  eparses  dans  les  sinuosit^s,  tres  fines  et  tor- 
tueuses,  qui  guillochent  la  circonference  d’un  polypier  calcaire,  libre,  un  peu  irre- 
gulier,  discoide,  concave  ou  concentriquement  strie  en  dessus  comme  en  dessous,  et 
plus  epais  sur  les  bords.”  The  two  surfaces,  M.  de  Blainville  further  tells  us,  only 
exhibit  striae  of  increase,  without  any  trace  of  pores;  but  the  turned-iip  edge  is 
entirely  riddled  with  very  fine  rounded  pores,  which  are  situated  in  the  sinuosities  of 
a very  close  but  shallow  engine-turning  (guiilochis).  And  when  one  of  its  surfaces 
is  rubbed  away,  the  disk  is  found  to  be  formed  of  concentric  canals,  separated  by 
partitions,  and  themselves  divided  into  cells,  thus  recalling  in  some  degree  the  struc- 
ture of  Orbitolites.  Having  myself  had  the  opportunity  of  inspecting,  by  the  kind- 
ness of  M.  Valenciennes,  the  specimens  of  Marginopora  on  which  the  foregoing 

2 c 


MDCCCLVI. 


190 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


description  was  founded  (these  being  now  contained  in  the  ‘ Musee  d’Histoire  Natu- 
relle’),  I have  been  able  to  compare  them  with  my  own;  and  finding  that  they 
correspond  with  the  peculiar  type  of  the  latter,  which  is  represented  in  Plate  V. 
figs.  2 & 3,  I have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  in  this  description  also  the  true 
marginal  yores,  represented  in  Plate  V.  fig.  6,  have  been  overlooked;  and  that  what 
are  described  by  M.  de  Blainville  as  pores,  are  nothing  else  than  incomplete  cells 
left  open  in  the  frilled  edges  which  bound  the  marginal  furrow  above  and  below 
(see  5[  25).  A similar  description  has  since  been  given  by  M.  Dujardin*,  who  does 
not  hesitate  to  regard  the  disk  as  a polypary,  and  to  speak  of  the  animals  whereby  it 
is  formed,  as  polypes. 

4.  In  the  Memoir  of  Professor  Ehrenberg  already  referred  to,  we  find  the  genus 
Orbitolites  for  the  first  time  associated  with  true  Foraminifera,  as  a member  of  his 
class  Bryozoa,  order  PolytJiala7nia,  suborder  Polysomatia,  family  Asterodiscina, 
wherein  it  is  placed  next  to  Lumdites,  which  undoubtedly  belongs  to  the  group  of 
Bryozoa  (Polyzoa)  as  now  restricted.  This  family  he  characterizes  as  follows:— 
‘^Gemmis  in  eodem  piano  prodeuntibus,  polypiaria  plana,  discoidea,  formantibus, 
osculis  distinctis  post  mortem  apertis;”  and  it  is  by  the  last  of  these  characters  that 
he  distinguishes  it  from  the  family  Soritidce,  consisting  of  the  two  genera  Sorites  and 
Amyhisorus,  of  which  he  says, — “Osculis  contracto  corpore,  tanquam  operculo  duro 
clausis.”  If  any  faith  whatever  is  to  be  placed  in  Professor  Ehrenberg’s  figures  and 
descriptions,  his  Sorites  is  nothing  else  than  Lamarck’s  Orhulites  marginalis  \ whilst 
his  Amyhisorus,  which  differs  from  Sorites  merely  in  having  two  layers  of  cells  instead 
of  one,  is  (as  I shall  hereafter  show)  the  same  type  in  a higher  grade  of  development. 
I cannot  conceal  my  astonishment,  however,  that  so  practised  a microscopic  observer 
should  have  entirely  overlooked  the  real  marginal  openings  between  the  cells;  still 
more,  that  he  should  have  described  the  entirely-closed  cells  of  the  surface  as  covered 
in  by  a moveable  operculum,  which  merely  shuts  their  orifices  when  the  animal  is 
contracted  ; and  further,  that,  mistaking  an  accidental  for  a normal  opening  of  some 
of  the  cells,  he  should  have  ventured  to  figure  an  eight-armed  Bryozoon  as  issuing 
forth  from  one  of  them, — a phenomenon  which,  I do  not  hesitate  to  say,  is  entirely 
irreconcileable  with  our  existing  knowledge  of  the  organization  of  the  animal  of 
which  these  disks  are  the  skeletons. 

5.  The  earlier  publications  of  M.  d’Orbigny  on  the  subject  of  the  Foraminifera  do 
not  include  any  notice  of  this  genus  ; and  neither  in  the  systematic  arrangement 
which  he  put  forth  in  his  article  in  the  ‘Diet.  Univ.  d’Hist.  Nat.’  tome  v.  (1844),  nor 
in  that  contained  in  his  ‘ Foram.  Foss,  de  Vienne’  (1846),  is  the  order  Cyclostegues 
recognized,  which  makes  its  appearance  for  the  first  time  in  his  ‘ Cours  Elementaire 
de  Paleontologie,’  tome  ii.  (1852),  between  the  Monostegues  and  the  Helicostegues, 
with  the  following  definition  (p.  192): — “Animal  compose  de  segments  nombreux, 
places  en  lignes  circnlaires.  Coquille  discoidale,  composee  de  loges,  concentriques, 

* Diet.  Univ.  d’Hist.  Nat.,  tome  vii.  p.  777. 


GENUS  ORBITOIJTES: — HISTORY. 


191 


simples  ou  multiples ; point  de  spirale.”  Under  this  order  are  ranged  the  genera 
CycloUna  (D’Orb,  1839),  OrhitoUtes  (Lamarck,  1801,  and  Marginopora,  Quov  et 
Gaimard,  1836),  Orhitolina  (D’Orb.  1847),  and  Orhitoides  (D’Orb.  1847).  As  I shall 
have  occasion  to  show  that  the  first  three  of  these  genera  cannot  be  separated  from 
each  other  by  any  valid  distinctions,  and  that  the  greater  number  of  the  species 
ranked  under  them  by  M.  d’Orbigny  (see  his  ‘Prodrome  de  Paleontologie  Strati- 
graphique’)  really  belong  to  the  same  specific  type,  I must  here  cite  the  generic  cha- 
racters which  he  assigns  to  them  : — “ CycloUna,  Coquille  discoidale,  chaque  loge 
percoe  de  nombreux  pores,  faisant  im  circle  entier  aiitour  des  autres.  L’esp^ce  con- 
nue  est  de  I’etage  cenomanien. — OrhitoUtes,  Coquille  discoidale,  plane,  egale,  et 
encroutee  des  deux  cotes,  pourvue  de  lignes  concentriqiies.  Loges  nombreuses, 
par  lignes  irregulieres,  transverses,  visibles  seulement  au  pourtour.  Nous  connais- 
sons  deux  esp^ces  ; les  premieres,  de  I’etage  suessonien  ; le  maximum,  dans  les 
mers  actuelles. — Orhitolina,  Ce  sont  des  Orbitolites  a cotes  inegaux ; Fun,  convexe, 
eucroute,  a lignes  concentriques ; I’autre,  concave,  non  encroute,  rnontrant  des  loges 
nombreuses,  par  lignes  obliques  sur  le  cote,  au  pourtour.  Nous  connaissons  de  ce 
genre  perdu  six  esp^ces  ; les  premieres,  de  I’etage  albien  ; les  derni^res,  de  I’etage 
senonien.” 

6.  The  first  approach  towards  a more  accurate  knowledge  of  the  real  nature  of  the 
Orbitolite,  through  an  examination  of  its  internal  structure,  was  made  (I  believe)  by 
myself,  in  my  Memoir  “ On  the  Microscopic  Structure  of  NummuUna,  OrhitoUtes, 
and  Orhitoides,''  read  before  the  Geological  Society  of  London  in  November  1849, 
and  published  in  its  Quarterly  Journal  for  February  18.50.  The  place  assigned  to 
this  genus  in  the  system  of  M.  d’Orbigny  not  having  been  at  that  time  made  public, 
and  all  other  zoologists  and  paleontologists  having  ranked  it  in  close  approximation 
to  Lunulites  and  other  Polyparies  of  the  Bryozoic  (Polyzoic)  kind,  I entered  upon 
the  examination  without  the  least  suspicion  that  this  organism  was  to  be  regarded  in 
any  other  light ; and  that  I was  not  undeceived  in  the  course  of  it,  may  be  attributed 
to  the  small  number  of  specimens  then  placed  at  my  disposal  for  the  inquiry  by  my 
late  friend  Professor  E.  Forbes,  and  to  the  circumstance  that  these  specimens  were 
of  the  type  that  presents  most  resemblance  to  that  of  a Bryozoic  polypary,  and  were 
all  deficient  in  the  central  nucleus,  which  is  the  portion  most  indicative  of  their 
Foraminiferous  nature.  Nevertheless,  the  marked  dissimilarity  in  structure  which  I 
found  to  exist  between  the  disk  of  Orbitolite  and  the  polypary  of  Lunulite  or  of  any 
other  undoubted  members  of  the  Bryozoic  group,  made  me  even  then  express  myself 
doubtfully  as  to  its  title  to  be  associated  with  them.  In  this  Memoir,  published  two 
years  previously  to  M.  d’Orbigny’s  first  announcement  of  the  fact,  I showed  that  the 
genn?,  Marginopora  must  be  abolished,  since  its  sole  representative  is  so  closely  allied 
in  structure  to  the  Orhitolite  of  the  Paris  basin,  that  no  doubt  of  their  generic  iden- 
tity can  be  entertained ; the  existing  M.  vertehralis,  in  fact,  being  only  specifically 
distinguishable  from  the  fossil  O.  complanata,  by  a difference  in  the  form  of  its  super- 

2 c 2 


192 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


ficial  cells, — a character  to  which  the  more  extended  knowledge  of  this  type  has  made 
it  clear  to  me  that  not  the  slightest  value  is  to  be  attached  (see  Sect.  IV.).  I showed 
that  in  one  as  in  the  other,  the  cells  are  normally  closed-in  over  the  whole  surface; 
that  the  cells  of  the  two  surfaces  are  separated  from  each  other  by  an  intervening 
stratum,  traversed  by  a set  of  round  cells  or  passages  of  its  own,  with  which  each 
superficial  cell  communicates  by  two  small  apertures  ; and  that  the  only  real  exter- 
nal orifices  are  the  minute  pores  at  the  margin  of  the  disk,  which  communicate,  not 
directly  with  the  cells  of  the  superficial  layers,  but  with  the  passages  of  the  inter- 
mediate stratum. 

7.  A very  important  addition  to  this  limited  measure  of  information  was  made  not 
long  afterwards  by  Professor  Williamson  of  Manchester,  who,  in  a paper  read  before 
the  Microscopical  Society  of  London,  June  12,  1850,  and  published  in  its  Transac- 
tions (First  Series,  vol.  iii.  March  1851),  first  gave  a minute  description  of  the  small 
recent  Orhitolites  marginaUs  of  Lamarck  (which,  however,  he  designated  as  O.  com- 
planata)-,  contrasted  it  with  that  of  a large  recent  Orbitolite  from  Tonga,  shown  by 
hiis  description  to  be  identical  with  the  Marginogora  of  Quov  and  Gaimard,  to  my  pre- 
vious account  of  which  he  added  some  important  particulars;  and  compared  both 
vvfith  the  well-known  OrhicuUna  adunca  of  the  Bahamas.  His  investigations  led  him 
to  the  conclusion,  that  these  three  forms  should  rank  under  the  same  genus  Orhi- 
cuUna-,  their  most  important  structural  features  being  common  to  all,  whilst  their 
differences  are  only  of  specific  value.  His  OrhicuUna  complanata  (really  Orhitolites 
marginaUs)  he  characterizes  by  its  spiral  commencement,  and  by  its  possessing  only 
one  layer  of  cells  ; his  O.  Tonga  (Marginopora)  he  characterizes  by  its  cyclical  com- 
mencement, and  by  its  possession  of  two  superficial  layers  of  cells,  with  an  interme- 
diate stratum,  as  I had  previously  pointed  out;  whilst  the  O.  adunca  he  shows  to 
commence  on  the  spiral  type,  and  to  carry  it  on  much  further  than  his  O.  compla- 
nata, but  finally  to  assume  the  cyclical,  and  then  to  correspond  very  closely  with  his 
O.  Tonga.  The  title  of  the  genus  Orhitolites  to  a place  in  the  group  of  Foraminifera, 
in  near  proximity  to,  if  not  in  union  with,  OrhicuUna  (which  had  been  ranked  as  such 
by  M.  d’Orbigny  from  an  early  period  of  his  investigations),  and  the  entire  absence 
of  any  ground  for  ranking  it  among  the  Bryozoa  (Polyzoa),  were  clearly  established 
by  Professor  Williamson  in  this  valuable  memoir;  and  though  I shall  hereafter  have 
occasion  to  show  that  some  of  his  conclusions  were  erroneous,  yet  I regard  them  as 
fully  justified  at  the  time,  by  the  information  which  the  materials  at  his  command 
afforded  ; my  own  means  of  correcting  them  being  only  supplied  by  the  comparison 
I have  been  enabled  to  institute  through  a much  wider  range  of  specimens.  And  it 
is  with  great  satisfaction  that  I am  enabled  to  add,  that,  after  a careful  inspection  of 
my  preparations  and  drawings,  Professor  Williamson  authorises  me  to  express  his 
full  accordance  in  the  results  which  I shall  now  proceed  to  detail. 

8.  As  the  value  of  such  details  cannot  be  truly  estimated  without  some  knowledge 
of  the  range  of  the  observations  from  which  they  are  derived,  I think  it  right  to  state 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — GENERAL  PLAN  OF  ORGANIZATION. 


urs 

in  limine  what  are  the  opportunities  I have  enjoyed.  The  first  and  most  important 
of  these  was  afforded  me  by  the  great  abundance  of  Orbitolites  of  various  sizes, 

from  o to  besides  a vast  multitude  of  fragments,  in  Mr.  Jukes’s  Australian 

dredgings ; besides  which.  Professor  E.  Forbes  kindly  put  into  my  hands  several  spe- 
cimens which  had  been  taken  in  their  living  state  by  Mr.  Jukes,  from  the  marine 
plants  to  which  they  were  attached.  All  these  I have  carefully  examined  under  the 
microscope,  so  as  to  be  able  to  make  an  exact  determination  of  their  external  cha- 
racters ; and  of  a large  proportion  I have  made  microscopic  sections  in  various  direc- 
tions, that  I might  assure  myself  of  every  particular  respecting  their  internal  struc- 
ture. When  I had  nearly  exhausted  these  sources  of  information,  I found  a new  and 
most  interesting  series  of  specimens  in  Mr.  Cuming’s  Philippine  collection;  and  by 
the  study  of  these  I was  enabled  to  test  the  validity  of  the  conclusions,  to  which  I had 
been  led  by  the  examination  of  the  Australian  forms.  The  kindness  of  various  friends 
has  further  enabled  me  to  examine  specimens  obtained  from  other  widely-distant 
localities,  such  as  different  parts  of  the  Indian,  Southern,  and  Pacific  Oceans,  the 
Red  Sea  and  the  iEgean.  And  finally,  I have  had  placed  at  my  disposal,  through 
the  instrumentality  of  Professor  Quekett,  several  Orbitolites  of  various  sizes  and 
ages,  obtained  on  the  shores  of  the  Feejee  Islands  by  the  late  Sir  Everard  Home,  in 
which  the  animal  substance  occupying  the  interior  had  been  preserved  by  the  immer- 
sion of  the  fresh  specimens  in  spirits. 

9.  Besides  the  existing  forms,  I have  examined  a large  number  of  specimens  of 
Fossil  Orbitolites,  both  from  the  Paris  basin  and  from  other  localities  ; and  I have 
instituted  the  same  kind  of  minute  comparison  of  these  specimens,  both  with  each 
other  and  with  the  recent  types,  that  I had  previously  made  among  the  diversified 
forms  of  the  latter. 

10.  Postponing,  until  adequate  means  shall  have  been  supplied  by  the  details  of 
their  organization,  to  be  presently  given,  the  inquiry  into  the  relationship  of  these 
different  forms  (Sect.  VI.),  we  shall  proceed  in  the  first  place  to  consider  the  general 
plan  of  organization  of  the  Orbitolite,  and  then  to  study  the  variations  to  which  this 
is  subject. 

II.  General  Plan  of  Organization. 

11.  In  studying  the  organization  of  the  Orbitolite,  we  shall  have  recourse,  on  the 
one  hand,  to  the  structural  characters  presented  by  the  Animal,  as  displayed  by  the 
fleshy  residuum  left  after  the  decalcification  of  specimens  in  which  it  has  been  pre- 
served ; and  on  the  other,  to  the  structural  characters  presented  by  the  Shell,  of 
which  some  are  visible  on  its  surface,  and  without  any  preparation,  whilst  others 
may  be  seen  in  thin  specimens  by  transmitted  light,  but  of  which  the  greater  part 
can  only  be  brought  into  view  by  thin  sections  taken  in  various  directions,  especially 
horizontal  or  parallel  to  the  surface,  and  vertical  or  perpendicular  to  the  surface. 


194 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


12.  The  state  of  preservation  of  the  animal  body  of  the  Orbitolite,  in  the  spirit- 
specirnens  which  I have  examined,  is  so  complete,  as  to  leave  me  no  room  for  hesi- 
tation in  affirming-  that  it  corresponds  in  every  particular  with  the  ‘sarcode’  which 
we  have  seen  to  liave  been  first  described  by  M.  Dujardin,  as  constituting  the  bodies 
of  many  of  the  lowest  organisms,  and  especially  as  the  component  of  those  of  the 
Rhizopoda.  A small  portion  of  this  substance,  sufficiently  magnified  to  exhibit  its 
nearly  homogeneous  jelly-like  aspect,  with  minute  granules  and  somewhat  larger  par- 
ticles scattered  through  it,  is  shown  in  Plate  IV.  fig.  2.  Although  it  is  so  far  decolo- 
rized in  spirit-specimens  as  to  present  only  a brownish  hue,  yet  as  specimens  that 
have  been  gathered  fresh  and  have  been  then  dried,  possess  a reddish  aspect,  and  as 
this  is  not  due  to  the  shelly  substance,  it  may  be  presumed  that  the  sarcode  of  the 
living  Orbitolite  has  the  same  bright  red  colour  as  that  of  Rotalia  and  many  other 
Foraminifera.  The  entire  animal  body  (Plate  IV.  fig.  1)  is  composed  of  a numerous 
assemblage  of  minute  segments,  arranged  at  tolerably  regular  intervals  in  concentric 
zones  around  a sort  of  central  ‘nucleus  the  segments  composing  each  zone  being 
united  with  each  other  by  a continuous  annular  ‘stolon’  or  band  of  sarcode,  and 
being  connected  with  those  of  the  adjoining  zones  by  peduncles  of  the  same  material. 
I have  not  met  with  the  least  indication  that  the  sarcode  is  contained  within  any 
proper  membrane  ; and  the  absence  of  any  such  indication,  notwithstanding  the 
various  manipulations  to  which  I have  subjected  its  segments,  may  be  taken,  I think, 
as  strong  negative  evidence  that  it  has  no  more  existence  in  this  animal,  than  it  has 
in  the  species  of  Foraminifera  which  have  been  so  well  studied  by  M.  Dujardin  and 
Professor  Schultze.  Nor  is  there  the  slightest  trace  of  distinct  organs,  either  in  the 
mass  of  sarcode  which  forms  the  central  nucleus,  or  in  that  which  constitutes  each 
one  of  the  surrounding  segments ; and  he  would,  I think,  be  a mere  speculator,  who 
should  maintain  the  presence  of  a digestive  cavity  in  any  of  these  parts,  or  the  exist- 
ence of  an  intestinal  canal  in  the  peduncular  threads  which  connect  them  together. 
The  homogeneity  of  the  component  substance  of  the  central  nucleus,  and  of  the 
entire  assemblage  of  multiple  segments,  seems,  indeed,  to  be  conclusively  established 
by  the  following  facts  : — In  all  the  spirit-specimens  which  I have  examined,  the  cavi- 
ties of  the  outer  zones  are  completely  void,  whilst  those  of  the  nucleus  and  of  the 
inner  zones  are  quite  filled  with  their  animal  contents.  This  drawing-together  of 
the  soft  body  towards  the  centre,  is  evidenced  also  in  many  of  the  larger  specimens 
which  have  been  dried  when  collected  in  the  living  state,  by  the  limitation  of  the  red 
colour  that  indicates  the  presence  of  the  sarcode,  to  the  inner  portion  of  the  disk. 
In  both  cases  it  may  be  presumed  that  the  animal  matter  has  shrunk  together,  in  the 
former  through  the  corrugating  action  of  the  spirit,  in  the  latter  through  desiccation. 
Now  if  the  polypidom  of  a zoophyte  be  similarly  treated,  there  is  no  such  drawing 
together  of  the  entire  body,  but  each  cell  is  found  to  contain  the  shrunk  contents  of 
its  own  polype-segment ; and  this  difference  seems  to  me  to  indicate  a complete  dis- 
similarity in  the  characters  of  the  two  organisms.  For  it  is  obvious  that  the  sub- 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — GENERAL  PLAN  OF  ORGANIZATION. 


195 


Stance  of  the  peripheral  segments  of  the  Orbitolite-body  can  only  be  brought  together 
towards  the  centre,  through  being  completely  unattached  to  the  walls  of  the  cavities 
which  it  occupies,  and  through  having  a form  so  alterable,  as  to  be  capable  of  being- 
drawn  in  threads  through  the  narrow  connecting  passages,  and  of  then  coalescing 
together  again  so  perfectly,  that  the  masses  they  form  do  not  present  the  least  trace 
of  having  been  tiuis  spun  out.  There  is  no  known  kind  of  animal  texture,  except 
sarcode,  that  is  susceptible  of  this  kind  of  alteration  ; and  the  evidence  of  it  which  I 
have  adduced  seems  to  me  extremely  valuable,  not  only  as  establishing  the  general 
nature  of  the  animal  body  of  the  Orbitolite,  but  also  as  fully  justifying  the  assump- 
tion, that,  in  the  living  state,  the  sarcode  is  projected  in  pseudopodia  through  the 
marginal  apertures,  and  that  alimentary  particles  are  introduced  by  their  instrumen- 
tality, as  in  other  Foraminifera. 

13.  Turning  from  the  animal  body  to  the  calcareous  disks  which  enclose  it,  we  find 
that,  whether  large  or  small,  these  are  almost  invariably  circular,  or  nearly  so;  that 
they  are  usually  nearly  flat,  any  difference  in  thickness  being  generally  in  favour  of 
the  marginal  portion;  and  that  if,  as  sometimes  happens,  there  is  a slight  central 
projection,  this  is  formed  by  the  nucleus  alone.  By  these  characters  we  may  distin- 
guish OrbitoUtes  from  Ovbiculina\  for  although  the  discoidal  forms  of  the  latter  so 
strongly  resemble  Orbitolites,  that  by  the  structure  and  arrangement  of  their  mar- 
ginal portion  they  could  not  be  distinguished,  yet  they  may  always  be  discriminated 
by  the  knobby  protuberance  of  their  centre,  which  is  occasioned  by  the  mutual 
investment  of  the  earlier  whorls  of  the  spiral  in  which  they  commence.  The  same 
entire  absence,  or  very  small  size,  of  the  central  elevation,  together  with  the  uni- 
formity or  even  slight  increase  of  thickness  towards  the  circumference,  also  helps 
us  to  separate  Orbitolites  from  Orbitoides  ; the  centre  of  the  latter  being  always 
considerably  elevated,  and  the  thickness  of  its  disk  ordinarily  diminishing  gra- 
dually towards  its  margin  Around  the  ' nucleus’ which  occupies  the  centre  of 
the  disk  (Plate  V.  figs.  1,  6),  are  seen  an  indeterminate  number  of  concentric  zones 
of  cells  (c,  c,  c),  the  shape  of  which  differs  in  different  individuals  (see  Sect.  IV.)  ; 
these,  although  completely  closed  (unless  laid  open  by  abrasion),  have  their  form 

* I wish  this  statement  to  be  understood  with  reference  to  the  genus  Orbitoides,  as  characterized  by  the 
structure  which  I have  shown  it  to  possess  (Quart.  Journ.  of  Geol.  Soc.,  Feb.  1850),  and  not  to  the  genus  as 
defined  by  M.  d’Orbigny  (Cours  Elementaire  de  Paleontologie,  tome  ii.  p.  194),  who,  notwithstanding  that 
he  has  shown  himself  to  be  acquainted  with  my  Memoir  (by  copying  from  it  a figure  of  Nummulite),  has  not 
profited  in  any  degree  by  my  investigations,  but  has  left  the  generic  characters  of  Orbitolites,  Orbitolina  and 
Orbitoides  in  the  state  in  which  they  might  have  been,  and  probably  were,  before  that  Memoir  was  published. 
The  true  distinction,  however,  has  been  fully  recognized  by  M.  d’Archiac,  who,  in  his  ‘ Description  des  Ani- 
maux  Fossiles  du  Groupe  Nummulitique  de  ITnde,’  p.  349,  has  designated  as  Orbitoides  dispansa  and  Orbitoides 
Fortisi,  the  bodies  which,  in  the  account  of  them  he  had  previously  given  in  the  ‘ Mem.  Soc.  Geol.  de  France,’ 
2nd  ser.,  vol.  iii.,  he  had  designated  as  Orbitolites;  thus  correcting  the  error  into  which  Mr.  Carter  has 
fallen  in  his  description  of  the  same  fossils,  through  reliance  on  M.  d’Orbigny’s  insufficient  and  indeed  erro- 
neous characters  of  these  genera. 


196 


I)[l.  CAKPENTER’S  researches  on  the  FORAMINIFERA. 


distinctly  indicated  by  the  surface-markings.  The  only  external  orifices  whicli 
communicate  with  these  cells,  are  the  minute  pores  {d,  d,  d)  forming  one  or  more 
I'anges  at  the  margin  of  the  disk,  each  pore  lying  in  a vertical  furrow,  between 
the  projecting  walls  of  two  contiguous  cells.  In  the  smallest  and  thinnest  disks 
(Plate  V.  fig.  1)  we  find  but  a single  row,  or  sometimes  two  rows,  of  such  pores; 
in  disks  somewhat  thicker,  thei’e  are  three  or  four  rows  ; and  in  the  largest  and 
thickest  Orbitolites  (Plate  V.  fig.  6),  no  fewer  than  ten  or  twelve  such  rows.  This 
multiplication  in  the  number  of  ranges  of  marginal  orifices,  indicates  a like  mul- 
tiplication in  the  number  of  floors  (so  to  speak),  of  which  the  disk  is  composed  ; 
and  just  as  the  total  number  of  chambers  in  a building  may  be  increased,  either 
by  extending  its  base  over  a larger  area,  or  by  additions  to  its  number  of  storeys, 
so  may  an  increase  in  the  number  of  segments  of  which  this  animal  is  composed 
be  provided  for,  either  by  the  marginal  addition  of  a new  zone  resembling  the  last, 
so  that  the  diameter  of  the  disk  is  alone  augmented,  or  by  an  increase  in  the  thick- 
ness of  the  newly-forming  zone,  so  that  it  contains  a larger  number  of  superposed 
layers.  The  new  zones,  however,  never  invest  or  cover  those  which  they  surround, 
each  being  simply  a continuation  of  the  maigin  of  the  preceding;  and  in  this  respect 
the  mode  of  growth  of  Orbitolites  at  every  stage  is  pointedly  distinguished  from  the 
early  mode  of  growth  of  Orbiculina,  just  now  specified  as  the  cause  of  the  protube- 
rance of  its  centre. 

14.  The  shelly  substance  of  the  calcareous  disk,  although  firm,  is  by  no  means  so 
dense  and  bony  as  that  of  the  shells  of  many  other  Foraminifera  of  higher  organiza- 
tion. It  is  apparently  quite  homogeneous,  rarely  presenting  the  least  appearance  of 
‘structure,’  and  this  being  probably  fallacious;  I refer  to  the  punctated  marking 
sometimes  seen  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  nucleus,  which  shows  itself  under  the 
aspect  represented  in  Plate  VI.  fig.  5,  when  the  thin  layer  of  shell  which  presents  it 
is  viewed  by  transmitted  light.  Although  this  appearance  might  be  considered  to 
indicate  the  existence  of  a cellular  structure  in  the  shell,  yet  I believe  that  such  an 
inference  would  be  fallacious ; since  I have  not  been  able  to  detect  the  least  trace  of 
such  a structure  in  the  decalcified  residuum,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  me 
to  be  a substance  as  structureless  as  sarcode  itself.  Coupling  these  appearances  with 
those  which  I have  found  to  exist  more  distinctly  in  Orbiculina,  I am  disposed  to 
interpret  them  as  proceeding  from  minute  depressions  on  the  surface;  and  these  are 
perhaps  to  be  regarded  as  the  rudiments  of  those  minute  closely-set  apertures,  which, 
in  many  Foraminifera,  give  passage  to  pseudopodial  extensions  of  the  sarcode  from 
every  part  of  their  bodies. 

15.  In  all  the  forms  of  Orbitolite  that  I have  examined,  the  central  Nucleus  pre- 
sents the  same  essential  characters.  When  the  interior  of  any  disk,  whether  large 
or  small,  is  laid  open  by  a horizontal  section  passing  through  the  central  plane,  the 
nucleus  is  seen  to  be  occupied  by  a large  cavity  (Plate  V.  fig.  1)  somewhat  irregu- 
larly divided  by  a sinuous  partition,  which  always,  however,  marks  out  a central 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES  : — GENERAL  PLAN;  SIMPLE  TYPE. 


197 


cell  (a)  of  a somewhat  pyriform  shape,  as  distinct  from  the  space  {b,  h)  which  sur- 
rounds it.  The  meaning  of  this  feature  is  at  once  made  apparent,  by  reference  to 
the  disposition  of  the  sarcode  which  occupies  the  cavity  of  the  nucleus  ; for  we  then 
see  (Plate  IV.  fig.  5)  that  the  large  central  pear-shaped  cell  is  occupied  by  a mass  (a) 
of  corresponding  shape,  from  the  small  extremity  of  which  a peduncular  process 
extends,  that  dilates  again  into  a still  larger  mass  {b,  b)  completely  surrounding  that 
from  which  it  springs;  the  former  may  be  conveniently  designated  as  the  ‘central,’ 
the  latter  as  the  ‘ circumambient  ’ segment.  In  a vertical  section  of  the  disk,  passing 
through  the  centre,  such  as  that  seen  in  Plate  V.  fig.  4,  the  nucleus  seems  to  present 
three  chambers  ; but  this  is  simply  due  to  the  fact  that  such  a section  will  traverse 
the  circumambient  cell  twice,  that  is,  will  cut  it  through  on  both  sides  of  the  central 
cell.  In  the  section  represented  in  Plate  V.  fig.  9,  there  are  but  two  central  cham- 
bers ; in  this  case  the  plane  of  division  seems  to  have  traversed  the  nucleus  just  where 
the  neck  of  the  central  cell  touches  its  margin,  so  that  the  circumambient  cell  is  only 
on  one  side  of  it.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  plane  of  division  should  happen  not  to 
pass  through  the  central  cell  at  all,  so  as  to  traverse  the  circumambient  cell  alone,  a 
single  broad  cavity  will  present  itself  in  the  vertical  section,  as  shown  in  Plate  V. 
fig.  7-  Frequently,  however,  it  happens  that  the  circumambient  segment  is  partially 
subdivided  on  one  side  by  an  interposed  partition  (Plate  VII.  fig.  4) ; and  then  a ver- 
tical section  will  show/b^^r  chambers,  as  is  seen  in  Plate  V.  fig.  10,  the  central  seg- 
ment having  a single  portion  of  the  circumambient  segment  on  one  side  of  it,  and  a 
double  portion  on  the  other.  Some  remarkable  varieties  in  the  size  of  the  nucleus, 
and  in  the  mode  of  its  connexion  with  the  surrounding  parts,  will  be  noticed  here- 
after (^^  44-46,  and  54,  55). 

16.  In  describing  the  structure  of  the  Concentric  Zones  which  successively  sur- 

round the  nucleus,  it  will  be  requisite  to  make  a distinction  between  the  simple  and 
complex  types  according  to  which  the  Orbitolite-disks  may  be  generated;  the  former 
being  characterized  by  the  existence  of  only  one  layer  or  ‘floor’  of  segments,  the 
latter  by  the  presence  of  two  or  more  such  layers.  For  although,  as  will  subsequently 
appear,  I can  show,  by  a series  of  transitional  gradations  between  these  two  types  of 
structure,  and  by  their  occasional  coexistence  in  the  same  individual,  that  they  are 
not  to  be  held  to  characterize  distinct  genera  (as  Professor  Ehrenberg  supposed),  or 
even  distinct  (as  Professor  Williamson  has  urged  with  more  apparent  reason), 

yet,  when  most  characteristically  displayed,  they  differ  so  much  from  one  another, 
and  each  is  so  remarkably  distinguished  by  features  of  its  own,  that  it  seems  more 
advantageous  to  describe  them  separately  in  the  first  instance,  and  then  to  discuss 
their  relationship  to  each  other. 

17.  The  Simple  type  is  found  to  prevail  in  those  minute  Orbitolite-disks,  which 
occur  in  greater  or  less  abundance  in  sands  and  dredgings  from  almost  every  part 
of  the  globe,  but  which  are  particularly  numerous  in  those  of  the  Philippine  shores. 
Their  ordinary  diameter  is  about  *05  of  an  inch,  and  they  usually  contain  from  ten 

MDCCCLVI.  2 D 


198 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


to  fifteen  concentric  zones.  The  arrangement  and  connexions  of  these  zones  may 
be  made  out  in  the  thinnest  and  most  translucent  specimens,  by  examining  them 
by  transmitted  light,  after  mounting  them  in  Canada  balsam ; this,  however,  gives 
such  transparence  to  the  thin  shelly  layer  which  is  continuous  over  both  surfaces, 
that  it  may  escape  notice  (if  not  carefully  looked  for),  so  as  to  lead  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  cells  are  open.  Most  specimens  require  to  be  somewhat  reduced  in 
thickness,  by  slightly  grinding  down  one  surface,  to  enable  the  arrangement  of  their 
interior  to  be  distinctly  made  out;  and  this  may  be  examined  either  by  transmitted 
or  by  reflected  light.  Each  zone  thus  seen  in  horizontal  section  (Plate  V.  fig.  1,  c,  c), 
consists  of  a circular  set  of  small  ovate  cells,  excavated,  as  it  were,  in  the  shelly  sub- 
stance of  the  disk,  and  communicating  with  each  other  laterally  by  passages  which 
unite  them  together  into  a continuous  annulus.  The  zone  which  immediately  sur- 
rounds the  nucleus  is  connected  with  it  by  passages  which  extend  from  the  outer 
margin  of  the  large  circumambient  segment  to  the  several  cells  of  which  it  is  itself 
composed  ; and  each  zone  communicates  with  the  one  on  its  exterior  by  similar 
passages,  which  usually  extend,  however,  not  from  the  cells  of  the  inner  zone  to  those 
of  the  outer,  but  from  the  connecting  passages  of  the  inner  zone  to  the  cells  of  the 
outer  (Plate  IV.  figs.  8,  9) ; and  thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  the  cells  of  each  zone 
usually  alternate  with  those  of  the  zones  that  are  internal  and  external  to  it.  A ver- 
tical section  of  the  disk,  such  as  is  shown  in  Plate  V.  figs.  4,  5,  exhibits  the  same 
arrangement  under  a different  aspect.  The  cells  of  the  concentric  zones  are  seen  to 
be  much  higher  than  they  are  broad,  so  that  they  present  a somewhat  columnar 
form  ; the  proportion  of  their  height  to  their  breadth,  however,  may  vary  greatly  in 
different  parts  of  the  same  disk,  the  former  often  increasing  from  the  centre  towards 
the  periphery  (fig.  4),  whilst  the  latter  remains  constant,  or  nearly  so ; and  the 
columns,  instead  of  being  straight,  are  generally  more  or  less  curved,  and  are  some- 
times bent  in  the  middle  at  an  obtuse  angle  (Plate  V.  fig.  7?  i)-  The  gradation 

which  presents  itself  from  one  of  these  forms  to  the  other,  and  their  coexistence  even 
in  the  same  specimens,  clearly  proves  that  no  value  can  be  attached  to  the  form  and 
proportions  of  the  cells,  thus  seen  in  a vertical  section,  as  furnishing  specific  charac- 
ters. In  every  perfect  specimen,  the  columnar  cells  are  seen  to  be  closed  at  their 
two  extremities  by  a thin  shelly  wall;  and  this  is  sometimes  flat,  sometimes  more  or 
less  convex  *. — The  meaning  of  these  arrangements  is  clearly  seen,  when  we  turn  our 
attention  to  the  structure  of  the  animal  (Plate  IV.  fig.  1).  For  the  outer  margin  of 


* In  a large  proportion  of  the  specimens  obtained  from  sands  or  dredging,  the  cells  have  been  laid  open  by 
attrition ; either  throughout  the  surface  of  the  disk,  if  it  should  be  flat,  or  at  its  margin  only,  if  it  should  be 
at  all  saucer-shaped.  The  constancy  of  this  last  character  in  a certain  set  of  forms,  resembling  that  repre- 
sented in  Plate  VII,  figs.  8,  10,  might  at  first  sight  lead  to  the  idea  that  they  constitute  a distinct  specific  type; 
but,  as  will  hereafter  appear,  these  plate-shaped  disks  cannot  be  separated  by  any  definite  line  of  demarcation 
from  such  as  are  quite  plane ; and  in  specimens  of  them  which  have  not  suffered  attrition,  the  marginal  cells 
ate  closed,  like  all  the  rest. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — GENERAL  PLAN;  SIMPLE  TYPE. 


199 


the  circumambient  segment  of  the  nucleus  is  seen  to  give  off  a number  of  slender 
prolongations  or  'stolons’  of  sarcode,  which  radiate  from  it  to  a short  distance  and 
then  enlarge  into  columnar  segments  having  a circular  or  ovoidal  base,  which  are 
united  with  each  other  laterally  by  an  annular  ‘stolon’;  and  from  the  portions  of  this 
‘ stolon  ’ which  intervene  between  the  segments  of  each  annulus  of  sarcode,  are  given 
off  the  radiating  ' stolons’ that  go  to  originate  the  next  zone,  the  arrangement  of 
whose  parts  is  precisely  similar  to  that  just  described. 

18.  In  this  manner,  any  number  of  concentric  zones  may  be  formed,  which  are 
exact  repetitions  of  each  other,  except  that  the  number  of  segments  in  the  outer 
zones  is  greater  than  that  of  which  the  inner  zones  are  composed.  It  does  not 
increase,  however,  in  the  regular  ratio  of  the  respective  diameters  of  the  zones ; for 
the  cells  of  the  outer  zones,  being  usually  both  larger  and  more  widely  separated 
from  each  other  than  are  those  of  the  inner,  are  less  numerous  in  proportion ; thus 
in  a specimen  before  me,  there  are  twenty-eight  cells  in  the  innermost  row  and  only 
forty-nine  in  the  outermost,  though  the  latter  is  more  than  twice  the  diameter  of  the 
former.  The  increase  in  the  number  of  the  segments  is  accom.plished  by  the  occa- 
sional interpolation  of  an  additional  segment,  communicating  directly  with  the  one 
immediately  interior  to  it,  between  the  two  segments  which  spring  from  the  annular 
stolon  on  either  side  of  the  latter,  as  is  shown  in  Plate  IV.  figs.  8,  9,  a.  Hence  it  is 
obvious  that  prolongations  of  sarcode  giving  origin  to  new  segments,  although  ordi- 
narily put  forth  rather  by  the  connecting  ' stolons  ’ than  by  the  segments  themselves, 
may  originate  from  any  part  of  the  annulus.  This  is  shown  still  more  forcibly  by  the 
occasional  occurrence  of  irregularities,  such  as  that  represented  in  Plate  VI.  fig.  6. 

19.  The  cells  of  the  last-formed  zone  communicate  with  the  exterior  by  the  very 
same  kind  of  radial  passages,  as  in  other  instances  communicate  with  the  next  zone; 
and  the  external  orifices  of  these  form  the  pores  which  present  themselves  at  the 
margin  of  the  disk  (Plate  V.  fig.  1).  Thus  it  is  seen,  on  the  one  hand,  how  it  hap- 
pens that  these  pores  are  intermediate  between  the  cells,  instead  of  opening  directly 
into  them  ; and  on  the  other,  how  each  pore  leads,  by  the  divarication  of  its  passage, 
into  two  cells,  one  on  either  side  of  it.  When  a new  zone  is  formed,  each  pore  opens 
into  one  of  its  cells  ; and  this  zone  in  its  turn  communicates  with  the  exterior, 
through  a new  set  of  pores  at  its  own  margin.  Each  pore  is  often  surrounded  by  a 
rather  prominent  annulus  of  shell  (Plate  V.  fig.  l,c?);  and  it  is  obvious  that  when 
the  seetion  passes  through  this,  it  will  be  indicated  by  a little  ‘ beak’  on  either  side  of 
the  entrance  to  the  passage  ; such  ' beaks’  (which  are  of  course  repeated  through  the 
entire  disk)  are  shown  in  their  ordinary  aspect  in  Plate  IV.  fig.  9,  but  they  are  fre- 
quently more  prominent,  as  is  shown  in  Plate  VI.  fig.  1. 

20.  In  all  cases  in  which  the  growth  of  the  disk  takes  place  with  normal  regula- 
rity, a complete  circular  zone  is  added  at  once.  Exceptions  to  this  regularity  aie 
rare,  and  they  can  be  generally  traced  with  probability  to  some  accidental  interrup- 
tion. It  can  scarcely  be  doubted,  I think,  that  when  a new  ring  of  cells  is  about  to 

2 D 2 


200 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


be  formed,  the  prolongations  of  sarcode  issuing  from  the  several  pores  of  the  pre- 
ceding zone  coalesce,  so  as  to  form  a complete  zone  of  segments  and  connecting 
stolons  around  the  margin  of  the  previously-foi’med  disk  ; and  that  the  deposit  of 
calcareous  matter  forming  the  shelly  walls  of  the  cells  and  passages,  takes  place  upon, 
or  rather  in,  the  superficial  portion  of  this  zone  of  sarcode.  But  I cannot  find  any 
evidence  in  the  ordinary  growth  of  the  disk,  that  the  sarcode  extends  itself  over  the 
surface  of  the  portion  previously  formed ; although  occasional  appearances  will  be 
hereafter  described  53),  that  seem  to  indicate  that  it  may  do  so. 

21.  It  is  a fact  of  much  importance  in  the  due  appreciation  of  the  relations  of 
OrbitoUte  and  its  allied  forms  to  other  tribes  of  Foraminifera,  that  the  calcareous 
partition  which  separates  each  cell  of  any  one  zone  from  its  neighbours  on  either 
side,  is  not  double,  but  single.  And  this  is  in  great  part  the  case,  even  with  regard 
to  the  partitions  that  separate  the  cells  of  successive  zones  ; the  inner  or  central 
boundary  of  one  being  chiefly  foi-med  by  the  peripheral  wall  of  the  other.  It  is  not 
easy  even  in  thin  sections  to  distinguish  the  boundary  between  the  walls  of  one  zone 
and  those  of  another,  so  absolutely  continuous  do  they  appear  to  be.  But  it  not 
unfrequently  happens,  that  in  fracturing  these  disks,  their  component  zones  come 
apart  from  each  other,  along  their  natural  lines  of  junction,  so  as  to  disclose  the  real 
inner  (or  central)  margin  of  the  outer  segiuent,  which  then  presents  a set  of  wide 
apertures,  through  which  we  look  at  once  into  its  cells;  thus  proving  their  incom- 
plete enclosure  by  proper  walls  on  that  side  (Plate  V.  fig.  \,jf).  Thus  in  the  forma- 
tion of  each  new  zone,  the  calcareous  envelope  seems  to  be  only  generated  where  the 
sarcode  is  not  already  in  contact  with  a solid  wall. 

22.  There  cannot  be  any  reasonable  doubt,  that  the  number  of  concentric  zones 
which  any  disk  may  present,  is  entirely  determined  by  its  stage  of  growth,  and  that 
it  affords  no  basis  whatever  for  specific  distinction.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  the  con- 
centric layers  of  wood  in  the  stem  of  a tree,  a minute  nucleus,  surrounded  by  only  a 
single  annulus  of  cells,  may  come  in  time  to  be  the  centre  of  a large  disk  consisting 
of  many  scores  of  concentric  zones.  Although,  as  already  stated  (^  17),  most  of  the 
Orbitolites  fortned  upon  this  simple  type  are  of  comparatively  small  size,  yet  there 
does  not  seem  to  be  any  definite  liniit  to  the  multiplication  of  zones;  for  I possess 
specimens  attaining  T5  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  consisting  of  about  forty  zones 
(much  larger,  therefore,  than  the  younger  zones  of  the  complex  type),  in  which  there 
is  no  appearance  of  any  departure  from  the  original  mode  of  growth.  That  com- 
paratively few  specimens,  however,  attain  so  large  a size  upon  this  simple  type  of 
structure,  is  due,  I believe,  to  the  circumstance  that  they  early  tend  to  develope 
themselves  upon  the  more  complex  plan  which  I shall  presently  describe. 

23.  Although  I have  spoken  of  these  disks  as  typically  plane  or  nearly  so  (there 
being  usually  no  great  difference  between  the  thickness  of  their  central  and  that  of 
their  perij)heral  parts),  yet  it  not  unfrequently  happens  that  the  successive  zones  gra- 
dually increase  in  thickness  from  within  outwards  (as  is  shown  in  Plate  V.  fig.  5), 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES -.—GENERAL  PLAN;  COMPLEX  TYPE. 


201 


SO  that  the  height  of  the  columnar  segments  progressively  increases,  and  the  entire 
disk  becomes  somewhat  biconcave.  Sometimes,  again,  without  any  alteration  in 
the  thickness  of  the  several  parts,  the  disk  comes  to  assume,  by  the  depression  of  its 
central  portion,  the  shape  of  a plate,  or  that  of  a watch-glass,  or  (by  the  more  com- 
plete upturning  of  its  edges)  that  of  a saucer.  In  any  case  in  which  either  surface 
of  the  marginal  zone  is  more  exposed  by  its  projection  than  those  of  the  zones  whicli 
it  encloses,  there  will  be  a special  liability  to  a laying-open  of  its  cells  (as  shown  in 
Plate  VII.  figs.  8,  10)  if  the  disk  should  be  subjected  to  attrition;  and  I believe  that 
not  only  the  recent  species  O.  marginalis,  but  the  fossil  O.  rnacropora,  are  nothing 
else  than  examples  of  this  type,  the  figure  of  the  latter  given  by  Goldfuss  * corre- 
sponding exactly  with  a form  of  it  which  I have  frequently  encountered.  I have  not 
met  with  any  examples  in  this  simple  type,  of  that  marginal  thinning  away  as  age 
increases,  which  is  observable  in  many  other  Foraminifera. 

24.  From  the  simplest,  it  will  be  convenient  to  pass  at  once  to  the  most  complex 
type  of  structure  presented  by  the  Orbitolite,  the  existence  of  which  is  marked  (as 
already  noticed,  ^ 13)  by  a multiplication  of  the  horizontal  ranges  of  marginal  pores. 
I have  met  with  this  form  in  specimens  obtained  by  dredging,  from  the  coast  of 
Australia,  from  various  parts  of  the  Polynesian  Archipelago,  from  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Philippine  Islands,  from  the  Red  Sea,  and  from  the  idigean ; and  as  the  sands 
of  all  these  localities  present  the  simpler  type  in  great  abundance,  I am  disposed  to 
believe  that  the  former  is  really  not  the  less  widely  diffused  than  the  latter,  and  would 
be  discovered  wherever  it  abounds,  if  properly  searched  for.  The  largest  specimen 
in  my  possession,  measuring  seven-tenths  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  is  from  the  coast  of 
Australia,  where  these  Orbitolites  are  so  abundant  at  certain  spots  (as  I learn  from 
Mr.  Jukes),  that  their  entire  disks  and  fragments,  with  fragments  of  Corallines 
(chiefly,  I believe,  the  Corallina  palmata  of  Ellis),  constitute  the  great  mass  of  the 
dredgings.  Among  the  Australian  specimens,  several  attain  a diameter  of -45  inch, 
and  a considerable  proportion  as  much  as  *30  of  an  inch.  Hence  the  Orbitolites  of 
this  type  are  among  the  largest  forms  of  existing  Foraminifera,  being  only  surpassed, 
as  far  as  I am  aware,  by  the  Cycloclypeus  hereafter  to  be  described.  Of  two  speci- 
mens in  my  possession  from  the  Feejee  Islands,  one  measures  '63  inch,  and  the 
other  -53  inch  in  diameter;  but  the  average  of  the  Polynesian  specimens,  like  that 
of  the  Philippine,  Red  Sea,  and  ^Egean,  seems  to  be  considerably  lower  than  that  of 
the  Australian,  as  their  diameter  seldom  exceeds  -25  of  an  inch,  and  is  usually  not 
more  than  -10  or  *12. 

25.  The  disks  formed  on  this  plan,  like  the  preceding,  may  be  considered  as  typi- 
cally circular,  although  they  are  seldom  or  never  exactly  so  in  reality.  They  may 
be  considered,  too,  as  typically  flat,  with  a slight  concavity  in  the  central  part,  from 
which,  however,  the  nucleus  often  projects;  but,  as  will  hereafter  appear,  there  is  no 
constant  relation  either  between  the  thickness  and  the  diameter  of  different  specimens, 


* Petrefacta,  pi.  12.  fig.  8. 


202 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


or  between  the  thickness  of  different  parts  of  the  same  specimen,  and  the  distance  of 
these  parts  from  its  centre.  The  only  remarkable  departure  from  the  ordinary  fornr 
which  I have  met  wdth,  presents  itself  in  certain  Orbitoiites  from  the  Feejee  Islands, 
of  which  several  specimens  in  the  Museum  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  and 
two  in  my  own  possession,  exhibit  a curious  plication  towards  their  margins ; the 
degree  of  this  departure  varies  so  much,  however,  in  different  individuals,  the  plica- 
tion being  almost  obsolete  in  some  (see  Plate  V.  figs.  2,  3),  that  it  cannot  be  admit- 
ted to  mark  a specific  div^ersity;  and  considering  that  these  disks  always  grow  on 
the  surfaces  of  other  bodies,  it  can  scarcely,  I think,  be  considered  improbable,  that 
the  plications  originate  in  the  inflections  of  those  surfaces*.  These  same  specimens, 
moreover,  also  exhibit  another  curious  abnormality ; namely,  the  projection  of  the 
upper  and  lower  edges  of  the  margin,  so  that  a groove  is  left  between  them,  the  pro- 
jecting laminse  being  thin  and  foliaceous,  and  their  cells  very  irregularly  arranged. 
This  peculiarity,  again,  being  far  from  uniform  in  its  degree,  and  being  altogether 
wanting  in  specimens  which  in  other  respects  precisely  resemble  those  with  plicated 
and  foliated  margins,  must  be  considered  merely  in  the  light  of  an  accidental  variety ; 
but  I cannot  suggest  any  explanation  of  its  occurrence,  or  of  its  limitation  (so  far  as 
I am  aware)  to  this  particular  locality, 

26.  The  surface  of  the  disk  (Plate  V.  fig.  6)  is  marked  out,  as  in  the  simpler 
type,  by  concentric  zones  of  ceils,  the  number  of  which  bears  a general  (though  not 
a constant)  ratio  to  its  diameter;  these  cells  are  usually  somewhat  rectangular  in 
shape  and  sometimes  approach  a square,  but  are  more  commonly  nearly  twice  as 
long  in  the  line  of  the  radius  of  the  disk  as  they  are  in  the  transverse  direction,  their 
long  sides  being  parallel  to  each  other.  We  shall  hereafter  see,  however,  that  the 
form  of  the  superficial  cells  is  very  subject  to  variation,  and  that  it  may  be  very 
dissimilar  even  in  different  zones  of  the  same  disk  (^^  48-52).  The  pores  at  the 
margin  of  the  disk  are  disposed,  as  in  the  simpler  type,  between  the  projections 
formed  by  the  convexities  of  the  cells;  and  each  is  usually  surrounded  by  the  pro- 
jecting annulus  formerly  noticed  (^  19).  The  disposition  of  these  pores,  however,  is 
far  from  regular,  as  they  seldom  form  rows  that  seem  exactly  continuous  with  each 
other,  either  horizontally  or  vertically ; and  the  number  of  pores  in  each  vertical 
row  is  by  no  means  constant,  even  in  different  parts  of  the  margin  of  the  same 
disk  T. 

* I have  elsewhere  noticed  the  fact,  that  various  species  of  Orbit  aides  are  disposed  to  exhibit  a like  con- 
tortion ; and  that  the  well-marked  ephippial  shape  which  some  specimens  present,  is  nothing  else  than  an  acci- 
dental variety  (see  Quart.  Journ.  of  Geol.  Soc.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  34,  35). 

t In  following  the  description  of  the  internal  structure  of  this  type  of  Orbitolite,  it  will  be  convenient  for 
the  reader  to  make  frequent  reference  to  the  ideal  representation  which  has  been  built  up  in  Plate  V.  fig.  6, 
by  the  combination  of  materials  furnished  by  a great  number  of  preparations  which  are  represented  in  separate 
figures  accompanying  the  original  Memoir  in  the  Archives  of  the  Royal  Society ; these  last  of  course  furnish 
the  real  authority  for  every  point  in  the  description,  the  ideal  figure,  however,  serving  to  display  the  relation 
of  diflPerent  parts  to  each  other  in  a manner  that  no  single  preparation  would  possibly  admit. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES  GENERAL  PLAN;  COMPLEX  TYPE 


203 


27.  The  disks  of  this  complex  type  are  not  distinguished  from  those  of  the  simple 
type  already  described,  by  any  difference  in  the  structure  of  the  Nucleus ; and  there 
is  frequently  nothing-  specially  characteristic  in  the  structure  of  the  zones  that  imme- 
diately surround  it.  Each  of  the  peripheral  zones,  however,  consists  of  two  super- 

Jicial  layers,  an  upper  and  a lower,  and  of  an  intermediate  stratum  ; — these  will  now 
be  described  seriatim. 

28.  The  superficial  layers  are  formed  of  the  (usually)  oblong  cells,  whose  contour 

is  indicated  by  the  surface-markings;  when  they  are  laid  open  horizontally,  by  rub- 
bing away  the  thin  shell  which  covers  them  in  (Plate  VI.  fig.  3),  it  is  seen  that  the 
floor  of  each  cell  has  an  aperture  at  either  end;  but  no  communication  can  be 
traced,  either  through  the  side-walls  between  the  contiguous  cells  of  the  same  zone, 
or  through  the  end-walls,  between  the  cells  of  successive  zones.  Moreover,  there  is 
no  such  alternating  arrangement  of  the  cells  of  successive  zones,  as  we  have  seen  to 
prevail  in  the  simpler  type  (^  17);  and  they  altogether  seem  to  be  quite  independent 
one  of  another.  When  this  superficial  layer  is  examined  in  a vertical  section  having 
a radial  direction  (Plate  VI.  fig.  7)5  it  is  seen  that  the  floors  of  its  cells  (a,  a)  are 
formed  by  the  expanded  summits  id,  d',  d”)  of  the  irregular  septa,  which  separate 
from  each  other  the  columnar  cells  of  the  intermediate  stratum  (cccc);  and  that 
the  apertures  at  the  two  ends  of  the  floor  are  the  entrances  to  passages  (e,  e',  e"), 
which  lead  obliquely  downwards  (the  passages  on  either  side  of  the  partition  between 
two  successive  cells  of  the  superficial  layer  inclining  towards  each  other)  towards 
these  cavities.  It  is  observable,  moreover,  that  just  at  the  point  at  which  the  con- 
tiguous passages  meet  each  other,  there  is  always  a round  aperture  in  the 

partition  {g,g)  which  divides  the  contiguous  cells  of  each  zone ; and  when,  in  a hori- 
zontal section,  the  superficial  cells  have  been  entirely  ground  away,  so  as  to  lay  open 
the  most  superficial  part  of  the  intermediate  stratum,  this  part  is  found  to  be  traversed 
in  each  zone  by  a continuous  circular  canal  (Plate  VIII.  fig.  3),  with  large  rounded 
openings  that  lead  into  the  columnar  cells  beneath.  The  meaning  of  this  arrange- 
ment becomes  obvious,  when  we  examine  the  disposition  of  the  animal  substance 
which  occupies  these  cavities ; for  we  find,  as  might  have  been  anticipated,  that  the 
superficial  cells  are  filled  with  segments  of  sarcode  of  corresponding  shape  (Plate  IV. 
figs.  4,  7}  aa) ; and  that  whilst  these  have  no  direct  connexion  with  one  another, 
each  of  them  is  connected  by  means  of  fleshy  peduncles  with  the  annular  stolons 
bb  that  run  along  its  extremities;  whilst  from  the  underside  of  these  annular  stolons 
(fig.  4)  descend  the  thick  columns  of  sarcode  (cc,  c'c'),  which  occupy  the  columnar 
cells  of  the  intermediate  stratum.  The  absence  of  any  essential  dependence  of  the 
segments  of  the  superficial,  and  of  those  of  the  intermediate  strata  upon  each  other, 
seems  indicated  by  the  fact  that  there  is  no  constant  numerical  relation  between 
them, — a circumstance  which  extremely  perplexed  me,  until  I had  ascertained,  by 
examination  of  the  animal,  that  the  passages  (Plate  VI.  fig.  7?  e,  e',  e")  debouch,  not 
(as  I had  at  first  supposed)  into  the  columnar  cavities,  but  into  the  annular  canal, 


204 


DR,  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


which  serves  to  bring  the  superficial  and  columnar  segments  of  each  zone  into  mutual 
communication. 

29.  As  the  description  now  given  of  the  superficial  layer  applies  equally  to  both 

surfaces,  we  may  now  proceed  to  i\\e  intermediate  When  this  is  laid  open  by  a 

horizontal  section  (Plate  V.  fig.  6),  it  is  seen  to  consist  of  a series  of  concentric  zones, 
the  cells  of  which  alternate  with  each  other,  like  those  of  the  simpler  type  17-). 
The  cells  are  usually  circular  (or  nearly  so)  in  form  ; but  seem  to  differ  consider- 
ably in  size,  even  in  different  parts  of  the  same  zone.  Their  borders,  however,  very 
commonly  present  a funnel-like  aspect;  and  thus  we  perceive  that  the  diameter  of 
the  cavity  is  liable  to  vary,  according  to  the  part  of  it  which  the  section  happens  to 
traverse, — a fact  which  becomes  mure  obvious  when  vertical  sections  are  examined  ; 
for  it  is  then  seen  (Plate  VI.  figs.  7,  8,  9)  that  each  columnar  cell  is  narrowed  by 
constrictions  at  intervals,  so  as  to  divide  it  imperfectly  into  a series  of  segments 
vertically  superposed  one  upon  another.  The  number  of  th&se  segments  varies 
according  to  the  thickness  of  the  disk ; so  that  it  is  anything  but  constant,  either 
in  different  individuals,  or  in  different  parts  of  the  same.  Moreover,  it  may  be  often 
observed  that  the  columns  neither  always  pass  from  end  to  end  in  a straight  line,  nor 
maintain  a complete  isolation  from  each  other  (Plate  VIII.  figs.  1,  2) ; an  inoscula- 
tion of  two  columns  not  being  unfrequent,  and  more  rarely  a fusion  of  two  columns 
into  one.  All  these  features  of  structure  presented  by  the  shell,  are  beautifully  dis- 
played by  the  animal  (Plate  IV.  fig.  4)  ; the  columns  of  sarcode  (cc,  c'c')  exhibiting 
the  imperfect  transverse  segmental  division,  the  not  unfrequent  inosculation,  and 
the  occasional  fusion,  which  we  have  seen  to  exist  in  the  cavities  which  they  occupy. 
At  their  upper  and  lower  extremities,  they  unite  with  the  horizontal  bands  {hh' , bb'), 
which  pass  continuously  round,  in  each  zone,  between  the  intermediate  and  the  super- 
ficial layers. 

30.  Save  in  the  case  of  such  accidental  inosculations  as  those  just  noticed  (which  are 
indicated  in  vertical  sections  like  that  represented  in  Plate  VI.  fig.  7,  by  the  irregularly 
disposed  apertures  h,  h),  no  other  lateral  communication  seems  to  exist  between  the 
contiguous  cells  of  the  same  zone,  than  that  which  is  established  by  the  annular  sto- 
lons just  mentioned.  The  cells  of  the  successive  zones  communicate  with  each  other, 
however,  as  in  the  simple  type  previously  described  (^  17.)  ; but  with  a curious  modi- 
fication ; for  whereas  a horizontal  section  of  the  latter  shows  that  each  cell  communi- 
cates with  the  two  cells  alternating  with  it  in  the  interior  zone  (Plate  V.  fig.  1),  a like 
section  of  the  Orbitolite  of  complex  type  seems  to  show  that  such  a connexion  exists 
with  only  one  cell  of  the  interior  zone,  by  a passage  running  obliquely  from  one  to  the 
other,  and  extending  continuously  through  several  successive  zones  (Plate V.  fig.  6,  i,  k), 
I was  long  perplexed  by  the  want  of  constancy  in  the  direction  of  these  passages; 
the  very  same  section  exhibiting  opposite  obliquities  in  contiguous  parts  (Plate  VI. 
fig.  2).  By  the  study  of  vertical  sections,  however,  made  tangentially  instead  of 
radially,  so  as  to  cross  these  connecting  passages,  I arrived  at  the  explanation  of  this 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES; — GENERAL  PLAN;  COMPLEX  TYPE. 


205 


apparent  anomaly,  which  is  simply  as  follows.  Each  columnar  cell  really  communi- 
cates with  the  two  alternating  columnar  cells  in  the  next  interior  zone;  but  by  two 
distinct  passages,  instead  of  by  the  divarication  of  one ; and  these  passages  are  not 
upon  the  same  plane,  but  those  of  different  planes  turn  alternately  to  one  side  and  to 
the  other.  This  is  well  seen  in  the  two  tangential  sections  represented  in  Plate  VI. 
figs.  8 & 9;  of  which  8 shows  the  back  or  central  side  of  four  contiguous  columnar 
cells  ad,  hV , cc',  dd',  of  the  same  zone,  each  of  them  perforated  by  a series  of  aper- 
tures, in  which  some  degree  of  alternation  is  perceptible;  whilst  9 shows  the  front 
or  peripheral  side  of  four  other  columnar  cells,  in  which  it  is  seen  that,  by  the  sinuo- 
sity of  the  partition,  the  apertures  of  any  vertical  row,  even  when  in  a line  with  each 
other,  open  alternately  into  the  cells  on  the  right  and  on  the  left  of  the  septum  ; so 
that  {e.g.)  the  passages  extending  backwards  from  the  row  of  apertures  in  the 
columnar  cell  hV,  fig.  8,  will  debouch  alternately  in  cells  ad  and  hV,  fig.  9,  of  the 
zone  within.  The  same  will  of  course  be  true  of  the  pores  which  open  on  the  margin, 
these  being  nothing  else  than  the  orifices  of  the  inter-zonular  passages  just  described, 
which,  when  another  annulus  is  added,  lead  into  its  cells.  This  idea  of  the  alterna- 
ting direction  of  the  inter-zonular  passages,  seemed  to  furnish  the  solution  of  the 
appearances  presented  in  Plate  VI.  fig.  2 ; for,  as  the  disks  are  seldom  perfectly  flat, 
the  section  which  traverses,  at  one  part  of  the  disk,  the  set  of  passages  running  in 
one  direction,  will  traverse  the  other  set  of  passages,  where,  by  the  flexure  of  the  disk, 
the  plane  of  seetion  is  slightly  altered  in  regard  to  it.  All  doubt,  however,  as  to  the 
validity  of  this  explanation,  was  removed  by  the  examination  of  the  animal  substance 
filling  the  vertical  columns  ; for,  as  is  shown  in  Plate  IV.  fig.  4,  each  column  of  sarcode 
in  one  zone  {cc)  does  communicate  with  the  two  columns  alternating  with  it  in  the 
next  zone  (cV)  by  two  rows  of  peduncular  stolons ; and  the  peduncles  which  pass 
from  each  pair  of  contiguous  columns,  to  the  single  column  of  the  next  zone,  incline 
towards  one  another,  so  as  to  enter  it  nearly  in  the  same  vertical  line,  though  in  dif- 
ferent horizontal  planes. 

31.  That  which  has  been  already  stated  in  regard  to  the  partial  deficiency  of  the 
inner  wall  in  each  of  the  concentric  zones  of  the  simple  type  (5[  21.),  holds  good  also 
in  regard  to  the  septa  which  divide  the  successive  zones  of  the  intermediate  stratum 
in  this  more  complex  type;  for  the  walls  of  the  columnar  cells  close-in  around  them 
very  imperfectly  on  their  inner  or  central  side,  leaving  large  irregular  vertical  fissures 
(Plate  VIII.  fig.  1)  which  are  applied  to  the  vertical  rows  of  orifices  (Plate  VIII. 
fig.  2)  on  the  outer  margin  of  the  included  zone. 

32.  The  thickness  of  this  intermediate  stratum,  and  the  number  of  vertical  segments 
of  which  it  consists,  are  found  to  vary  considerably  in  different  parts  of  the  same 
disk  ; being  usually  least  near  the  nucleus,  and  gradually  augmenting  in  successive 
zones  as  their  distance  from  the  centre  increases  (Plate  VI.  fig.  7)  ; or  ceasing  to 
augment  at  a certain  point,  so  that  the  outer  part  of  the  disk  is  flat;  or  even  dimi- 
nishing again,  so  that  the  disk  thins  away  towards  its  margin.  It  is  specially  worthy 

2 E 


MDCCCLVI. 


206 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


of  note,  that  whatever  differences  of  this  kind  may  exist,  they  are  entirely  due  to  the 
variable  length  of  the  columns  of  the  intermediate  stratum  ; the  depth  of  the  cells 
of  the  superficial  layers  being  nearly  constant,  and  no  vertical  multiplication  of  these 
ever  taking  place.  The  intermediate  stratum,  where  it  abuts  on  the  nucleus,  is  often 
very  thin  ; the  annular  stolons  that  run  beneath  the  superficial  layers  being  in  such 
near  proximity  to  each  other,  that  the  intervening  column  of  sai’code  is  very  short, 
and  consists  of  only  a single  vertical  segment,  Plate  V.  fig.  12. 

33.  The  foregoing  description  applies  in  every  particular  to  those  specimens  only, 
which  present  the  structure  of  this  type  of  Orbitolite  in  its  most  regular  and  charac- 
teristic development ; and  the  differences  between  this  more  complex  form,  and  the 
simple  form  previously  described,  are  such  as  at  first  sight  to  preclude  the  idea  of 
their  specific  identity.  Hence  I am  not  in  the  least  degree  surprised,  that  Professor 
Williamson,  by  whom  their  respective  plans  of  organization  were  first  compared 
{loc.  cit.),  should  have  unhesitatingly  regarded  these  two  forms  as  specifically  distinct. 
But  when  a large  number  of  specimens  of  the  more  complex  type  are  carefully 
examined  and  compared  with  each  other,  it  becomes  obvious  that  a vast  amount  of 
diversity  in  the  arrangement  of  the  cells  of  the  shell,  and  of  the  segments  of  the 
animal,  may  present  itself;  and  that  one  after  another  of  the  characters  which  at  first 
seem  most  clearly  marked  and  therefore  most  distinctive,  may  be  shaded  off  (so  to 
speak)  in  such  a manner  that  a complete  transition  is  established,  sometimes  even  in  a 
single  disk,  between  the  simple  and  complex  types.  Such  a transition  is  exhibited 
by  the  specimen  of  which  a vertical  section  is  figured  in  Plate  V.  fig.  7;  for  it  is 
obvious  that  the  central  portion  of  this  disk  (a — b)  is  so  exactly  conformable  to  the 
simpler  type,  that  if  this  growth  had  stopped  at  the  twenty-third  zone,  it  would  have 
undoubtedly  been  regarded  as  an  unusually  large  example  of  that  form.  So  many 
variations  present  themselves  in  the  development  of  the  different  parts  of  the  more 
complex  type,  that  it  will  be  desirable  to  describe  them  under  a distinct  head 
(Sect.  IV.) ; and  when  these  shall  have  been  duly  considered,  I think  that  all  doubt 
as  to  the  specific  identity  of  the  simpler  and  more  complex  forms  will  be  done  away. 

III.  Physiology. 

34.  Growth. — ^Of  the  mode  in  which  the  Nutritive  process  is  carried  on  in  Orbito- 
lites,  our  imperfect  acquaintance  with  their  living  habits  leaves  us  much  in  the  dark  ; 
nevertheless  it  is  fair  to  reason  by  analogy  from  a comparison  of  their  structure  with 
that  of  other  Foraminifera  whose  habits  of  life  are  known  ; especially  as  this  analogy 
is  sufficiently  complete  in  the  present  instance,  to  justify  a tolerably  firm  reliance 
upon  it,  and  as  the  results  to  which  it  would  lead  are  in  harmony  with  the  facts  of 
observation.  All  the  Orbitolites,  whether  of  the  simple  or  complex  type,  which  have 
been  collected  in  the  living  state,  have  been  found  growing  on  the  surface  of  Sea- 
weeds or  other  marine  plants  (as  Zostera),  or  of  Zoophytes  ; it  may  therefore  be  fairly 
presumed,  that  such  is  their  ordinary  habitat ; and  hence  it  is  scarcely  conceivable 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES  PHYSIOLOGY  ; GROWTH. 


207 


that  their  attached  surface  should  ever  be  invested  by  sarcode.  Moreover,  several 
of  the  spirit-specimens  which  I have  submitted  to  decalcification,  have  proved  to  be 
so  closely  invested  by  a covering  of  vegetation,  chiefly  composed  of  Diatomacece, 
Desmidiece,  and  other  minute  Algae,  that  I cannot  suppose  even  the  free  surface  of 
their  disk  to  be  ordinarily  covered  by  sarcode*.  The  analogy  of  other  Rhizopods, 
however,  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  sarcode  projects  from  the  marginal  pores 
under  the  form  of  pseudopodia,  and  that  it  is  by  the  introduction  of  alimentary  parti- 
cles (chiefly  minute  forms  of  vegetation)  through  their  means  into  the  mass  of  sarcode 
from  which  they  are  put  forth,  that  the  fleshy  body  pervading  the  entire  disk  is 
nourished.  For  although  there  is  nothing  like  a digestive  cavity  in  any  part  of  it,  or  an 
alimentary  tube  passing  from  one  portion  to  another,  still  less  any  vascular  commu- 
nication between  the  segments,  yet  as  the  sarcode  forms  one  soft  homogeneous  mass 
continuous  throughout,  the  body  as  a whole  will  receive  the  benefit  of  any  incorpora- 
tion of  new  matter  with  its  substance,  in  whatever  situation  this  may  be  made.  That 
organic  particles  small  enough  to  pass  through  the  marginal  pores,  are  thus  introduced 
into  the  chambers  of  the  disk,  is  proved  by  the  curious  fact,  that  the  residuum  left 
after  the  decalcification  of  large  and  therefore  aged  disks,  whose  animal  contents  have 
not  been  preserved,  consists  almost  entirely  of  an  assemblage  of  remains  of  minute 
Diatomacece,  Desmidiece,  &c.,  which  have  obviously  been  retained  in  the  interior  of 
their  cavities,  after  the  assimilation  of  the  nutriment  they  were  competent  to  afford. 

35.  The  sarcode-body  of  the  animal,  growing  at  the  expense  of  the  nutriment  thus 
appropriated,  will  gradually,  it  is  probable,  project  itself  through  the  marginal 
orifices,  not  merely  in  filamentous  pseudopodia,  but  in  quantity  sufficient  to  form  new 
segments  on  the  outside  of  each  pore ; and  these  segments,  extending  themselves 
laterally,  will  come  into  mutual  connexion,  and  will  thus  form  a complete  annulus. 
It  may  be  presumed  to  be  by  the  calcification  of  the  surface  of  this  beaded  ring  of 
sarcode,  that  the  formation  of  the  shelly  zone  is  accomplished ; and  if  the  calcifying 
process  commence  on  the  segments,  and  extend  from  these  along  the  surface  of  their 
connecting  stolons,  we  can  understand  why  the  passages  that  are  left  for  communi- 
cation with  the  exterior,  should  arise  from  the  intermediate  divisions  of  the  annular 
canal,  instead  of  from  the  segments  themselves. 

36.  The  addition  of  new  zones  usually  takes  place  with  the  same  regularity  in  the 
complex  as  in  the  simple  type  of  structure ; but  departures  from  this  regularity, 
occasioned  by  a want  of  completeness  of  particular  zones,  are  more  frequent ; and 
this  is  perhaps  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  larger  size  of  the  disk,  which  will  tend  to 
produce  a less  intimate  dependence  of  each  part  of  the  animal  body  upon  every 

* I have  found  such  an  investment  also  on  several  dried  specimens ; and  until  I had  detached  and  examined 
this,  I should  have  supposed  from  its  aspect  that  it  was  the  desiccated  flesh  of  the  animal.  I have  little  doubt 
that  the  “greenish  cuticle”  described  by  Mr.  Carter  as  covering  his  Operculina  ardbica  (Ann.  of  Nat.  Hist, 
ser.  2.  vol.  x.  pp.  168,  172)  and  supposed  by  MM.  d’Archiac  and  Haime  (op.  cit.  p.  52)  to  be  specially  con- 
cerned in  the  formation  of  the  shell,  is  of  the  same  nature. 

2 E 2 


208 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


other,  and  will  thus  favour  the  partial  action  of  any  cause  (e.  g.  an  excess  of  nutrient 
materials)  which  promotes  a more  rapid  growth  on  one  side  than  on  the  other.  And 
this  view  is  most  remarkably  borne  out  by  the  fact,  which  I shall  more  fully  illus- 
trate in  a subsequent  meiuoir,  tliat  in  another  example  of  this  group*,  which,  though 
normally  growing  upon  the  cyclical  type,  possesses  a greater  degree  of  segmental 
independence,  such  irregularities  occur  far  more  frequently;  so  that,  in  fact,  it  is  rare 
to  meet  with  a disk  whose  increase  has  taken  place  with  uniformity  throughout. 

37.  Reparation  of  Injuries. — Looking  at  that  vegetative  repetition  of  parts  which 
pre-eminently  characterizes  the  body  of  the  Orbitolite, — every  one  of  the  segments 
first  budded-off  from  the  nucleus,  and  subsequently  from  the  margin  of  the  pre-formed 
zones,  being  the  precise  repetition  of  every  other, — it  may  be  expected  from  the 
analogy  of  similar  organisms,  that  every  one  of  these  parts  should  be  equally  capable, 
both  of  repairing  injuries  done  to  itself,  and  of  maintaining  an  independent  existence 
when  detached  from  the  mass  to  which  it  originally  belonged.  And  although  no 
opportunity  has  yet  presented  itself,  of  subjecting  such  a conclusion  to  the  test  of 
experiments  devised  for  the  purpose,  yet  accident  has  furnished  the  means  of  verifying 
it,  to  a degree  that  could  scarcely  have  been  anticipated.  For  in  the  course  of  my 
examination  of  the  large  collections  which  have  been  placed  at  my  disposal,  I have 
met  with  several  specimens,  in  which  it  is  evident  that,  after  larger  or  smaller  por- 
tions of  the  disk  had  been  broken  away,  a new  growth  has  taken  place  along  the 
fractured  edge.  Various  examples  of  this  are  shown  in  Plate  Vlll.  In  the  first  that 
I happened  to  meet  with,  which  is  represented  in  fig.  6,  the  injury  is  evidently  very 
slight,  being  confined  to  the  loss  of  a few  rows  near  the  edge  of  the  disk,  for  some- 
thing less  than  half  its  circumference  (a — b).  This  injury  had  obviously  been  sustained 
previously  to  the  formation  of  the  last  two  zones  ; for  these,  whilst  added  to  the 
uninjured  part  of  the  rnaigin  in  the  usual  way,  have  followed  the  irregular  contour  of 
the  broken  edge ; and  whilst  in  the  former  case  the  cells  present  their  normal  con- 
formity to  those  of  the  margin  they  invest,  in  the  latter,  the  cells,  while  obviously 
continuous  with  the  preceding,  are  quite  unconformable  to  those  of  the  fractured 
margin,  as  is  shown  on  a larger  scale  in  fig.  7.  Flence  it  seems  to  me  probable,  that 
the  growth  of  these  two  rows  along  the  fractured  edge,  has  taken  place,  not  from  that 
edge  itself,  but  by  an  extension  of  the  sarcode  about  to  form  the  new  circle  of  the 
entire  edge,  from  the  points  a and  h.  In  fig.  9 is  seen  an  example  of  a similar  kind, 
in  which  a much  larger  portion  of  the  disk  has  been  broken  away,  so  as  to  leave  only 
an  irregular  fragment,  including  its  centre  and  about  an  eighth  of  its  margin.  Here 
seven  rows  of  cells  have  been  formed  since  the  injury;  and  these,  whilst  produced 
conformably  to  those  of  the  uninjured  margin,  present  the  most  marked  want  of  con- 
formity to  those  of  the  fractured  margin,  which,  nevertheless,  they  completely  surround. 
A careful  examination  of  this  specinmn,  indeed,  seems  to  me  to  leave  little  room  for 
doubt,  that  the  growth  of  the  innermost,  or  what  I may  call  the  reparative  zone  of 

* I refer  to  a genus  hitherto  undescribed,  which  I shall  designate  Cycloclypeus. 


GENUS  ORBITOLJTES: — PHYSIOLOGY;  REPARATION  OF  INJURIES. 


209 


cells,  took  place,  not  from  the  broken  edge,  but  from  the  margin  of  the  unbroken ; 
just  as,  to  use  a professional  simile,  an  ulcerated  surface  ‘ skins-over’  by  an  extension 
of  the  integument  from  its  edges,  not  by  the  direct  formation  of  skin  upon  the  granu- 
lation-surface itself.  All  the  six  rows  subsequently  produced,  are  conformable  to 
each  other,  and  to  the  first  or  reparative  row,  from  which  they  have  obviously 
extended  themselves  after  the  normal  manner.  It  is  observable,  however,  that  the 
breadth  of  these  rows  varies  in  different  parts,  being  least  where  they  invest  the  pro- 
jecting portions  of  the  fractured  edge,  and  greatest  where  they  sink  into  its  hollows. 
And  thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  the  irregularities  left  in  the  shape  of  the  disk,  by  the 
loss  of  a large  part  of  its  substance,  are  gradually  compensated,  so  as  to  restore  it  to 
a form  much  more  nearly  corresponding  to  its  typical  symmetry. 

38.  Even  a very  small  fragment  appears  thus  to  serve  as  the  nucleus  for  a new 
disk.  In  fig.  8 is  shown  an  example  of  this  kind,  in  which  the  tendency  to  the  repro- 
duction of  the  typical  form,  by  the  compensative  reparation  just  described,  is  very 
curiously  marked.  This  specimen  also  presents  the  following  very  curious  feature, 
— that  the  new  growth  has  taken  place  from  the  inner  margin  of  the  original  fragment 
(«a),  and  not  from  its  outer  or  growing  margin,  as  in  the  cases  previously  noticed. 
Having  carefully  examined  it  in  various  modes,  1 cannot  entertain  the  slightest  doubt 
that  such  has  been  the  case  ; for  the  cells  of  the  first  new  zone,  as  well  as  those  of  all 
the  zones  subsequently  produced,  are  so  manifestly  conformable  to  those  of  the 
thinner  and  older  portion  of  the  fragment,  and  are  so  unconformable  to  those  of  the 
thicker  and  newer  margin,  that  it  seems  obvious  that  the  sarcode  must  have  extended 
itself  from  the  former  part,  along  the  fractured  edge  on  each  side,  and  have  then 
enveloped  the  margin  which  had  been  left  entire.  This  may  have  more  readily  taken 
place  in  the  present  instance,  because  at  the  part  {ad)  the  fracture  seems  to  have 
followed  the  course  of  one  of  the  zones,  instead  of  passing,  as  at  the  sides  of  this 
fragment,  and  in  the  instances  previously  cited,  in  such  a direction  as  to  cut  the 
zones  transversely. 

39.  The  preceding  instance  clearly  proves,  that  connexion  with  the  central 
nucleus  is  not  in  the  least  degree  requisite  for  the  continued  growth  of  the  peripheral 
parts  ; since  these  maybe  entirely  detached  from  it,  without  any  loss  of  vital  activity. 
The  same  inference  may  be  deduced  from  the  examination  of  specimens,  in  which, 
the  central  portion  of  the  disk  having  been  broken-out,  a growth  of  new  zones  seems 
to  have  taken  place  from  without  inwards,  so  as  to  fill  up  the  void  space  thus  left. 
In  no  other  way  can  I account  for  the  appearances  presented  by  a specimen  in  my 
possession,  in  which  the  included  portion  is  as  evidently  unconformable  to  that 
which  surrounds  it,  as  it  is  in  the  preceding  case,  but  in  which  there  is  also  an  unfilled 
void,  the  shape  of  one  part  of  which  clearly  indicates  that  it  occupies  the  site  of  the 
original  centre.  The  included  portion,  and  not  the  peripheral,  must  therefore  be  the 
after-growth  in  this  instance;  and  if  a little  more  time  had  elapsed,  the  whole  of  the 
central  vacuity  would  probably  have  been  filled  up  by  it. 


210 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


40.  In  the  specimen  represented  in  fig.  5,  the  central  portion  appears  to  have  been 
lost,  with  about  a third  of  the  peripheral ; and  the  new  growth  seems  to  have  taken 
place  at  the  same  time,  from  the  inner  margin  aaa  oi  the  fragment,  and  from  its 
outer  margin  hhh,  the  two  growths  becoming  continuous  with  each  other  along  the 
broken  edges  ab,  ah.  For  although  the  zones  that  lie  internally  to  a aa  are  conform- 
able to  those  which  surround  them,  yet  there  is  a peculiar  character  about  them 
(more  apparent  in  the  specimen  than  in  the  drawing)  which  indicates  them  to  have 
been  formed  at  a later  period,  and  to  have  been  contemporaneous  with  those  which 
surround  the  zone  hhh.  Their  actual  continuity  at  the  angles  a a is  unfortunately 
interrupted  by  an  injury  which  the  specimen  seems  subsequently  to  have  received; 
yet  its  traces  are  sufficiently  perceptible  on  one  side,  to  justify  the  belief  in  its  former 
existence. — The  specimen  of  which  fig.  4 is  a delineation,  seems  to  have  been  the 
subject  of  several  minor  fractures  and  reparations  ; but  the  course  of  its  zones  marks 
out  an  obvious  separation  between  an  earlier-  and  a later-formed  portion,  one 
having  sprung  from  the  other  along  the  line  ah.  The  incompleteness  of  the  speci- 
men, however,  prevents  me  from  coming  to  any  certain  conclusion,  whether  the 
small  inner  portion  is  here  the  older,  the  large  outer  portion  having  grown  in  the 
first  instance  from  its  margin  ah,  and  having  gradually  extended  itself  around  it; 
or  whether  the  outer  portion  is  the  residue  of  an  unusually  excentric  disk,  which, 
having  lost  its  nucleus  and  the  zones  immediately  surrounding  it,  has  filled  up  the 
central  space  with  an  extension  from  its  innermost  zone,  which  is  consequently  the 
newest  portion  of  the  whole. — It  is  interesting  to  find  evidence  in  fossil  specimens, 
that  the  same  kind  of  reparation  has  taken  place.  Among  the  Orbitolites  which  I 
have  examined  from  the  Calcaire  grossier  of  Paris,  is  a disk  of  which  a large  part 
had  obviously  been  lost  by  fracture,  but  of  which  the  original  symmetry  had  been  in 
great  degree  restored  by  a similar  outgrowth  from  the  zones  formed  from  the 
uninjured  margin,  along  the  fractured  edge. 

41.  7’his  series  of  abnormal  phenomena,  then,  not  only  confirms  the  conclusion 
that  seemed  fairly  deducible  from  our  previous  examination  of  the  normal  mode  of 
growth,  with  regard  to  the  independent  endowments  of  the  component  segments  of 
the  Orbitolite  body,  but  also  affords  some  additional  information  of  much  interest. 
For  we  see,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  growth  of  the  sarcode,  and  the  addition  of  new 
parts,  may  take  place  in  the  direction  of  the  centre,  where  a free  edge  is  exposed  at 
the  inner  margin  of  any  zone,  as  well  as  in  the  peripheral  direction  from  the  normal 
outer  margin.  Secondly,  the  reparative  nisus  seems  always  to  tend  towards  the  pro- 
duetion  of  a disk,  whose  shape  shall  approach  the  circular,  whatever  may  be  the  form 
of  the  fragment  which  serves  as  its  foundation  ; thus  showing  that,  notwithstanding 
the  repetition  and  independenee  of  the  separate  parts  of  these  organisms,  each  cluster, 
whether  large  or  small,  is  an  integer,  having  an  archetypal  symmetry  to  which  it 
tends  to  conform, — thus  strongly  reminding  us  of  the  laws  of  crystallization.  And 
thirdly,  the  plan  by  which  this  recurrence  to  the  discoidal  form  is  provided  for. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — PHYSIOLOGY;  QUESTION  OF  INDIVIDUALITY.  211 


seems  partly  to  consist  in  the  limitation  of  the  new  growth  to  the  natural  margins  of 
the  zones ; no  such  growth  taking  place  from  the  edge  of  a fracture  which  has 
crossed  the  zones  transversely,  although  it  may  proceed  from  the  remains  of  a zone 
which  has  been  broken  off  by  a fracture  that  partly  follows  its  course. 

42.  Question  of  Individuality . — It  has  been  frequently  discussed,  whether  each  of  the 
composite  forms  of  Foraminifera,  such  as  Orbitolite  or  Nummulite,  is  to  be  regarded 
as  a single  individual,  or  as  a colony  or  cluster  of  individuals.  Ail  occasion  for  this 
discussion  would,  I think,  be  removed  by  the  adoption  of  philosophical  views  as  to 
what  really  constitutes  an  individual,  and  as  to  the  relationship  between  the  parts 
which,  having  a common  origin  in  one  generative  act,  are  multiplied  by  a process  of 
gemmation.  As  I have  elsewhere  endeavoured  to  show*,  the  entire  product  of  every 
generative  act,  whether  developing  itself  into  a body  of  high  organization,  distin- 
guished by  the  structural  differentiation  of  its  parts,  or  evolving  itself  as  an  almost 
homogeneous  aggregate  of  equal  and  similar  segments,  must  be  regarded  as  homolo- 
gically the  same ; and  the  essential  difference  between  the  two,  as  living  beings,  lies 
in  the  functional  relations  of  their  respective  parts.  For  whilst  in  the  former  there 
is  so  close  an  interdependence  amongst  them  all,  that  no  one  can  exist  without  the 
rest,  and  the  life  of  the  whole  is  (as  it  were)  ihe  product  of  the  lives  of  the  component 
parts,  there  may  be  in  the  latter  such  a mutual  independence,  that  each  part  can  con- 
tinue to  live,  grow,  and  reproduce  itself  when  separated  from  the  rest,  so  that  the  life 
of  the  whole  is  (so  to  speak)  but  the  sum  of  that  of  its  components.  Now  the  term 
Mndividual,’  being  commonly  applied  to  the  entire  organism  in  the  first  case,  and  to 
only  a small  Segment  of  it,  perhaps,  in  the  second,  is  obviously  inappropriate  either  to 
one  or  to  the  other,  except  in  so  far  as  it  expresses  the  fact  of  independent  existence. 
But  the  limits  of  such  individuality  as  this  cannot  be  strictly  defined,  and  they 
even  differ  widely  in  animals  whose  general  plan  of  structure  is  the  same-f'.  Hence  in 
regard  to  the  Foraminifera,  as  in  regard  to  Zoophytes,  Composite  Acalephee,  &c.,  we 
are  to  regard  the  entire  mass  originating  in  a generative  act,  as  a single  organism  ; 
and  the  question  in  regard  to  the  functional  independence  of  its  multiple  segments,  is 
one  of  degree  in  each  particular  type.  Thus,  as  we  have  seen,  this  independence 
exists  in  the  case  of  the  Orbitolite  to  such  a degree  as  to  make  each  part  entirely 
self-sustaining,  and  to  prevent  the  existence  of  any  definite  limit  to  the  growth  of  the 
whole ; yet  it  is  quite  possible  that  in  a form  so  much  more  elevated  as  Nummulite, 
there  may  be,  as  maintained  by  MM.  d’Archiac  and  Haime  {op.  cit.  p.  69),  such  a 
degree  of  mutual  dependence  among  the  segments,  and  of  unity  in  their  aggregate 
life,  that  the  latter  predominates  sufficiently  to  limit  the  growth  of  the  organism  to  a 
tolerably  determinate  size^. 

* Principles  of  Comparative  Physiology,  chap.  xi.  sect.  1. 

t See  also  Mr.  Huxlev’s  observations  on  this  subject,  in  Philosophical  Transactions,  1851,  pp.  578,  580. 

t Whilst  admitting  the  possibility  of  this  view,  I shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  question  its  correctness ; 
since  the  evidence  on  which  it  is  based  appears  to  me  by  no  means  satisfactory.  In  fact,  when  I come  to 


212 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


43.  Reproduction. — The  mode  of  Reproduction  of  the  Foraminifera  generally,  is  at 
present  involved  in  the  deepest  obscurity ; and  there  is  little  probability  that  it  will 
be  fully  elucidated  by  any  other  means,  than  continued  observation  of  the  animals  in 
their  living  state,  such  as  may  probably  be  best  carried  out  with  regard  to  the  species 
of  our  own  seas  by  keeping  them  in  Vivaria.  In  default  of  such  observations,  and  as 
a guide  to  further  inquiry,  I think  it  as  well  to  state  what  has  fallen  under  my  own 
notice.  In  many  parts  of  the  body  of  spirit-specimens  of  Orbitolite, — especially,  but 
not  solely,  in  the  superficial  cells, — I have  found  the  sarcode  broken-up  as  it  were  into 
little  spherules,  as  represented  in  Plate  IV.  fig.  3 ; these  spherules,  however,  do  not 
seem  to  possess  any  peculiar  investment,  nor  does  their  sarcode  appear  to  have 
undergone  any  special  change.  Similar  spherules  are  figured  by  Professor  Ehrenberg 
{op.  cit.)  in  several  of  the  cells  of  his  Sorites  orbiculus ; and  Professor  Schultze  has 
recently  {op.  cit.  pp.  26,  27)  described  bodies  which  seem  to  be  of  the  same  kind, 
though  more  opake  (probably  through  having  a denser  envelope),  as  frequently  pre- 
senting themselves  in  certain  chambers  of  Rotalice,  or  even  throughout  the  entire 
series.  I feel  much  inclined  to  believe  that  these  bodies  are  gemmules,  which,  like 
the  zoospores  of  the  Algse,  are  produced  by  a resolution  of  certain  portions  of  the 
substance  of  the  organism  into  independent  particles,  which,  spontaneously  detaching 
themselves,  and  escaping  through  the  marginal  pores  of  the  disk,  will  go  forth  to  lay 
the  foundation  for  new  disks  elsewhere. 

Besides  these,  however,  I have  more  rarely  met  with  certain  other  bodies,  appa- 
rently imbedded  in  the  sarcode,  which  may  be  either  gemmules  in  a later  stage, 
or  may  possibly  be  true  ova;  these,  represented  in  Plate  IV.  fig.  11,  seem  to  exhibit 
various  stages  of  binary  subdivision  ; and  they  present  a deep-red  colour,  even  in 
spirit- specimens.  I can  scarcely  imagine  that  these  can  be  vegetable  organisms 
that  have  been  introduced  through  the  marginal  pores  ; since  they  are  much  too 
large  to  pass  through  these,  without  a great  alteration  in  form  ; and  this  would  seem 
to  be  incompatible  with  the  firmness  of  their  envelope.  At  g,  fig.  11,  is  represented, 
under  the  same  magnifying  power  with  the  foregoing,  an  object  which  I have  detected 
in  one  of  my  vertical  sections  of  the  shell,  where  it  occupies  one  of  the  superficial 
cells,  the  cover  of  which  is  deficient.  Now  it  is  quite  possible  that  this  cell  may 
have  been  accidentally  abraded,  and  that  the  object  in  question  may  have  found  its 
way  into  it  abexterno;  its  position  and  aspect,  however,  seem  to  me  much  more 
conformable  to  the  idea,  that  it  has  been  developed  in  the  disk  itself,  and  that  it  has 
burst  through  the  lid' of  the  cell  by  its  own  enlargement,  in  preparation  for  its  final 
escape.  And  this  view  seems  borne  out  by  the  fact,  that  I have  frequently  found  a 
few  cells  open  on  different  parts  of  the  surface  of  disks  which  did  not  appear  to  have 
suffered  any  abrasion;  as  if  the  rupture  of  their  lids  had  taken  place  as  an  ordinary 

describe  (in  a future  memoir)  the  structure  and  varieties  of  Nonionina,  the  nearest  existing  type  to  Nummulite, 
and  in  my  belief  generically  identical  with  it,  I shall  have  occasion  to  show,  that  there  is  not  only  no  proof  of 
the  existence  of  such  a limitation  to  its  growth,  but  that  there  is  strong  evidence  to  the  contrary. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES  : — REPRODUCTION  ; VARIATIONS  IN  SIZE. 


213 


phenomenon  of  their  development,  instead  of  being  the  result  of  accident. — I do  not 
wish  to  attach  any  weight  to  the  interpretations  I have  here  offered  ; but  I simply  state 
the  facts,  and  the  explanations  of  them  which  have  suggested  themselves  to  my  own 
mind ; merely  adding,  what  I hope  to  present  in  more  detail  at  a future  opportunity, 
that  bodies  resembling  the  first  or  primordial  cell,  in  which  Foraminifera  of  all  forms 
originate,  are  not  unfrequently  met-with  in  the  chambers  of  many  other  species. 


IV.  Variations. 

44.  Variations  in  Size. — We  have  already  seen  that  diversities  both  in  the  diameter 
and  in  the  thickness  of  the  disk,  arise  directly  from  the  degree  in  which  the  animal 
substance  (whereon  the  skeleton  is  modelled)  has  extended  itself  either  horizontally 
or  vertically,  so  as  to  multiply  either  the  number  of  concentric  rings,  or  the  number 
of  the  superposed  segments  of  which  each  ring  consists.  This,  however,  is  not  the 
only  source  of  variation  in  size ; for  a most  extraordinary  diversity  presents  itself  in 
the  dimensions  of  the  individual  components,  by  whose  repetition  the  entire  disk  is 
made  up.  It  is  in  the  nucleus  that  I find  this  diversity  most  strongly  marked,  as 
will  appear  from  a comparison  of  Plate  VII.  figs.  1 — 4,  which  exhibit  parts  of  a grada- 
tional series  of  twelve,  from  the  smallest  to  the  largest  forms  I have  met  with,  all  of 
them  accurately  drawn,  under  the  same  magnifying  power,  from  specimens  in  my 
possession*.  The  length  of  the  entire  nucleus  of  fig.  4 is  about  seven  times  that  of 
the  nucleus  of  fig.  1,  and  its  breadth  about  four  times  as  great ; the  area  of  the  former 
is  therefore  about  twenty-eight  times  that  of  the  latter;  and  as  it  is  also  several  times 
as  thick,  the  whole  of  the  cavity,  which  was  occupied  in  the  living  state  by  animal 
substance,  could  scarcely  have  been  less  than  a hundred  times  as  large  in  the  one  as 
in  the  other.  (Compare  also  figs.  5,  6,  10,  12,  13  of  Plate  IV.)  There  is  not  by 
any  means  the  same  amount  of  difference  between  the  dimensions  of  the  ordinary 
cells  which  are  formed  by  concentric  extensions  of  the  nucleus ; nevertheless,  it  will 
be  seen  by  a glance  at  the  figures  just  referred-to,  that  these  also  exhibit  marked 
diversities  in  size,  the  largest  cells  being  usually  found  to  spring  from  the  largest 
nuclei,  and  vice  versd.  Moreover,  the  individual  cells  of  the  very  same  disk  are 
occasionally  found  to  differ  amongst  each  other,  as  widely  as  do  the  cells  of  fig.  1 
from  those  of  fig.  4. 

45.  Similar  differences  present  themselves  in  the  thickness  of  individual  cells  ; as  is 
of  course  best  seen  in  the  simple  type  of  Orbitolite,  in  which  the  augmentation  of 
thickness  is  not  produced  by  the  vertical  superposition  of  multiple  segments.  A 
remarkable  example  of  this  kind  is  presented  in  the  comparison  of  figs.  4 and  5 of 
Plate  V. ; these  being,  like  the  figures  in  Plate  VII.,  drawn  under  the  same  magni- 
fying power.  I possess  a series  of  vertical  sections  of  different  individuals,  in  which 
the  same  gradual  transition  is  seen  from  the  thin  to  the  thick,  as  I have  just  stated 


MDCCCLVI. 


* The  entire  series  of  figures  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Royal  Society. 

2 F 


214 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


to  exist  in  regard  to  superficial  area ; and  which  also  proves  that  the  relative  thick- 
ness of  the  central  and  of  the  peripheral  portions  is  equally  liable  to  variation, 

46.  It  seems  obvious,  from  the  foregoing  considerations,  that  neither  the  absolute 
nor  the  relative  dimensions  of  the  individual  parts  of  these  composite  fabrics,  can, 
any  more  than  the  dimensions  of  the  entire  disks,  be  taken  as  affording  valid  charac- 
ters for  the  discrimination  of  species;  and  that  such  a wide  range  of  variation  exists 
among  individuals,  as  would,  if  the  extreme  cases  alone  were  known,  seem  fully 
to  justify  their  separation  under  distinct  specific  designations.  Thus,  if  the  two 
extreme  forms,  figs.  1 and  4 (Plate  VII.),  had  been  the  sole  objects  of  comparison, 
most  naturalists  would  undoubtedly  have  considered  the  strongly-marked  difference 
in  the  size  of  their  respective  nuclei  to  entitle  them  to  rank  as  separate  species;  and 
even  if  fig.  2 or  fig.  3 had  been  brought  into  comparison  with  them,  it  might  have 
been  a question  whether  it  should  be  associated  with  fig.  1 or  with  fig.  4,  or  should 
rank  as  a third  species  intermediate  between  them,  or  should  be  considered  as  a con- 
necting link  specifically  identical  with  both,  and  therefore  establishing  their  specific 
identity  with  each  other.  The  comparison  of  the  entire  series  must  be  felt  to  remove 
all  ground  for  hesitation  on  this  point,  since  it  is  manifestly  impossible  to  draw  a line 
across  any  part  of  it,  which  should  divide  it  into  two  or  any  larger  number  of  groups, 
respectively  characterized  by  constant  and  well-marked  differences  in  size.  And 
here  again,  therefore,  we  have  evidence  of  the  great  importance  of  bringing  into 
comparison  a sufficiently  large  number  of  forms,  to  enable  us  to  determine  in  some 
degree  the  measure  of  individual  variation. 

47.  Variations  in  Shape. — The  very  strong  tendency  which  we  have  seen  to  pre- 
vail in  the  Orbitolite,  not  only  to  the  maintenance  of  the  circular  type  in  the  regular 
growth  of  the  disk,  but  to  its  reproduction  after  accidental  injuries,  seems  to  prevent 
the  occurrence  of  any  considerable  variation  in  its  general  form,  except  such  as  may 
be  directly  produced  by  external  agencies.  The  circular  sometimes  gives  place  to  an 
elliptical  shape  (Plate  VII.  fig.  4),  especially  in  young  specimens,  whose  form  is  more 
determined  by  that  of  the  nucleus  than  is  that  of  older  individuals.  And  the  occur- 
rence of  such  a variety  in  the  recent  type,  makes  me  indisposed  to  admit  that  ellip- 
ticity  of  shape  can  be  in  itself  a sufficient  basis  for  the  specific  differentiation  of  any 
fossil  form  of  this  genus.  Of  the  marked  differences  in  the  general  aspect  of  the 
disks,  which  may  arise  from  differences  in  the  relative  proportions  between  their 
thickness  and  their  diameter,  and  in  the  relative  thickness  of  their  central  and 
peripheral  portions,  mention  has  been  already  made  (^^  17  and  32.).  And  the 
only  other  important  departure  from  the  typical  shape  which  I have  met  with,  either 
in  the  simple  or  in  the  more  complex  form,  has  been  described  under  a former 
head  (^  25.). 

48.  Variations  in  the  Form  of  the  Superficial  Cells,  and  in  the  Markings  of  the  Sur- 
face.— The  appearances  presented  on  minute  observation  by  the  surface  of  the  Orbi- 
tolite, are  so  far  from  being  uniform,  that  to  any  one  whose  eye  had  not  become 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES VARIATIONS  IN  SURFACE-MARKINGS. 


215 


familiarised  with  their  variety  by  the  examination  of  a considerable  number  of  speci- 
mens, they  would  become  sources  of  great  perplexity.  We  have  already  seen  that 
the  cellular  markings  present  two  very  distinct  forms,  the  rounded  (Plate  V.  fig.  1) 
and  the  oblong  (Plate  V.  fig.  6);  the  first  of  these  being  specially  characteristic  of 
that  simpler  type  of  structure  in  which  there  is  only  a single  layer  of  cells,  but  not 
being  confined  to  it ; whilst  the  second  is  peculiar  to  the  complex  type,  in  which 
there  are  two  superficial  layers,  distinct  from  the  intermediate  stratum.  Now  the 
occasional  coexistence  of  both  these  plans  of  structure  in  a single  individual  (^  33.), 
sufficiently  proves  that  the  diversity  of  the  surface-markings  to  which  they  respect- 
ively give  rise,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a basis  for  specific  distinction  ; and  when  these 
extremes  of  diversity  are  kept  in  view,  it  must  be  felt  to  be  highly  improbable  that 
any  modifications  of  either  form  should  possess  greater  importance.  That  such 
modifications  are  mere  individual  varieties,  is  further  evidenced  by  their  gradational 
character,  and  by  the  fact  that  two  or  more  of  them  may  present  themselves  in  the 
same  disk.  In  my  description  of  them,  I shall  limit  myself  to  an  account  of  those 
more  remarkable  and  frequently-recurring  varieties,  which  will  serve,  I think,  as  a 
key  to  any  others  that  are  likely  to  be  met  with. 

49.  Although  each  surface,  in  either  of  the  two  principal  types,  ordinarily  shows  a 
division  into  concentric  zones,  which  are  again  transversely  subdivided  so  as  to  mark 
the  separation  of  the  cells,  yet  sometimes  the  concentric  zones  are  alone  visible,  and 
no  transverse  subdivision  is  indicated,  save  by  the  alternation  of  lights  and  shadows 
proceeding  from  a like  alternation  of  solid  substance  and  of  hollow  spaces  beneath 
(Plate  VII.  fig.  7).  This  predominance  of  the  concentric  divisions,  which  gives  a 
very  distinetive  aspect  to  the  disks  which  exhibit  it,  is  usually  most  apparent  in  indi- 
viduals whose  vertical  section  exhibits  two  planes  of  cells  ; and  it  has  seemed  to  me 
to  depend  on  the  unusual  freedom  between  the  lateral  communications,  which  I have 
noticed  in  certain  individuals  thus  formed,  so  that  the  animal  portion  of  each  zone 
might  be  described  as  an  annulus  of  sarcode,  merely  constricted  at  intervals.  This 
peculiarly  cyclical  aspect  of  the  surface  (on  whose  occurrence  in  fossil  specimens  I 
believe  the  genus  Cyclolina  to  have  been  founded,  ^ 5.)  may  pass  into  either  of  the 
principal  types  previously  noticed;  thus  in  fig.  14  we  observe  the  concentric  zones, 
though  still  very  strongly  marked,  breaking  up  (so  to  speak)  into  bands  of  rounded 
cells  with  slightly  convex  covers  ; whilst  in  figs.  5,  6 they  are  subdivided  by  very  defi- 
nite transverse  lines  into  cells  of  remarkable  squareness,  which  still  retain  the  original 
flatness  of  their  surfaces. 

50.  On  the  other  hand,  the  appearance  of  concentric  division  is  sometimes  almost 
entirely  wanting  ; the  surface  of  the  disk  exhibiting  excentric  circular  markings, 
which  resemble  those  of  an  engine-turned  watch-case  (Plate  VII.  fig.  8),  and  the 
boundaries  of  the  cells  being  formed  by  the  intersection  of  these  with  each  other. 
This  aspect,  however,  which  seems  due  to  an  unusual  freedom  in  the  oblique  com- 
munications between  the  cells  in  each  zone  and  those  alternating  with  them  in  the 

2 F 2 


216 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


contiguous  zones  on  either  side,  insensibly  passes  into  the  ordinary  type ; and  it  is 
not  uncommon  to  meet  with  disks,  especially  fossil,  which  exhibit  in  one  part  the 
engine-turned  aspect  (Plate  VII.  fig.  8),  and  in  another  (fig.  14)  that  of  concentric 
zones  transversely  subdivided.  Indeed  I have  sometimes  found  that  the  very  same 
disk  might  be  made  to  present  either  of  these  aspects,  according  to  the  manner  in 
which  the  light  is  made  to  impinge  upon  it  and  is  reflected  from  it. 

51.  Although  the  rounded  or  ovoidal  form  of  the  superficial  divisions  is  specially 
characteristic  of  the  simple  type  of  Orbitolites,  yet  it  is  by  no  means  restricted  to 
this ; being  frequently  met-with  in  the  thicker  disks  of  the  more  complex  type,  and 
being  almost  constant  in  the  fossil  forms  that  abound  in  the  early  Tertiaries.  Its 
occurrence,  however,  may  always  (I  believe)  be  considered  as  indicating  an  incom- 
plete separation  between  the  superficial  cells  and  the  columnar  cells  of  the  inter- 
mediate stratum  (^  58.);  so  that  the  former  present  the  shape  of  the  latter,  in  place 
of  the  form  which  properly  characterises  them.  The  shape  of  the  cell  is  sometimes 
marked  out  in  unusual  strength  by  the  convexity  of  its  lid  or  cover,  as  shown  in 
Plate  VII.  fig.  15  ; and  this  feature  is  often  so  pronounced  in  the  large  fossil  Orbito- 
lites of  the  Paris  basin,  as  to  become  visible  to  the  naked  eye.  A very  marked 
diversity  in  its  degree,  however,  as  well  as  in  the  size  of  the  cells,  is  to  be  noticed  in 
the  contiguous  zones  of  another  specimen  (Plate  VII.  fig.  16) ; whence  it  is  obvious 
that  the  convexity  is  a mere  accidental  variation,  and  is  a character  of  no  value 
whatever  as  regards  the  differentiation  of  species.  The  relation  of  the  rounded  to  the 
square  or  oblong  cells  is  made  evident  by  the  occurrence  of  intermediate  links  of 
transition.  Thus,  from  such  circular  cells  as  are  delineated  in  Plate  VII.  fig.  9,  the 
passage  is  easy,  through  those  shown  in  figs.  8 and  14,  to  those  of  fig.  6 (which  are 
drawn  under  about  twice  the  magnifying  power),  and  thence  to  the  square  cells  of 
the  inner  part  of  the  portion  of  the  disk  figured  in  Plate  VII.  fig.  13.  This  last  figure 
illustrates  the  important  fact,  that  v/hile  the  cells  in  one  part  of  the  surface  of  the 
disk  are  square,  others  in  close  proximity  with  them  may  be  oblong ; thus  conducting 
us  to  the  extreme  form  of  this  type,  represented  in  Plate  VII.  fig.  12. 

52.  The  foregoing  considerations  seem  to  render  it  obvious,  that  the  diversities  in 
the  form  of  the  superficial  cells  do  not  afford  any  ground  whatever  for  the  establish- 
ment of  a corresponding  multiplicity  of  specific  types,  but  that  they  must  rank  as 
individual  variations  to  which  there  is  scarcely  any  definite  limit.  If  the  originals  of 
Plate  VII.  figs.  5,  7,  9,  12  and  15,  had  happened  to  have  presented  themselves  to  the 
Systematist  without  any  of  the  connecting  forms,  he  might  have  been  pardoned  for 
describing  them  as  distinct  species  characterised  by  well-marked  differences  in  the 
form  and  arrangement  of  their  cells;  but  no  such  differentiation  can  be  admitted  in 
the  face  of  the  fact,  that  these  are  only  extreme  examples  of  variations,  which  show 
themselves  in  a minor  degree  between  almost  every  two  specimens  brought  into  com- 
parison, and  even  between  the  different  parts  of  the  same  disk.  Moreover,  when  it 
is  borne  in  mind,  that  the  animal  basis  on  which  the  calcareous  skeleton  is  moulded 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — VARIATIONS  IN  SURFACE-MARKINGS. 


217 


is  not  a body  of  constant  shape,  provided  with  organs  having  a fixed  relation  one  to 
another,  but  is  a mass  of  almost  homogeneous  sarcode,  which  in  the  living  state  is 
continually  undergoing  changes  of  form,  one  part  extending  itself  into  pseudopodia, 
whilst  another  undergoes  a corresponding  contraction,  a strong  a priori  improba- 
bility is  seen  to  exist,  that,  in  animals  of  such  organization,  the  form  of  the  compo- 
nent segments  should  possess  that  value  as  a specific  character,  which  it  can  only 
derive  from  constancy. 

53.  Besides  those  regular  markings  of  the  surface,  which  correspond  to  the  divi- 
sion of  the  interior  into  cells,  a peculiar  aspect  is  frequently  given  to  it  by  the 
deposit  of  calcareous  thickenings,  which  are  sometimes  irregular,  but  which  occa- 
sionally present  an  approach  to  symmetry.  The  most  remarkable  example  I have 
met  with,  of  this  kind  of  addition,  is  delineated  in  Plate  VII.  fig.  11,  in  which  it  will 
be  seen  that  the  deposit  has  taken  place  in  radial  lines  disposed  with  a certain 
degree  of  regularity.  But  in  fig.  10,  which  represents  a specimen  whose  surface  is  far 
less  altered  by  these  deposits,  no  such  symmetry  presents  itself;  and  other  specimens 
in  my  possession  exhibit  the  means  between  these  extremes.  Hence  we  are  justified 
in  pronouncing  this  peculiarity  to  result  from  an  accidental  outgrowth,  which  is  so 
variable  in  its  degree  as  not  to  afford  the  least  basis  for  specific  differentiation.  It 
is  worthy  of  note,  however,  that  it  presents  itself  far  more  frequently,  and  also  in  a 
far  more  characteristic  manner,  in  the  Orbitolites  of  the  Philippine  Seas,  than  in 
those  of  the  Australian  or  of  any  other  provinces ; and  this  circumstance  seems  to 
render  it  probable,  that  the  outgrowth  is  directly  due  to  the  influence  of  some  exter- 
nal conditions,  probably  to  an  excess  in  the  proportion  of  carbonate  of  lime  in  the 
waters  inhabited  by  these  particular  specimens. 

54.  Variations  in  Mode  of  Gro?c^A.— Although  the  cyclical  mode  of  growth,  when 
once  established,  is  subsequently  maintained  with  great  regularity,  and  although  in 
what  may  be  considered  the  typical  form,  it  commences  from  the ‘nucleus’  itself, 
yet  there  are  numerous  instances  in  which  the  typical  regularity  is  more  or  less 
widely  departed-from,  so  that  the  early  increase  seems  to  take  place  after  an  alto- 
gether different  plan.  The  most  marked  antithesis  to  that  regularly  concentric  type 
of  growth,  in  which  a complete  annulus  of  cells  is  formed  around  the  large  circum- 
ambient segment  of  the  ‘ nucleus  ’ (see  ^17,  also  Plate  IV.  fig.  5,  and  Plate  VII.  fig,  2), 
is  presented  by  those  forms  in  which  this  circumambient  mass  only  gives  origin  to 
new  cells  at  its  extremity ; these  in  their  turn  bud-forth  others,  which  extend  and 
multiply  themselves  laterally  as  well  as  in  advance  ; and  thus  a kind  of  spiral  is  pro- 
duced, which  opens-out  very  rapidly,  the  lateral  portions  of  its  mouth  tending  to 
grow-round  and  embrace  the  nucleus.  Thus,  starting  from  the  central  globular 
mass,  1,  of  Plate  IX.  fig.  4,  we  see  that  the  circumambient  mass  2 2,  which  nearly 
surrounds  it,  gives  origin  at  one  of  its  extremities  to  a smaller  mass,  3,  from  which 
bud-off  two  cells,  4 4,  which  again  give  origin  to  four  cells,  constituting  the  row  5 5. 
The  cells  of  the  next  row,  6 6,  are  more  numerous,  but  are  themselves  exceeded  by 


218 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


those  of  the  zone  7 7,  which  not  only  surrounds  it,  but  extends  further  backwards 
upon  the  nucleus.  So  the  cells  of  the  zones  8 8,  9 9,  10  10,  11  11,  and  12  12,  pro- 
gressively increase  in  number,  and  each  zone  extends  itself  further  back  upon  the 
nucleus,  until  those  of  the  last  of  these  zones  nearly  meet  upon  its  yet  unenclosed 
margin.  The  cells  of  zone  13  13  do  actually  meet  there,  so  as  to  form  a complete 
circle;  and  zones  14  14  and  15  15  are  formed  with  cyclical  regularity,  as  would  be 
any  other  zones  subsequently  produced.  A still  more  complete  spiral,  in  which 
twenty-two  zones  (commencing  with  the  central  segment)  succeed  one  another  before 
the  first  complete  annulus  is  formed,  is  shown  in  Plate  IX.  fig.  2.  Both  figs.  2 and  4 
(the  latter  of  which  is  diagrammatized)  represent  the  central  portions  of  large  disks, 
whose  peripheral  portions  grow  on  the  regular  cyclical  plan. 

55.  Now  if  these  two  plans  of  growth — the  one  cyclical  from  the  beginning,  the 
other  cyclical  only  after  having  been  at  first  spiral — were  constantly  presented  in  well- 
marked  contrast  with  each  other,  there  would  be  good  ground  for  considering  them 
(as  Professor  Williamson  has  done*)  to  be  characteristic  of  distinct  specific  types. 
But  this  idea  cannot  be  entertained,  when  a large  number  of  individuals  are  examined. 
For  it  then  becomes  apparent,  that  the  number  of  cases  in  which  the  nucleus  is 
surrounded  on  all  sides  by  the  same  number  of  zones,  indicating  that  the  concentric 
mode  of  growth  has  prevailed  from  the  very  first,  are  very  few ; but  that  in  by  far 
the  larger  proportion  of  specimens,  there  is  a slight  excentricity  of  the  nucleus,  with 
a larger  number  of  zones  on  one  side  than  on  the  other,  as  in  Plate  IX.  figs.  1,  3; 
indicating  that  the  first-formed  zones  have  been  incomplete  circles,  owing  to  a 
restriction  of  the  gemmation  of  the  nucleus  to  one  part  of  its  periphery.  This  is 
shown  extremely  well  by  decalcified  specimens  of  the  animal,  no  two  of  which,  in 
fact,  precisely  resemble  one  another  as  to  the  mode  in  which  the  first  zone  of  segments 
originates  in  the  nucleus.  Thus  in  the  specimen  represented  in  Plate  IV.  fig.  1,  of 
which  the  nucleus  is  represented  on  a larger  scale  in  fig.  12,  the  circumambient 
segment  of  the  nucleus  gives  off  only  three  stolons,  at  the  end  most  remote  from  its 
connexion  with  the  central  mass  ; and  the  first  zone  of  segments  is  far  from  being 
entire,  the  cyclical  type  not  being  completely  attained  until  two  or  three  successive 
additions  have  been  made.  In  fig.  13,  eight  stolons  are  given  off  from  the  nucleus; 
and  from  the  half-zone  which  they  form,  an  entire  circle  is  next  produced ; thus 
affording  a remarkable  confirmation  to  the  idea  I have  already  suggested  (^  37.),  as 
to  the  capacity  of  a portion  of  a zone  to  give  origin  to  a complete  annulus,  by  the 
lateral  extension  of  its  hands  of  sarcode.  In  fig.  10,  the  nucleus  gives  off  eleven 
stolons  on  one  side,  and  there  are  indications  of  three  ov  four  on  the  other.  In  fig.  6, 
the  stolons  come  fortli  from  a still  larger  proportion  of  the  periphery  of  the  nucleus ; 
the  zone  which  first  surrounds  it,  however,  is  still  incomplete  in  some  parts,  though 
the  succeeding  zone  forms  an  entire  circle.  Finally,  in  the  specimen  represented  in 
fig.  5,  which  is  almost  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  disk  represented  in  Plate  VII.  fig.  2, 

* Transactions  of  the  Microscopical  Society,  1st  series,  vol.  iii.  pp.  116,  119. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — VARIATIONS  IN  MODE  OF  GROVFTH. 


219 


the  stolons  pullulate  from  the  entire  circumference  of  the  nucleus,  and  the  annular 
zones  of  segments  are  complete  from  the  first.  The  greater  the  limitation  of  the 
power  of  gemmation  to  one  side  of  the  nucleus,  and  the  larger  the  number  of  incom- 
plete zones,  the  more  will  the  early  plan  of  growth  approximate  to  the  spiral  type, 
such  as  is  represented  in  Plate  IX.  figs.  2,  4.  It  is  obvious  that  the  existence  of 
these  intermediate  gradations  breaks-down  that  barrier  between  the  extreme  forms, 
which  Professor  Williamson  had  proposed  to  erect ; and  shows  that  in  this,  as  in 
many  other  particulars,  differential  characters,  which  at  first  sight  appeared  to  be  per- 
fectly satisfactory,  lose  all  their  force  when  carefully  traced  through  a sufficiently 
extended  series  of  specimens. 

56.  It  is  desirable  to  note,  as  bearing  on  the  relations  between  Orbitolites  and 
Orhiculina,  that  even  in  those  forms  of  the  first-named  type,  in  which  the  spiral 
mode  of  early  growth  is  most  characteristically  displayed,  it  never  seems  to  proceed 
far  beyond  a single  turn  ; and  further,  that  the  later  portion  of  this  whorl  merely 
surrounds  the  earlier,  and  does  not  cover  it;  so  that  unless  (as  sometimes  happens, 
Plate  V.  fig.  5)  the  nucleus  should  itself  be  thicker  than  the  zones  of  cells  which  im- 
mediately surround  it,  there  is  no  central  protuberance.  In  Orhiculina,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  early  growth  invariably  takes  place  according  to  the  spiral  type ; this  type 
is  always  maintained,  until  several  turns  have  been  made ; and  the  later  whorls  not 
only  surround  but  cover-in  the  earlier,  so  as  to  give  rise  to  the  central  knob  or  pro- 
tuberance. Some  general  remarks,  which  I have  to  make  on  the  combination  of  the 
helical  and  cyclical  types  of  growth,  bearing  upon  certain  fundamental  questions  of 
classification,  will  be  more  appropriately  introduced  in  a subsequent  Memoir,  after 
the  structure  of  Orhiculina  shall  have  been  compared  with  that  of  OrhitoUtes. 

57.  It  is  not,  however,  in  the  early  mode  of  development  alone,  that  striking 
diversities  present  themselves ; for  numerous  variations,  some  of  them  quite  as 
remarkable,  are  seen  in  the  course  of  the  evolution  of  the  several  parts  which  are 
characteristic  of  the  ‘ complex’  type.  Thus,  in  the  first  place,  the  intermediate  stratum 
is  sometimes  entirely  deficient  in  the  zones  immediately  surrounding  the  nucleus; 
so  that  the  upper  and  lower  annuli  of  sarcode  are  represented  by  only  a single  band, 
as  is  indicated  by  the  singleness  of  the  aperture  through  which  it  passes.  In  the 
specimen  figured  in  Plate  V.  fig.  9,  we  see  this  to  be  the  case  only  with  the  Mree  zones 
nearest  the  centre  ; in  that  represented  in  Plate  V.  fig.  10,  the  canal  is  single  in  the 

Jive  inner  zones ; whilst  in  that  represented  in  Plate  V.  fig.  7?  the  canal  is  single  for 
the  first  twenty-three  zones.  Whenever  the  annular  canal  is  single,  the  upper  and 
lower  superficial  cells  also  become  continuous,  and  form  a series  of  columnar  cells  in 
every  respect  similar  to  those  of  the  simpler  type  (compare  Plate  V.  fig.  5 with  the 
portion  a — h of  Plate  V.  fig.  7)-  If,  then,  the  growth  of  either  of  these  disks  had  been 
checked  within  the  first  zone  in  which  its  annular  canal  becomes  double,  it  would 
have  been  accounted  as  belonging  to  the  simpler  type  ; and  the  wide  variation  which 
here  shows  itself,  in  regard  to  the  distance  from  the  nucleus  at  which  the  more  com- 


220 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


plex  type  begins  to  be  assumed,  sufficiently  explains  the  fact  already  noticed  22.), 
that  although  the  disks  of  the  ‘ simple’  type  are  for  the  most  part  of  minute  size,  yet 
that  the  diameter  of  many  of  them  exceeds  that  of  the  smaller  disks  of  the  complex 
type. 

58.  Even  when  an  intermediate  stratum  is  formed  by  the  separation  of  the  annular 
canals,  the  superficial  cells  are  not  always  clearly  marked-off  from  its  columnar 
cavities  ; for  instead  of  being  separated  by  floors  formed  by  the  expanded  summits 
of  the  zonal  septa  28.),  they  sometimes  open  at  once  into  the  columnar  cells  of 
the  intermediate  substance,  so  as  to  be  quite  continuous  with  them.  Of  this  we 
have  an  example  in  the  three  zones  6 — 8 of  the  specimen  represented  in  Plate  V. 
fig.  10,  h — c.  This  continuity  of  the  superficial  cells  with  the  intermediate  columns, 
is  sometimes  maintained  throughout  the  disk,  so  that  in  no  part  of  it  are  the  former 
clearly  marked  off  from  the  latter ; as  is  seen  in  the  portion  h — d of  fig.  7,  Plate  V. ; 
in  which,  however,  the  intermediate  layer  is  much  less  regular  than  usual.  This 
method  of  growth  is  so  remarkably  constant  in  the  Fossil  Orbitolites  of  the  Eocene 
strata,  whose  intermediate  layer  is  fully  and  very  regularly  developed  (see  Plate  VI. 
figs.  10,  11,  and  Plate  VIII.  fig.  2),  that  it  might  be  considered  to  be  specifically 
characteristic  of  them,  did  we  not  occasionally  find  it  to  occur  in  certain  zones  of 
recent  disks,  which  are  elsewhere  exactly  conformable  to  what  I have  described  as  the 
regular  type.  Thus  in  the  vertical  section  represented  in  Plate  V.  fig.  10,  we  see  that 
whilst  the  superficial  cells  of  the  three  zones  h — c are  continuous  with  the  columns 
of  the  intermediate  stratum,  a change  then  occurs  in  the  relative  places  of  their  zonal 
septa,  so  that  the  cells  of  the  former  come  to  be,  as  it  were,  detached  from  the 
columns  of  the  latter,  and  to  have  floors  formed  by  the  summits  of  the  partitions  bj 
which  these  are  divided.  It  is,  as  already  remarked  (^51.),  where  the  superficial 
cells  are  continuous  with  the  columnar  cells  of  the  intermediate  substance,  that  they 
present  the  rounded  or  ovoidal  shape,  instead  of  the  elongated  straight-sided  figure 
which  is  their  characteristic  form.  And  the  former  seems  to  give  place  to  the  latter, 
whenever  the  cells  of  the  superficial  layers  are  perfectly  separated  from  those  of  the 
intermediate  stratum,  and  are  connected  only  with  the  annular  passages. 

59.  The  intermediate  stratum,  again,  may  be  altogether  wanting,  notwithstanding 
that  the  two  superficial  layers  are  separated  from  each  other  by  a horizontal  partition. 
In  this  case,  each  layer  has  its  own  annular  canal ; and  its  cells  have  sometimes  such 
an  arrangement  as  regards  those  of  the  other  layer,  that  one  of  the  connecting  stolons 
from  which  each  segment  arises,  will  pass  into  the  alternating  cell  of  the  upper  layer, 
and  the  other  into  that  of  the  lower.  This  arrangement  may  present  itself  as  one  of 
the  modes  of  transition  from  the  simpler  to  the  more  complex  type,  as  is  shown  in 
Plate  V.  fig.  9;  the  columns  being  disposed  to  subdivide  transversely  when  they 
attain  a considerable  length,  and  the  annular  canal  becoming  double ; whilst  in  zones 
more  distant  from  the  centre,  the  two  layers  are  separated  by  the  interposition  of  the 
intermediate  stratum.  Sometimes,  however,  the  disk  continues  to  increase  and  attains 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — VARIATIONS  IN  MODE  OF  GROWTH;  MONSTROSITIES.  221 

a considerable  size  on  this  duplex  type ; and  its  edge  then  presents  two  rows  of 
rounded  prominences  with  pores  between  them,  those  of  the  upper  and  lower  rows 
alternating  with  each  other,  as  is  well  seen  in  the  vertical  plate  of  the  monstrosity 
represented  in  Plate  IX.  fig.  10.  It  is  on  a disk  of  this  type  that  Professor  Ehren- 
BERG  has  founded  his  genus  Amphisorus,  which  I cannot  regard  as  even  specifically 
distinct  from  the  ordinary  Orbitolite. 

60.  The  next  variety  to  be  noticed,  consists  in  a complete  absence  of  regularity  in 
the  disposition  of  the  columnar  cells  of  the  intermediate  stratum,  so  that  they  present 
an  assemblage  of  indefinitely-shaped  passages,  communicating  with  each  other  in 
various  directions.  This  variety  is  chiefly  interesting,  as  showing  how  little  import- 
ance is  to  be  attached  to  smaller  deviations  of  the  same  kind.  The  most  remarkable 
example  of  it  which  I have  met- with,  is  represented  in  Plate  V.  fig.  7,  c — d.  In  Plate  V. 
figs.  11,12  are  represented  two  examples  of  irregularity  in  the  disposition  of  the  super- 
ficial and  intermediate  cells  in  the  zones  immediately  surrounding  the  centre. 

61 . Lastly,  I have  to  mention,  that  the  septa  dividing  the  contiguous  cells  of  the  same 
zone  are  occasionally  deficient,  so  that  the  interior  of  the  zone  is  a continuous  circular 
passage,  with  only  slight  indications  of  the  normal  divisions.  In  such  a case,  it  is  ob- 
vious that  the  ring  of  sarcode  must  have  been  everywhere  of  nearly  uniform  thickness, 
showing  no  division  either  into  horizontal  or  into  vertical  segments ; and  it  may  not 
be  thought  improbable  that  this  is  its  first  condition  in  every  case,  and  that  its  seg- 
mental division  is  a subsequent  process,  so  that  the  shelly  investment,  if  formed  pre- 
viously to  the  segmentation,  will  have  the  character  of  incompleteness  just  described. 
I cannot  help  suspecting,  that  the  peculiar  groove  around  the  margin  of  the  Feejee 
specimens  formerly  noticed  25.),  is  referable  to  a still  greater  incompleteness  of 
the  production  of  the  calcareous  investment  around  the  newly-forming  zone. 

62.  Monstrosities. — Besides  those  departures  from  the  normal  type  of  growth,  which 

have  been  described  as  variations  or  irregularities,  there  are  certain  others  of  rarer 
occurrence,  which  can  only  be  regarded  as  ‘ monstrosities  by  excess  consisting  in  the 
production  of  one  or  more  incomplete  secondary  disks  by  outgrowth  from  the  first. 
In  the  specimen  represented  in  Plate  IX.  fig.  8,  the  secondary  disk  forms  a half-circle 
BD,  of  about  the  same  diameter  with  the  primary  ac,  and  is  superposed  vertically  upon 
the  latter,  the  plane  of  junction  passing  through  its  centre.  In  the  ^ 

specimens  represented  in  figs.  7 and  9,  the  secondary  disk  is  relatively  j 

smaller,  extending  only  from  the  centre  to  the  margin  of  the  primary,  b 

but  still  meeting  it  nearly  at  right  angles. — In  the  specimen  of  which  two  different 
aspects  are  shown  in  figs.  5,  6,  it  would  seem  difficult  to  say  which  is  the  primary  and 
which  the  secondary  disk,  and  it  would  be  more  correct  to  describe 
the  entire  structure  as  consisting  of  a single  half-disk  ab  and  of  a 
two  half-disks  bc  and  bd,  meeting  each  other  at  an  acute  angle 
CBD,  neither  of  them  being  in  the  same  plane  with  the  single  half-disk,  but  both  of 
them  meeting  it  at  similarly  obtuse  angles  abc  and  abd.  The  opening  of  one  of  the 

2 G 


MDCCCLVI. 


222 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINI FERA. 


obtuse  angles  is  shown  in  fig.  6,  and  that  of  the  acute  in  fig.  5 ; and  in  each  view  it  is 
seen,  that  the  divergence  takes  place  in  a plane  whieh  passes  through  the  common 
centre  of  all  three. — The  specimen  delineated  in  fig.  10  exhibits  a multiple  outgrowth 
of  a nature  resembling  that  shown  in  figs.  8 and  9.  For  from  the  surface  of  the  disk 
there  rises  a triradiate  crest,  formed  by  three  vertical  plates  meeting  one  another  at 
nearly  equal  angles,  but  all  of  them  nearly  perpendicular  to  the  plane  on  which  they 
rest.  It  is  a very  remarkable  feature  in  this  specimen,  however,  that  the  line  in  which 
the  three  vertical  planes  meet,  is  traceable  at  its  base  to  the  nucleus  of  the  horizontal 
disk  ; so  that  they  all  bear  the  same  relation  to  it,  as  does  the  single  outgrowth  in  the 
instances  previously  cited.  Hence  we  may  attribute  all  these  monstrosities  to  an 
excess  of  productive  power  in  the  sarcode  of  the  original  nucleus,  which  has  put  forth 
its  first  extension,  not  merely  in  the  horizontal,  but  also  in  the  perpendicular  direction  ; 
the  whole  subsequent  development  of  these  outgrowths  taking  place  after  the  normal 
plan,  from  the  foundation  thus  laid. — it  is  interesting  to  remark,  that  the  presence 
of  such  outgrowths  as  those  now  described,  is  far  more  frequent  in  certain  localities 
than  it  is  in  others.  Among  some  hundreds  of  specimens  which  I have  examined  from 
the  coast  of  Australia,  I have  only  met  with  those  represented  in  figs,  7,  8,  9,  and  two 
or  three  others  ; the  remarkable  specimen  delineated  in  figs.  5,  6,  occurred  with 
another  less  peculiar  among  a comparatively  small  number  of  Orbitolites  collected 
by  Mr.  Cuming  in  the  Philippine  Seas ; but  in  a small  collection  which  I have 
inspected  from  the  iEgean  Sea,  the  monstrosities  of  this  kind  (of  which  fig.  10  was 
the  most  remarkable)  were  so  numerous,  that  I think  I am  scarcely  wrong  in  assert- 
ing that  one  specimen  out  of  every  three  or  four  presented  some  excess*.  Among 
the  fossil  Orbitolites  of  the  Paris  basin,  the  presence  of  a completely-semicircular  ver- 
tical plate  is  not  at  all  uncommon. 

63.  There  may  be  some  doubt  in  the  first  instance,  as  to  the  light  in  which  we  are 
to  regard  the  specimen  represented  in  Plate  VIII.  fig.  10;  whether  as  a ‘ monstrosity 
by  excess,’  or  as  the  product  of  the  fusion  of  two  individuals  : but  I think  this  will  be 
removed  by  a closer  examination.  For  it  is  obvious,  that  the  smaller  disk,  which  is 
surrounded  by  the  outer  zones  of  the  larger  one,  has  been  developed  from  a nucleus 
of  its  own;  and  this  nucleus  does  not  appear  to  have  any  direct  connexion  with  the 
periphery,  still  less  with  the  centre,  of  the  larger  disk  : on  the  other  hand,  when  we 
consider  the  circumstances  under  which  Orbitolites  grow  34.),  it  is  very  easy  to 
understand,  that  the  smaller  and  younger  individual,  having  attached  itself  in  too 
near  proximity  to  the  larger  and  older  one,  should  become  imbedded  therein  (so  to 
speak)  by  the  extension  of  the  newly-forming  zones  of  the  latter  around  its  margin. 

* This  is  by  no  means  a solitary  case  of  the  prevalence  of  monstrosities  in  particular  localities.  The  collec- 
tion of  Mr.  Bean  of  Scarborough  contains  a number  of  curiously- distorted  specimens  of  the  common  Planorbis 
marcjinatus,  which  have  all  been  collected  in  one  brook.  Their  peculiarities  are  by  no  means  repetitions  of  each 
other ; and  I am  disposed,  therefore,  to  regard  them  rather  as  resulting  from  the  influence  of  external  condi- 
tions, than  as  accidental  varieties  hereditarily  propagated. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — MONSTROSITIES;  ESSENTIAL  CHARACTERS. 


223 


In  fact,  the  manner  in  which  the  outer  zones  of  the  larger  disk  envelope  the  smaller, 
precisely  corresponds  with  that  in  which  we  have  seen  the  new  zones  originating  from 
the  uninjured  margin  of  a mutilated  specimen,  to  extend  themselves  along  its  frac- 
tured edges  37.)* 

V.  Of  the  Essential  Characters  of  Orhitolites,  and  of  its  relations  to  other  Types  of 

Structure. 

64.  If,  now,  we  seek  to  determine  the  essential  characters  of  that  type  of  organi- 
zation which  is  known  under  the  designation  Orhitolites,  we  find  them  to  lie  in  the 
presence  of  a series  of  annuli  of  sar code  (and  of  corresponding  passages  in  the  shelly 
disk)  arranged  concentrically  round  a nucleus;  each  zone  in  the  simpler  type  con- 
taining but  a single  annulus,  so  constricted  at  intervals  as  to  form  a series  of  some- 
what columnar  segments  (occupying  the  cells  of  the  shelly  disk),  connected  with 
each  other  by  narrow  bands  of  sarcode  ; whilst  in  the  more  complex  type  each  zone 
contains  two  such  annuli,  including  between  them  a portion  of  its  series  of  columnar 
segments,  so  as  to  constitute  an  intermediate  stratum,  distinct  from  the  superficial 
portions.  In  either  case,  the  segments  of  successive  zones  freely  communicate  with 
each  other  by  radiating  hands  of  sarcode  (also  leaving  passages  in  the  shelly  disk), 
whose  normal  direction  is  such  as  to  connect  each  segment  with  the  two  segments 
that  alternate  with  it  in  each  of  the  adjacent  zones. 

65.  Now  the  addition  of  new  zones,  each  similar  to  the  last,  is  a simple  matter 
of  growth-,  but  the  passage  from  the  simpler  to  the  more  complex  plan  marks  an 
advance  in  development-,  and  this  advance  essentially  consists  (here  as  elsewhere) 
in  a progressive  differentiation  of  parts.  When,  with  the  vertical  extension  of  the 
columnar  segments,  the  annular  canal  subdivides  itself  into  two,  the  communica- 
tions between  the  successive  zones  no  longer  come-off,  as  before,  from  the  annular 
canal,  but  from  the  intermediate  portions  of  the  columnar  ceils ; and  instead  of  the 
two  diverging  passages  from  each  cell  being  in  the  same  plane,  they  lie  in  different 
planes,  alternating  with  each  other  vertically.  Up  to  this  point,  we  observe  little 
else  than  a multiplication  of  parts  vertically,  as  well  as  horizontally,  and  a separation 
of  connexions  that  were  previously  confluent.  But  in  the  highest  stage  of  develop- 
ment, we  find  a marked  alteration  in  plan  ; for  those  portions  of  the  columnar  seg- 
ments, which  lie  between  the  two  annular  canals  of  each  zone  and  the  two  surfaces 
of  the  disk,  become  completely  differentiated  from  the  portions  that  occupy  the  inter- 
mediate stratum,  so  as  to  form  a peculiar  set  of  superficial  cells -,  and  these  are  so 
equally  connected  with  two  zones,  as  to  make  it  impossible  to  say  that  they  belong 
specially  to  either. 

66.  Now  we  have  seen  that  development  may  be  checked,  while  growth  continues, 
at  any  period  of  its  progress  ; so  that  we  find  Orbitolites  growing  to  a considerable 
size  upon  the  very  simplest  plan, — others  still  larger  formed  upon  the  duplex  plan, — 
the  largest  yet  known  (fossilized  in  the  Paris  basin)  developed  upon  the  multiple  plan 

2 G 2 


224 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


without  separation  of  the  superficial  cells, — while  the  most  complete,  in  regard  alike 
to  multiplication  and  to  differentiation  of  parts,  are  only  found  among  the  disks  at 
present  existing ; and  it  is  interesting  to  observe,  that  some  of  them  present  this 
highest  grade  of  development,  while  as  yet  of  comparatively  minute  size.  I am  not 
acquainted  with  any  other  Animal  body,  in  which  so  wide  a range  of  developmental 
variation  normally  exists.  The  lower  classes  of  the  Vegetable  Kingdom,  however, 
especially  the  group  of  Fungi,  afford  abundant  examples  of  it*. 

67.  The  extreme  freedom  with  which  all  the  cavities  of  the  shell  mutually  commu- 
nicate, is  a very  marked  feature  in  the  structure  of  this  type;  and  shows  that  the 
several  parts  of  the  animal  body  are  far  more  closely  connected  into  one  whole,  than 
they  are  in  most  of  the  other  Foraminifera  whose  general  plan  of  conformation  is 
more  or  less  analogous.  Indeed,  if  we  were  to  imagine  a discoidal  mass  of  sarcode 
to  be  traversed  by  a reticulated  calcareous  skeleton,  somewhat  resembling  that  open 
areolar  texture  which  forms  the  shell  of  the  Echinida,  and  this  network  to  possess 
something  of  that  regularity  of  the  disposition  of  its  successively  formed  parts,  which 
is  presented  to  us  in  the  spines  of  the  Echinida,  we  should  have  no  unapt  repre- 
sentation of  the  relation  of  the  shelly  disk  of  the  Orbitolite  to  the  animal  which  it 
envelopes.  There  are  certain  Sponges  which  have  a reticulated  skeleton  composed 
of  mineral  matter  disposed  in  a mode  not  altogether  dissimilar,  whilst  the  constitu- 
tion of  their  soft  bodies  is  essentially  the  same.  And  a remarkable  connecting  link 
between  Orbitolites  and  Sponges,  seems  to  be  presented  to  us  in  the  curious  Thalas- 
sicolla  discovered  by  Mr.  Huxley -f-.  The  relations  of  Orbitolite  to  other  Forami- 
nifera have  already  been  partly  touched-on,  and  will  become  more  clear  hereafter, 
when  the  types  which  most  approximate  to  it  shall  have  been  themselves  described. 

VI.  Of  the  Species  of  Orbitolites. 

68.  It  only  remains  to  inquire,  whether  the  diversities  which  have  been  described 
as  existing  among  Orbitolites,  afford  any  ground  for  assuming  the  existence  of  more 
than  a single  species.  With  regard  to  the  recent  forms,  with  which,  so  far  as  they 
are  at  present  known,  1 have  made  myself  fully  acquainted,  I can  speak  confidently ; 
since,  as  I have  demonstrated,  the  Orbitolite  with  a single  stratum  of  cells  (O.  mar- 
ginalis  of  Lamarck,  Sorites  of  Ehrenberg),  that  with  a double  stratum  {Amphisoj'us 
of  Ehrenberg),  and  that  with  multiple  strata  {Marginopora  of  Quoy  and  Gaimard, 
Orbiculina  Tonga  of  Professor  Williamson),  are  fundamentally  the  same  forms,  deve- 
loped in  three  different  modes. 

69.  Of  the  identity  of  all  the  fossil  species  with  the  foregoing,  I cannot  speak  with 
the  same  confidence;  since  there  are  some  of  which  I can  only  judge  from  figures. 
Into  the  structure  of  that  which  is  best  known,  however,  and  wliich  has  been  com- 
monly accounted  the  type  of  the  genus,  viz.  the  Orbitolites  complanata  of  the  Paris 

* See  especially  the  recent  Memoirs  of  M.  Tulasne,  in  the  ‘ Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles.’ 
f Annals  of  Natural  History,  2nd  series,  vol.  viii.  p.  433. 


GENUS  ORBITOUTES: — SPECIES. 


225 


basin,  I have  made  investigations  scarcely  less  minute  and  extended  than  into  that 
of  the  recent  forms ; and  I have  come  to  the  conclusion,  that  it  cannot  he  specially 
distinguished  from  the  large  Australian  Orbitolite,  to  which  it  hears  a very  obvious 
general  conformity.  It  is  true  that  it  differs  from  the  typical  forms  of  the  latter  in 
two  important  features  of  structure,  which  are,  however,  mutually  connected  ; — 
namely,  the  direct  continuity  of  the  cells  of  the  superficial  layers  with  the  columnar 
cells  of  the  intermediate  layers ; and  the  rounded  or  ovoidal  form  of  the  superficial 
cells,  which  (as  already  stated)  these  always  possess,  as  in  the  simpler  type,  unless 
they  are  disconnected  with  the  columnar  cells,  and  communicate  only  with  the 
annular  stolons  (see  58.).  But  since  this  very  peculiarity  does  present  itself  in 
certain  existing  individuals,  whose  development  seems  to  have  taken  place  upon  a 
lower  type,  and  since  it  occasionally  shows  itself  in  the  course  of  the  passage  from 
the  simplest  to  the  most  complex  type,  in  such  as  ultimately  attain  the  latter,  there 
appears  to  me  no  room  for  questioning  the  specific  identity  of  the  O.  complanata  with 
the  Australian  forms,  notwithstanding  that  I have  never  met,  among  the  numerous 
specimens  which  I have  examined  of  the  former,  with  those  elongated  parallel-walled 
superficial  cells,  which  constitute  the  most  distinctive  feature  in  the  latter.  It  may 
be  well,  moreover,  to  bear  in  mind  the  remark  I have  already  made,  respecting  the 
local  prevalence  of  particular  varieties  of  form  ; since  there  is  nothing  more  strange 
in  the  incompleteness  of  the  type  of  development  presented  by  the  Paris-basin  Orbi- 
tolite, than  in  that  tendency  to  excessive  development,  which  gives  rise  to  the  nume- 
rous monstrosities  that  are  presented  by  the  iEgean  specimens  62.),  or  in  those 
radial  deposits  on  the  surface,  which  are  so  common  among  the  Philippine  forms 
(H  53.).  My  belief  in  the  specific  identity  of  this  fossil  with  the  recent  types  has 
been  strongly  confirmed  by  the  circumstance,  that  among  the  Paris-basin  forms  1 
have  found  a minute  specimen,  which  corresponds  in  every  respect  with  the  simple 
type  of  the  existing  species. 

70.  Of  the  other  fossil  species  cited  by  Lamarck,  the  O.  macropora  of  the  Maes- 
tricht  beds,  judging  from  the  figure  given  of  it  by  Goldfuss,  is  nothing  else  than  an 
Orbitolite  of  simple  type,  whose  marginal  cells  have  been  laid  open  by  attrition  both 
above  and  below,  as  in  Plate  VII.  figs.  8,  10.  The  O.  concava  and  O.  pileolus  of 
Lamarck  are  not  distinguished  in  his  definition  by  any  other  character  than  that 
drawn  from  form,  which  we  have  seen  to  be  so  variable  as  to  be  quite  insufficient  as 
a distinctive  feature.  It  is  quite  possible,  moreover,  that  they  may  belong  to  another 
type,  nothing  being  said  in  the  description  of  them,  either  of  concentric  lines,  or  of 
pores.  If,  as  I believe,  the  O.  concava  of  Lamarck  (figured  by  Michelin  in  his 
‘ Icon.  Zoophyt.,’  pi.  7-  fig-  9)  be  identical  with  the  O.  conica  of  M.  d’Archiac,  I feel 
certain  (from  careful  examination  of  its  imperfectly-preserved  internal  structure) 
that,  whatever  it  may  prove  to  be,  it  is  not  an  Orbitolite.  So  again,  the  O.  lent'icidata 
of  Lamarck,  judging  by  the  figure  given  of  it  by  Lamouroux*,  is  not  an  Orbitolite, 

* Polypiers,  pi.  72.  figs.  13,  16. 


226 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


but  probably  a Luniilite.  Of  the  species  subsequently  described  by  other  authors,  I 
entertain  no  doubt  that  the  O.  disculus  of  M.  Leymerie  * * * §,  as  well  as  in  all  proba- 
bility the  O.  plana  of  M.  d’Archiac,  is  nothing’  else  than  a variety  of  O.  complanata, 
more  especially  as  its  young  is  said  to  be  like  the  O.  macropora  of  Maestricht.  The 
O . gensacica,  O.  secuns,  and  O.  socialis  of  M.  Leymerie,  are  all  undoubtedly  Orhitoi- 
des,  and  all  belong,  I believe,  to  the  same  species ; though  on  this  point  I could  not 
speak  positively,  without  an  examination  of  their  internal  structure.  So,  again,  the  O. 
mamillata,  O.  Fortisii  {O.  gigantea  of  D’Orbigny),  O.  papyracea,  O.  stellata,  O.  sella 
and  O.  radians  ( O.  radiata  of  D’Orbigny)  of  M.  d’Archiac  -f-  are  all  probably  Orbi- 
toides,  as  he  has  himself  subsequently  recognized  in  regard  at  least  to  some  of  them:};. 
The  O.  eUiptlca  of  Michelin,  so  far  as  I can  judge  from  the  figure  he  gives  of  it 
(pi.  71,  hg-  1 1)>  is  certainly  not  entitled  to  rank  as  a distinct  species,  its  elliptic  form 
being  utterly  insufficient  to  separate  it  47. )•  And  as  I have  already  pointed  out 
(®[y  49.),  unless  some  distinctive  character  be  furnished  by  the  internal  conformation 
of  the  bodies  which  have  been  ranked  in  the  genus  Cyclolina  by  M.  d’Orbigny,  this 
also  should  take  rank  merely  as  a variety  of  Orbitolites  §. 

Vn.  Concluding  Remarks. 

71.  It  might  be  asked  with  some  show  of  reason,  what  good  purpose  can  possibly 
be  answered  by  such  a minute  and  prolix  description  of  a type  of  animal  structure, 
so  mean  and  insignificant  as  that  which  has  been  occupying  our  attention.  To  such 
a question  I would  reply — First,  that  I hold  it  to  be  a worthy  labour  to  learn,  and  to 
place  within  reach  of  others,  everything  that  can  be  learned  respecting  any  form  of 
Organized  Being ; that  such  a complete  acquaintance  is  the  great  desideratum  in 
every  department  of  Biological  Science ; and  that  no  works  have  ever  exercised  so 
beneficial  an  influence  on  its  progress,  as  those  admirable  Monographs  of  single 
species,  which,  by  thoroughly  elucidating  their  structure  and  physiological  history, 
have  served  as  a basis  for  all  subsequent  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  Plants  or 
Animals  formed  on  a like  plan: — Secondly,  that  such  an  inquiry  can  scarcely  be 
otherwise  than  of  peculiar  utility,  as  relating  to  a tribe  of  Animals  whose  nature  and 
history  are  almost  as  unknown  to  us  now,  as  those  of  Polypes  were  to  the  Naturalists 
of  a century  ago,  when  Trembley  wrote  his  immortal  ‘ Memoires  pour  servir  h 
I’Histoire  d’un  Genre  de  Polypes  d’eau  douce;’  what  little  is  known  respecting  them, 
being  of  a nature  to  mark  them  as  distinct  from  every  other  type  of  living  beings 

* Mem.  Geol.  Soc.  de  France,  2 ser.,  tom.  v.  pp.  190,  191. 

t Ibid.  tom.  ii.  p.  178,  and  2 ser.,  tom.  iii.  p.  4. 

i Description  des  Anirnaux  Fossiles  du  groupe  Nummulitique  de  ITnde,  p.  350. 

§ For  a recent  description  of  a form  of  this  reputed  genus,  which  occurs  in  contiguity  with  typical  Orbito- 
lites, and  which  seems  to  me  to  correspond  in  every  respect  with  those  recent  specimens  of  which  Plate  VII. 
fig.  14  exhibits  the  external  aspect,  see  Mr.  Cartee’s  Memoir  on  the  Fossil  Foraminifera  of  Scinde,  in  'Ann. 
of  Nat.  Hist.,’  2nd  ser.,  vol.  xi.  p.  174. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES:— CONCLUDING  REMARKS. 


227 


with  which  we  have  a tolerable  acquaintance : — and  Thirdly,  that  certain  general 
principles  evolve  themselves  as  results  of  these  investigations,  which  are  quite  as 
applicable  to  every  other  department  of  Biological  Science,  as  they  are  to  the  single 
case  of  the  Orhitolite. 

72.  It  has  been  shown  that  a very  wide  range  of  variation  exists  among  Orhitolites, 
not  merely  as  regards  external  form,  but  also  as  to  plan  of  development ; and  not 
merely  as  to  the  shape  and  aspect  of  the  entire  organism,  but  also  with  respect  to  the 
size  and  configuration  of  its  component  parts.  It  would  have  been  easy,  by  selecting 
only  the  most  divergent  types,  from  amongst  the  whole  series  of  specimens  which  I 
have  examined,  to  prefer  an  apparently  substantial  claim  on  behalf  of  these  to  be 
accounted  as  so  many  distinct  species  ; and  I could  thus  have  easily  created  an  almost 
indefinite  number  of  such  species.  But  after  having  classified  the  specimens  which 
could  be  arranged  around  these  types,  a large  proportion  would  yet  have  remained, 
either  presenting  characters  intermediate  between  those  of  two  or  more  of  them,  or 
actually  combining  those  characters  in  different  parts  of  their  fabric ; thus  showing 
that  no  lines  of  demarcation  can  be  drawn  across  any  part  of  the  series,  that  shall  defi- 
nitely separate  it  into  any  number  of  groups,  each  characterized  by  features  entirely 
peculiar  to  itself.  Thus,  then,  we  see  that  the  real  relationship  of  the  different  types 
to  each  other,  can  only  be  determined  by  the  careful  comparison  of  a very  large 
number  of  individuals  obtained  from  as  many  different  sources  as  possible  ; — a process 
which  is  too  frequently  neglected  by  Systematists,  many  of  whom  erect  species,  and 
even  genera,  without  the  least  care  to  determine,  by  any  such  process,  the  real  value 
of  the  distinctions  by  which  they  characterize  them. 

73.  The  right  mode  of  proceeding  in  every  other  department  of  Natural  History, 
must  be  that  which  has  thus  been  proved  to  be  the  only  reliable  method  in  this  ; and 
I venture,  therefore,  to  lay  down  the  following  general  Canons,  deduced  from  the 
results  of  the  preceding  investigation  ; which  will,  I think,  be  found  accordant  witli 
the  experience  of  all  soundly-judging  Naturalists,  although  they  have  not  yet,  so  far 
as  I am  aware,  received  a formal  expression. 

74.  To  become  fully  acquainted  with  the  Natural  History  of  any  Species,  it  is 
requisite ; — ( 1 ) to  study  not  only  its  external  conformation,  but  also  its  internal  organ- 
ization-, by  which  alone  can  the  value  of  superficial  resemblances  or  differences  he 
duly  estimated  ; (2)  to  trace  out  its  entire  developmental  history,  so  that  the  true 
relationship  of  individuals  in  different  stages  of  evolution  may  be  appreciated  ; 
(3)  to  compare  together  a large  number  of  specimens  taken  from  any  one  locality, 
in  order  to  ascertain  what  is  the  range  of  its  variation  under  nearly  identical  condi- 
tions; (4)  to  search  out  its  whole  Geographical  distribution,  and  to  bring  into  mutual 
comparison  large  numbers  of  specimens  from  the  remotest  regions,  as  well  as  frorn 
all  the  intermediate  areas  over  which  it  spreads,  in  order  to  determine  the  range  of 
its  variation  under  the  most  diverse  conditions  ; and  (5)  to  follow  the  same  course  of 
comparison  throughout  its  Geological  distribution,  still  relying  only  on  the  informa- 


228 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


tion  afforded  by  large  numbers  of  specimens,  collected  (so  far  as  may  be  possible) 
from  different  formations,  and  from  different  geographical  areas.  Until  the  whole  of 
this  process  shall  have  been  carefully  and  systematically  gone  through,  no  limitation 
of  a species  by  a definition  of  any  kind,  can  be  regarded  in  any  other  light  than  as 
a provisional  means  of  rnarhmg-out  the  existence  of  a particular  type  of  str  ucture,  whose 
relationship  to  other  types  must  be  a matter  of  further  investigation. 

75.  Let  me  subjoin  such  “pregnant  instances,”  as  shall  prove  the  importance  of 
each  of  the  foregoing  principles,  from  the  result  of  the  violation  or  neglect  of  it; — 
(1)  so  long  as  external  conformation  was  alone  regarded,  and  no  account  was 
taken  of  internal  organization,  the  Nautiloid  Foraminifera  were  placed  among 
Cephalopods,  and  the  Coralloid  forms  among  Polypifera ; to  neither  of  which  classes 
have  they  any  kind  of  relationship ; (2)  so  long  as  developmental  history  was  un- 
studied, the  Hydroid  Zoophytes  and  the  Medusoid  Acalephae  were  considered  as 
entirely  disconnected  groups,  belonging  to  two  different  Zoological  classes,  instead 
of  (as  in  reality)  different  states  of  the  very  same  organisms  ; (3)  so  long  as  reliance 
is  placed  on  the  comparison  of  a few  individual  specimens  only,  without  any  account 
being  taken  of  the  intermediate  forms  by  which  the  more  divergent  types  may  be 
connected,  so  long  are  species  multiplied  to  a most  unwarrantable  excess,  as  is  found 
to  be  the  case  in  almost  every  department  of  Zoology  and  Botany  by  those  who 
devote  themselves  to  a more  extended  comparison;  thus,  nineteen  species  have  been 
made  from  the  common  Potatoe,  and  many  more  from  the  Solanum  nigrum ; so, 
multitudes  of  species  have  been  instituted  in  various  genera  of  Californian  shells, 
by  the  late  Mr.  C.  B.  Adams,  whose  identity  is  established  by  a more  extended 
comparison  of  individuals  (as  will  be  shown  in  a Report  which  is  being  prepared  at 
the  request  of  the  British  Association,  by  my  brother,  the  Rev.  P.  P.  Carpenter)  ; 
in  fact,  wherever  this  test  is  conscientiously  applied,  its  effect  is  to  reduce  the  number 
of  reputed  species,  sometimes  in  a most  remarkable  degree*.  (4)  In  like  manner  it 
has  been  by  comparing  only  a small  number  of  specimens  from  remote  geographical 
provinces,  and  by  neglecting  the  intermediate  varieties  that  present  themselves  even 
among  sufficiently  large  collections  from  these,  still  more  among  specimens  collected 
from  intervening  regions,  that  not  only  numerous  errors  of  detail  have  been  com- 
mitted, but  general  doctrines  have  been  propounded,  which  the  advance  of  Science 
has  proved  to  be  utterly  untenable.  As  an  example  of  the  former  kind,  maybe  cited 
the  facts  mentioned  by  Dr.  J.  D.  Hooker  {op.  cit.),  that  of  the  New  Zealand  varieties 
of  Oxalis  corniculata,  one  of  the  most  widely-diffused  and  most  variable  Flowering 
plants  in  the  world,  no  less  than  seven  or  eight  species  have  been  made,  neither  of 
them  supposed  to  be  identical  with  any  belonging  to  the  European  Flora ; whilst  Pteris 

* I am  most  glad  to  find  my  views  on  this  point  in  accordance  with  those  of  Dr.  Joseph  D.  Hooker  (see 
his  ‘ Introductory  Essay  on  the  Flora  of  New  Zealand,’  § 2),  who  has  been  led  to  the  conviction,  that  instead 
of  affirming  the  existence  of  100,000  species  of  known  Plants,  we  ought  not  to  reckon  more  than  half  that 
number. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — CONCLUDING  REMARKS. 


229 


aquilina  has  a different  name  in  almost  every  country  in  the  world.  It  has  been 
through  reliance  on  such  ignorant  determinations,  most  of  them  proceeding  on  the 
notion  that  “ the  plants  (or  animals)  of  newly-discovered,  isolated,  or  little-visited 
localities  must  necessarily  be  new,”  that  the  doctrine  of  the  universal  distinctness  of 
the  species  of  the  New  World  from  those  of  the  Old,  and  of  those  of  the  Southern 
from  those  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere,  has  attained  a very  wide  currency  amongst 
Naturalists,  and  is  still  obstinately  persisted-in  by  some,  in  defiance  of  ample  evidence 
to  the  contrary*.  (5)  Lastly,  not  only  has  the  limitation  of  the  comparison  among 
Fossil  types,  to  a small  number  of  individuals,  led  to  the  excessive  multiplication  of 
species  in  the  forms  that  are  furnished  by  the  same  strata  ; but  the  same  habit  of 
relying  on  minute  differences,  without  attention  to  osculant  characters,  has  given 
rise  to  that  disposition  to  regard  the  species  of  successive  formations  as  necessarily 
different,  which  is  introducing  the  greatest  confusion  into  geological  and  palaeonto- 
logical determinations  of  every  kind.  How  an  extended  comparison  of  individual 
forms  tends  not  only  to  reduce  the  number  of  reputed  species,  but  to  establish  the 
continuity  of  the  same  specific  types  from  one  stratum  to  another,  will  be  remarkably 
seen  when  the  laborious  researches  of  Dr.  Wright  of  Cheltenham  on  the  Cidarites  of 
the  Liassic  and  Oolitic  formations  shall  have  been  made  public. 

76.  Another  general  consideration  of  some  interest,  appears  to  me  naturally  to 
connect  itself  with  the  foregoing  history, — namely,  that  the  lower  the  general  plan 
of  organization  of  any  being  (that  is,  the  greater  the  prevalence  of  ‘ vegetative’  or 
‘irrelative’  repetition  in  its  different  parts),  the  more  is  that  plan  liable  to  be  modified 
by  slight  differences  in  external  conditions,  and  the  wider,  therefore,  may  we  expect 
its  range  of  variation  to  be,  if  it  be  disposed  to  vary  at  all.  In  some  instances,  it  is 
true,  there  appears  (as  in  many  higher  forms  of  organization)  to  be  an  absolute 
incapacity  for  any  such  variation  ; and  a limitation  of  the  geographical  and  geolo- 
gical distribution  of  the  species  results  from  its  want  of  power  to  exist  under  any 
great  diversity  of  external  conditions.  But  when  the  same  general  type  of  organiza- 
tion is  found  to  prevail  extensively  both  in  space  and  in  time,  it  may,  I think,  be 
safely  regarded  as  probable,  that  that  type  has  within  itself  the  power  of  accommo- 
dation to  a considerable  diversity  of  external  conditions  ; and  hence  that  in  the  com- 
parison of  individuals,  differences  of  conformation  should  be  considered  as  of  less 
account  towards  the  establishment  of  specific  distinctions,  than  they  are  when  there 
is  an  obvious  restriction  of  the  type  to  a limited  Geographical  area  or  a particular 
Geological  epoch. 

77-  In  the  foregoing  communication,  I have  thought  it  right  not  only  to  make 
known  the  results  of  my  researches,  but  so  to  develope  my  plan  of  investigation,  that 
the  value  of  those  results  maybe  duly  estimated.  In  the  memoirs  which  I trust  to  be 

* “Thus  as  long  ago  as  1814,  Mr.  Robert  Brown  gave  a list  of  150  European  plants  common  to  Australia 
and  Europe.  The  identity  of  many  of  these  has  repeatedly  been  called  in  question,  but  almost  invariably 
erroneously ; added  to  which,  more  modern  collectors  have  greatly  increased  the  list.”— -Hooker,  op.  cit.  p.  IS. 

MDCCCLVI.  2 H 


230 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


enabled  to  forward  from  time  to  time,  regarding  those  other  typical  forms  of  Fora- 
minifera  of  which  1 have  made  a special  study,  it  is  not  my  intention  to  do  more 
than  state  the  results ; hoping  that  they  may  be  understood  to  have  been  attained  by  a 
method  of  inquiry  as  closely  resembling  that  which  I have  here  followed  through  its 
details,  as  the  circumstances  of  each  case  may  have  admitted.  1 would  have  it  borne 
in  mind  throughout,  that,  as  has  been  admirably  remarked  by  one  of  the  most  accom- 
plished Botanists  of  our  time,  “the  Naturalist  who  has  the  true  interest  of  science  at 
heart,  not  only  feels  that  the  thrusting  of  an  uncalled-for  synonym  into  the  nomen- 
clature of  science  is  an  exposure  of  his  own  ignorance,  and  deserves  censure,  but  that 
a wider  range  of  knowledge  and  a greater  depth  of  study  are  required,  to  prove  those 
dissimilar  forms  to  be  identical,  which  any  superficial  observer  can  separate  by  words 
and  a name”  (Dr.  J.  D.  Hooker,  op.  cit.  p.  14,  note). 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES. 

PLATE  IV. 

Structure  of  the  Animal  of  Orhitolite. 

Fig.  1.  Entire  Animal,  from  a small  and  simple  disk,  the  shell  having  been  removed 
by  maceration  in  acid  ; in  the  peripheral  portion  the  segments  of  sarcode 
are  wanting,  and  the  structureless  residuum  of  the  shell  is  alone  seen: — 
magnified  40  diameters. 

Fig.  2.  Appearance  of  a portion  of  Sarcode,  highly  magnified  : — 180  diam. 

Fig.  3.  Portion  of  the  body  of  one  of  the  more  complex  forms  (resembling  fig.  4),  in 
which  the  sarcode  has  broken  up  into  little  spheres  (gemmules?); — a,  a, 
superficial  segments  ; b,  h,  annular  band  : — 180  diam. 

Fig.  4.  Portion  of  the  body  of  one  of  the  more  complex  forms,  as  seen  in  vertical 
section  ;—aa,  a'a',  upper  and  lower  rows  of  superficial  cells,  each  cell  con- 
nected, at  its  two  extremities,  with  the  annular  bands  hb  and  b'V  of  two 
zones;  from  these  annular  bands  spring  the  columnar  segments  cc,  dd, 
those  of  the  sa?ne  zone  occasionally  passing  into  each  other,  and  commu- 
nicating with  those  of  the  next  zone  by  oblique  peduncles  alternately  pass- 
ing towards  one  side  and  the  other: — 150  diam.  (N.B.  This  figure  is 
somewhat  ideal,  being  made-up  from  several  preparations ; but  for  every 
point  which  it  represents,  these  preparations  give  warranty.) 

Fig.  5.  Nucleus  and  first  two  annular  zones,  exhibiting  the  typical  conformation; — 
a,  the  central  segment;  Z/A,  the  circumambient  segment,  from  the  entire 
margin  of  which  are  given  off  peduncles  of  sarcode,  which  give  origin  to 
the  first  annular  zone  : — 84  diam. 


GENUS  ORBITOLTTES: — EXPLANATION  OF  PLATES. 


231 


Fig.  6.  Nucleus  and  first  two  annular  zones  of  another  disk,  showing  a deficiency  in 
the  connexions  of  the  first  annular  zone  with  the  circumambient  segment  hh, 
for  about  a third  of  the  circumference  of  the  latter,  between  the  points 
cc  : — 84  diam. 

Fig.  7-  Portion  of  one  of  the  surfaces  of  an  animal  of  complex  type  (as  in  fig.  4) : — 
aa,  aa,  rows  of  superficial  cells,  connected  at  their  two  extremities  with 
the  annular  bands  bh,  hb: — 150  diam. 

Fig.  8.  Portion  of  fig.  1,  enlarged,  to  show  the  ordinary  mode  in  which  the  segments 
of  each  zone  are  connected  by  peduncles  with  the  annular  hand  of  the  pre- 
ceding zone,  so  as  to  alternate  with  its  segments ; showing  also  the 
occasional  interpolation  of  additional  segments,  a,  a,  whose  peduncles  come 
off  from  the  segments  of  the  preceding  zone: — 90  diam. 

Fig.  9.  Portion  of  a section  of  the  shelly  disk  enlarged,  to  show  the  corresponding 
appearances  it  presents ; each  cell  being  ordinarily  connected  by  a radial 
passage  with  the  annular  canal  of  the  preceding  zone,  and  thus  with  the 
two  cells  alternating  with  itself;  but  cells  a,  a,  being  sometimes  interpo- 
lated, which  open  directly  into  the  cells  of  the  preceding  zone  : — 90  diam. 

Fig.  10.  Central  and  circumambient  segments  {a  and  hh)  of  a large  disk,  showing 
the  origin  of  the  segments  of  the  first  annular  zone,  c,  c,  from  less  than  half 
the  circumference  of  the  nucleus: — 84  diam. 

Fig.  11.  Peculiar  bodies  (ova?)  found  in  the  substance  of  the  sarcode  in  different 
parts,  showing  successive  stages,  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  f,  of  binary  subdivision ; 
g,  other  bodies  of  somewhat  larger  size,  found  in  one  of  the  superficial  cells 
of  a vertical  section  : — 130  diam. 

Fig.  12.  Central  portion  of  fig.  1,  enlarged  to  the  same  scale  as  figs.  5,  6,  10 ; show- 
ing the  central  segment  a,  the  circumambient  segment  hh,  and  the  origin 
of  the  first  annular  zpne  in  three  peduncles  proceeding  from  the  end  of  the 
latter: — 84  diam. 

Fig.  13.  Central  portion  of  another  disk,  showing  the  origin  of  the  first  annular  zone 
by  eight  peduncles  from  the  circumambient  cell: — 84  diam. 

PLATE  V. 

Structure  of  the  Calcareous  Disks  of  Orbitolite. 

Fig.  1.  Ideal  Representation  of  a Disk  of  the  Simple  Type,  the.  details  of  the  different 
parts  made-up  from  actual  specimens  ; showing  the  natural  surface,  with 
the  markings  of  the  cells  ; the  natural  margin,  with  the  single  row  of  pores 
between  the  protuberances  of  the  cells  ; — a portion  of  the  interior,  as  dis- 
played by  a horizontal  section,  showing  the  central  cell  a,  the  circumam- 
bient cell  h,  h,  the  concentric  zones  of  cells  c,  c,  with  the  annular  passages 
which  connect  together  the  cells  of  the  same  zone,  and  the  radiating  passages 

2 H 2 


232 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


which  extend  from  the  annular  passages  of  each  zone  to  the  cells  of  the  next, 
and,  in  the  outermost  zone,  to  the  pores  d,  d ; — another  portion  as  displayed 
by  a vertical  section  e,  e,  in  a radial  direction,  which  lays  open  the  colum- 
nar cells,  but  passes  through  the  intercellular  partitions,  in  alternate  zones; 
— and  another  portion  ff,  as  displayed  by  a fracture  in  the  course  of  one  of 
the  zones,  laying  open  the  entrances  to  the  cells  from  its  inner  or  central 
side. 

Figs.  2,  3.  Two  large  recent  disks  from  the  Feejee  islands,  plicated  towards  the  mar- 
gin, but  one  much  more  so  than  the  other,  and  with  a projection  of  the 
upper  and  lower  edges,  so  as  to  leave  a deep  marginal  furrow : — enlarged 
2 diam. 

Figs.  4,  5.  Vertical  sections  of  two  disks,  drawn  under  the  same  magnifying  power, 
showing  the  marked  difference  in  the  size  and  proportions  of  their  parts. 
In  each  disk  we  see  the  central  cell,  with  the  circumambient  cell  laid  open 
on  either  side  of  it ; and  the  cells  of  successive  zones,  with  their  commu- 
nications : — 30  diam. 

Fig.  6.  Ideal  Representation  of  a Disk  of  the  Complex  Type ; the  details  of  the 
different  parts  made-up  from  actual  specimens  ; — a,  central  cell ; h,  circum- 
ambient cell ; c,  c,  concentric  zones  of  oblong  superficial  cells,  some  of 
them  laid  open ; d,  d,  marginal  pores,  forming  several  rows  ; d",  d'",  cor- 
responding pores  of  inner  zones,  once  marginal,  but  now  connecting  them 
with  surrounding  zones;  e,  e,  vertical  section  in  a radial  direction,  show- 
ing the  zones  nearest  the  centre  to  be  made  up  of  simple  columnar  cells, 
but  those  of  the  remainder  of  the  disk  to  be  composed  of  two  superficial 
layers  and  of  an  intermediate  stratum  ; f,f,  floors  of  the  superficial  cells, 
with  an  aperture  at  each  end  of  every  one ; g,  g,  annular  canals,  running 
beneath  these  floors,  with  the  large  apertures  leading  to  the  columnar  cells 
of  the  intermediate  stratum  ; g',  the  same  canals  near  the  other  surface  of 
the  disk  ; g",  the  same  canals  laid  open  through  the  plane  at  which  they 
give  off  the  two  passages  into  the  superficial  cells ; g’",  the  same  canals,  as 
cut  transversely  by  a vertical  section  ; h,  passage  of  the  horizontal  section 
through  the  intermediate  stratum,  showing  the  summits  of  its  columnar 
cells  about  to  enter  the  annular  canals ; i,  i,  i,  and  k,  k,  k,  passage  of  the 
horizontal  section  through  two  different  planes  of  the  intermediate  stra- 
tum, showing  the  connexion  between  the  columnar  cells  of  successive  zones, 
by  oblique  passages  running  in  different  directions  ; I,  portion  immediately 
surrounding  the  nucleus,  formed  upon  the  simple  type,  as  in  fig.  1. 

Fig.  7-  Vertical  section,  taken  in  a radial  direction,  of  a recent  disk  incompletely 
developed  on  the  complex  type  ; showing  at  a,  a single  chamber  of  the  cavity 
of  the  nucleus,  the  section  having  traversed  the  circumambient  cell;  from 
a to  h,  including  twenty-three  zones,  the  disk  developed  upon  the  simple 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — EXPLANATION  OF  PliATES. 


233 


type ; from  i to  c the  annular  canal  double,  and  an  irregular  intermediate 
stratum  interposed,  from  which,  however,  the  superficial  cells  are  not  com- 
pletely differentiated  ; and  from  ciod  the  imperfect  separation  of  the  super- 
ficial cells  from  the  intermediate  layer,  and  the  extreme  irregularity  of  the 
latter: — 50  diam. 

Fig.  8.  Tangential  section,  near  the  margin  of  the  same  disk,  showing  the  same 
peculiarities  : — 50  diam. 

Fig.  9.  Central  portion  of  a disk,  showing  the  nuclear  cavity  divided  into  two  (the 
section  having  traversed  the  central  cell  and  one  side  of  the  circumambient) ; 
the  formation  of  the  first  three  zones  {a — h)  on  the  simple  type  ; the  im- 
perfect separation  of  the  superficial  cells  from  the  intermediate  stratum  in 
the  next  two  zones  {h — c) ; and  the  regular  development  of  the  remainder 
(c — d)  on  the  complex  type: — 50  diam. 

Fig.  10.  Vertical  section  of  the  central  portion  of  a disk  of  complex  type;  showing 
four  cavities  in  the  nucleus  ; the  first  five  zones  {a — h)  constructed  upon 
the  simple  type,  with  a single  annular  canal,  but  an  incipient  separation 
manifesting  itself  between  the  superficial  cells  and  the  intermediate  stratum  ; 
in  the  next  three  zones  {h — c)  the  annular  canal  double,  but  the  superficial 
cells  still  partly  continuous  with  the  columnar;  the  outer  part  (c — d) 
framed  according  to  the  regular  complex  type: — 48  diam. 

Fig.  1 1.  Vertical  section  of  a disk  of  complex  type,  showing  an  unusual  development 
of  vertically  superposed  cells  immediately  around,  and  even  partly  cover- 
ing, the  nucleus,  from  which  they  arise  by  four  layers  of  passages  ; a pro- 
gressive diminution  in  the  thickness  of  the  disk,  as  far  as  the  fifth  zone  {h), 
with  a gradual  approximation  towards  the  regular  type,  on  which  the 
remainder  {h — c)  is  developed  : — 48  diam. 

Fig.  12.  Vertical  section  of  a disk  of  complex  type,  showing  commencement  of  its  first 
zone  by  a single  layer  of  passages  {a)  from  the  nucleus ; the  presence  of 
two  annular  canals,  with  the  absence  of  separation  of  the  superficial  cells, 
in  the  first  zone  {h) ; the  incomplete  separation  of  the  superficial  cells  from 
the  intermediate  columnar  portion  in  the  second  zone  (c) ; and  the  normal 
conformation  of  the  remainder  (c—d) : — 48  diam. 


PLATE  VI. 

Fig.  1.  Portion  of  a disk  of  simple  type,  from  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the 
nucleus,  showing  the  beak-like  projections  at  the  sides  of  the  passages  very 
remarkably  developed  : — 100  diam. 

Fig.  2.  Horizontal  section  of  the  intermediate  layer,  passing  (in  consequence  of  the 
flexure  of  the  disk)  through  two  different  planes,  and  thus  showing  the 
two  different  directions  of  the  oblique  passages  which  connect  the  colum- 


234 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


nar  cells  of  different  zones  ; also  showing  a marked  difference  in  the  size 
of  adjacent  cells  : — 100  diam. 

Fig.  3.  Horizontal  section  through  one  of  the  superficial  layers,  showing  the  elon- 
gated form  of  its  cells,  and  the  aperture  at  each  end  of  their  floor:— 
100  diam. 

Fig.  4.  Nucleus  and  surrounding  zones  of  the  excentrically-developed  disk  shown  in 
Plate  IX.  fig.  3 ; the  beak-like  projections  at  each  side  of  the  pores  open- 
ing into  the  new  zones  (shown  in  fig.  J)  are  here  generally  deficient: — 
100  diam. 

Fig.  5.  Appearance  of  the  thin  wall  covering-in  the  central  cell  of  a large  nucleus, 
as  seen  under  a high  magnifying  power,  showing  the  quasi-cellular  mark- 
ings : — 100  diam. 

Fig.  6.  Horizontal  section  through  the  intermediate  layer  of  a disk  of  complex  type, 
showing  an  unusual  irregularity  in  the  communications  of  the  cells: — 
100  diam. 

Fig.  7-  Radial  section  of  a recent  disk,  showing  the  complex  development  on  the 
normal  type  ; aa,  hb,  upper  and  lower  superficial  layers  ; c,  c,  c,  c,  interme- 
mediate  stratum  ; dd,  d'd’,  d"d",  summits  of  partitions  between  successive 
zones,  forming  the  floors  of  the  superficial  cells;  e,  d,  e",  oblique  passages 
through  the  floors  of  the  cells  of  the  superficial  layer,  leading  towards  the 
annular  canals;  annular  canals  of  four  zones,  near  the  lower 

surface  of  the  disk  ; gg,  partitions  between  the  adjacent  cells  of  the  same 
zones ; hh,  perforations  in  these,  through  which  the  columnar  cells  inos- 
culate with  each  other: — 100  diam. 

Fig.  8.  Tangential  section  of  a fossil  disk  of  complex  type,  showing  four  columnar 
cells,  aa',  bV , cc\  dd',  of  the  same  zone,  divided  by  sinuous  partitions,  with 
the  orifices  leading  into  the  columnar  cells  of  the  next  interior  zone: — 
100  diam. 

Fig.  9.  Similar  tangential  section,  showing  four  cells  of  the  next  interior  zone,  aa', 
bb',cc',dd',  alternating  with  the  preceding,  and  the  entrance  of  the  passages 
of  the  same  vertical  row,  alternately  into  one  and  the  other  of  the  cells  on 
the  two  sides  of  each  of  the  sinuous  vertical  partitions: — 100  diam. 

Fig.  10.  Radial  section  of  a fossil  disk,  showing  the  incompleteness  of  the  separation 
of  the  superficial  cells  from  the  intermediate  layer,  and  the  irregularity  in 
the  arrangement  of  its  cells,  with  their  numerous  lateral  inosculations 
(compare  Plate  V.  fig.  7,  b — d) : — 48  diam. 

Fig.  1 1.  Radial  section  of  a thicker  fossil  disk,  showing  a more  regular  arrangement 
of  the  columnar  cells  of  the  intermediate  layer  (still,  however,  with 
numerous  passages  for  lateral  inosculation),  and  the  complete  continuity  of 
the  superficial  cells  with  these: — 48  diam. 


GENUS  ORBITOLITES: — EXPLANATION  OF  PLATES. 


235 


PLATE  VII. 

Figs.  1 — 4.  A series  of  specimens,  drawn  under  the  same  magnifying  power  (.35 
diam.),  illustrating  the  variations  which  present  themselves  in  regard  to 
the  Size  of  the  nucleus. 

The  remaining  figures  represent  various  appearances  exhibited  by  the  Surfaces  of 

Disks,  simple  and  complex  : — all  magnified  35  diam.,  except  fig.  6,  which  is  magnified 

70  diam. 

Figs.  5 — 7-  Portions  of  surfaces  of  simple  disks,  in  which  the  concentric  circles  are 
strongly  marked,  and  the  transverse  divisions  of  the  cells  are  compara- 
tively obscure. 

Fig.  8.  Simple  disk,  slightly  concave,  the  marginal  cells  laid  open  by  abrasion,  the 
surface  marked  rather  by  ‘ engine-turned’  or  excentric,  than  by  concentric 
circles. 

Fig.  9.  Portion  of  the  surface  of  a complex  disk,  having  small,  round,  and  flattened 
superficial  cells. 

Fig.  10.  Simple  disk  (from  Australia),  slightly  concave,  the  marginal  cells  laid  open 
by  abrasion,  the  surface  irregularly  thickened  by  calcareous  deposits. 

Fig.  11.  Flattened  simple  disk  (from  the  Philippines),  with  abundant  superficial  depo- 
sits, arranged  with  considerable  regularity  in  a radiating  direction. 

Fig.  12.  Portion  of  the  surface  of  a large  complex  disk,  with  very  narrow  oblong 
superficial  cells. 

Fig.  13.  Portion  of  the  surface  of  a complex  disk,  showing  a marked  difference  in  the 
proportions  of  the  straight-sided  cells,  even  in  adjacent  zones. 

Fig.  14.  Surface  of  simple  disk  {Cyclolina}  of  D’Orbigny),  with  an  excentric  nucleus, 
surrounded  by  strongly-marked  concentric  circles. 

Fig.  15.  Portion  of  the  surface  of  a simple  disk,  showing  unusually  large  and  pro- 
tuberant ovoidal  cells. 

Fig.  16.  Portion  of  the  surface  of  a large  fossil  disk  of  complex  type,  showing  varieties 
in  the  size  and  form  of  the  superficial  cells. 


PLATE  VIII. 

Fig.  1.  Inner  surface  of  a zone  of  a thick  fossil  disk,  showing  a tolerably  regular 
arrangement  of  the  columnar  cells,  the  segmental  constrictions  of  these, 
and  the  fissures  leading  into  those  of  the  next  row: — 35  diam. 

Fig.  2.  Outer  surface  of  a similar  zone,  showing  the  continuity  of  the  cells  of  the 
superficial  layer  with  the  vertical  columns  of  the  intermediate  (the  latter 
not  unfrequently  dividing,  however,  at  their  extremities,  so  as  to  form  two 
cells  at  the  end  of  each  column),  and  the  pores  leading  to  the  oblique 


236 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


passages,  directed  alternately  to  one  side  and  to  the  other,  which  lead  to 
the  cavities  of  the  columnar  cells : — 35  diam. 

Fig.  3.  Horizontal  section  of  the  intermediate  layer,  immediately  beneath  the  floors 
of  the  superficial  cells,  laying  open  the  annular  canals,  with  the  summits  of 
the  columnar  cells : — ^100  diam. 

Figs.  4 — 9.  Various  examples  of  the  Reparation  of  disks  after  fracture,  and  of  the 
growth  of  new  disks  from  detached  fragments.  For  description,  see 
1137  — 40  of  Memoir.  Fig.  6 is  magnified  6 diam. ; the  rest  35  diam. 

Fig.  10.  Monstrosity  formed  by  the  inclusion  of  a young  disk  within  the  outer  zones 
of  an  older  one,  that  seems  to  have  been  brought  into  contact  with  it  by 
the  progressive  increase  of  its  own  diameter : — 25  diam. 

PLATE  IX. 

Figs.  1 — 4.  Various  departures  from  the  typical  mode  of  concentric  development, 
presented  in  their  early  state,  both  by  simple  and  complex  disks ; some  of 
them  even  passing  towards  a spiral  mode  of  evolution.  Figs.  1 and  3 are 
magnified  35  diam. ; Figs.  2 and  4 are  enlarged  90  diam. 

The  remaining  figures  show  various  forms  of  Monstrosity,  produced  by  excess  of 

growth  from  the  nucleus. 

Fig.  5,  6.  Two  views  of  a disk  from  the  Philippine  shores,  having  a single  plane  on 
one  side,  and  two  planes,  meeting  at  an  acute  angle,  on  the  other : — 6 diam. 

Figs.  7,  8,  9.  Small  Australian  disks,  with  vertical  crests : — 35  diam. 

Fig.  10.  Disk  from  the  ^Egean  Sea,  with  a tri-radiate  crest: — 35  diam. 


[ 237  ] 


XI.  Further  Researches  on  the  Polarity  of  the  Diamagnetic  Force.  By  John  Tyndall, 
F.R.S.,  Memhre  de  la  Socidtd  Hollandaise  des  Sciences ; Foreign  Member  of  the 
Physical  Society  of  Berlin,  and  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Royal 
Institution. 

Received  November  27, — Read  December  20,  1855. 

INTRODUCTION. 

A YEAR  ago  I placed  before  the  Royal  Society  the  results  of  an  investigation  “ On 
the  Nature  of  the  Force  by  which  Bodies  are  repelled  from  the  Poles  of  a Magnet*.” 
The  simultaneous  exhibition  of  attraction  and  repulsion  in  the  case  of  magnetized 
iron  is  the  fact  on  which  the  idea  of  the  polarity  of  this  substance  is  founded ; and  it 
resulted  from  the  investigation  referred  to,  that  a corresponding  duality  of  action  was 
manifested  by  bismuth.  In  those  experiments  the  bismuth  was  the  moveable  object 
upon  which  fixed  magnets  were  caused  to  act,  and  from  the  deflection  of  the  bismuth 
its  polarity  was  inferred.  But,  inasmuch  as  the  action  is  reciprocal,  we  ought  also  to 
obtain  evidence  of  diamagnetic  polarity  by  reversing  the  conditions  of  experiment ; by 
making  the  magnet  the  moveable  object,  and  inferring  from  its  deflection  the  polarity 
of  the  mass  which  produces  the  deflection.  This  experiment  would  be  complementary 
to  those  described  in  the  communication  referred  to,  and  existing  circumstances 
invested  the  experiment  with  a great  degree  of  interest  and  importance. 

In  fact  an  experiment  similar  to  that  here  indicated  was  made  by  Professor 
W.  Weber,  previous  to  my  investigation,  and  the  result  was  such  as  to  satisfy  its 
author  of  the  reverse  polarity  of  diamagnetic  bodies.  I will  not  here  enter  into  a 
minute  description  of  the  instrument  and  mode  of  experiment  by  which  this  result 
was  obtained ; for  the  instrument  made  use  of  in  the  present  inquiry  being  simply  a 
refinement  of  that  made  use  of  by  M.  Weber,  its  explanation  will  embrace  the 
explanation  of  his  apparatus.  For  the  general  comprehension  of  the  criticisms  to 
which  M.  Weber’s  results  have  been  subjected,  it  is  necessary,  however,  to  remark, 
that  in  his  experiments  a bismuth  bar,  within  a vertical  spiral  of  copper  wire,  through 
which  an  electric  current  was  transmitted,  was  caused  to  act  upon  a steel  magnet 
freely  suspended  without  the  spiral.  When  the  two  ends  of  the  bar  of  bismuth  were 
permitted  to  act  successively  upon  the  suspended  magnet,  a motion  of  the  latter  was 
observed,  which  indicated  that  the  bismuth  bar  was  polar,  and  that  its  polarity  was 
the  reverse  of  that  of  iron. 

Notwithstanding  the  acknowledged  eminence  of  M.  Weber  as  an  experimenter, 

* Philosophical  Transactions,  1854. 

MDCCCLVI.  2 I 


238 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


this  result  failed  to  produce  general  conviction.  Mr.  Faraday,  in  his  paper  “On  the 
polar  or  other  condition  of  diamagnetic  bodies*,”  had  shown  that  results  quite  similar 
to  those  obtained  by  M.  Weber,  in  his  first  investigation  with  bismuth,  were  obtained 
in  a greatly  exalted  degree,  with  gold,  silver  and  copper ; the  effect  being  one  of 
induction,  and  not  one  due  to  diamagnetic  polarity.  He  by  no  means  asserted  that 
his  results  had  the  same  origin  as  those  obtained  by  M.  Weber  ; but  as  the  latter 
philosopher  had  made  no  mention  of  the  source  of  error  which  Mr.  Faraday’s  expe- 
riments rendered  manifest,  it  was  natural  to  suppose  that  it  had  been  overlooked, 
and  the  observed  action  attributed  to  a wrong  cause.  In  an  article  published  in  his 
‘ Massbestirnmungen’  in  1852,  M.  Weber,  however,  with  reference  to  this  point, 
writes  as  follows : — “ I will  remark  that  the  article  transferred  from  the  Reports  of 
the  Society  of  Sciences  of  Saxony  to  Poggendorff’s  ‘ Annalen’  was  only  a preliminary 
notice  of  my  investigation,  the  special  discussion  of  which  was  reserved  for  a sub- 
sequent communication.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  state  here,  that  in  the  experiments 
referred  to  I sought  to  eliminate  the  inductive  action  by  suitable  combinations ; but 
it  is  certainly  far  better  to  set  aside  this  action  altogether,  as  has  been  done  in  the 
experiments  described  in  the  present  memoir.” 

One  conviction  grew  and  strengthened  throughout  these  discussions — this,  namely, 
that  in  experiments  on  diamagnetic  polarity  great  caution  is  required  to  separate  the 
pure  effects  of  diamagnetism  from  those  of  ordinary  induetion.  With  reference  to 
even  the  most  recent  experiments  of  M.  Weber — those  to  which  he  has  referred  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  above  citation — it  is  strongly  urged  that  there  is  no  assurance 
that  the  separation  referred  to  has  been  effected.  In  those  experiments,  as  already 
stated,  a cylinder  of  bismuth  was  suspended  within  a vertical  helix  of  covered  copper 
wire,  and  the  action  of  the  cylinder  upon  a magnet  suspended  opposite  to  the  centre 
or  neutral  point  of  the  helix  was  observed.  To  increase  the  action,  the  position  of 
the  cylinder  was  changed  at  each  termination  of  the  minute  swing  of  the  magnet, 
the  amplitude  of  the  oscillations  being  thus  increased,  and  the  effect  rendered  more 
sensible  to  the  eye.  Now,  it  is  urged,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  in  these 
motions  of  a metallic  mass  within  an  excited  helix  induced  currents  will  be  deve- 
loped, which,  acting  upon  the  magnet,  will  produce  the  motions  observed.  The 
failure  indeed  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  diamagnetic  polarity  by  other  means 
has,  in  the  case  of  some  investigators,  converted  this  belief  into  a certainty. 

Among  the  number  whom  M.  Weber’s  experiments  have  failed  to  convince, 
M.  Matteucci  occupies  a prominent  place.  With  reference  to  the  question  before 
us  this  philosopher  writes  as  follows-l-: — “In  reading  the  description  of  the  expe- 
riments of  M.  Weber,  we  are  struck  on  beholding  the  effects  produced  by  moving 
the  bismuth  when  there  is  no  current  in  the  spiral.  Although  the  direction  of  oscil- 
lation in  this  latter  case  is  opposed  to  that  observed  when  the  spiral  is  active,  still 

* Experimental  Researches,  2640,  Philosophical  Transactions,  1850,  p.  171. 

t Cours  Special  sur  ITnduction,  p.  206. 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


239 


the  fact  excites  doubts  as  to  the  truth  of  the  conclusions  which  have  been  drawn 
from  these  experiments*.  To  deduce  rigorously  the  demonstration  of  diamagnetic 
polarity,  it  would  be  necessary  to  substitute  for  the  bismuth,  masses  formed  of  insulated 
fragments  of  the  metal\,  to  vary  the  dimensions  of  the  cylinder,  and  above  all,  to  com- 
pare the  effects  thus  obtained  with  those  which  would  probably  be  obtained  with  cylin- 
ders of  copper  and  silver  in  a state  of  purity. 

“ We  are  obliged  to  make  the  same  remarks  on  another  series  of  experiments 
which  this  physicist  has  made  to  obtain  anew,  by  the  effects  of  induction,  the  proof 
of  diamagnetic  polarity.  It  is  astonishing  that  after  having  sought  to  neutralize 
the  development  of  induced  currents  in  the  moving  cylinders  of  bismuth,  by  means 
of  a very  ingenious  disposition  of  the  spiral — it  is  astonishing,  I repeat,  that  no 
attempt  was  made  to  prove  by  preliminary  ^ssays  with  metals  possessing  a higher 
conductibility  than  bismuth,  that  the  same  end  could  be  obtained.  I cannot  leave 
you  ignorant  that  the  doubts  which  I have  ventured  to  advance  against  the  experi- 
ments of  M.  Weber  are  supported  by  the  negative  result  which  I have  obtained  in 
endeavouring  to  excite  diamagnetic  polarity  in  bismuth  by  the  discharge  of  the  Ley- 
den jar.” 

It  will  be  seen  in  the  following  pages  that  the  conditions  laid  down  by  M.  Mat- 
TEucci  for  the  rigorous  demonstration  of  diamagnetic  polarity  are  more  than  ful- 
filled. 

The  conclusions  of  M.  Weber  find  a still  more  strenuous  opponent  in  his  country- 
man Professor  v.  Feilitzsch,  who  has  repeated  Weber’s  experiments,  obtained  his 
results,  but  who  denies  the  validity  of  his  inferences.  M.  v.  Feilitzsch  argues  that 
in  the  experiments  referred  to  it  is  impossible  to  shut  out  ordinary  induction,  and 
for  the  rigorous  proof  of  diamagnetic  polarity  proposes  the  following  conditions^. 

To  render  the  experiment  free  from  the  action  of  induced  currents  two  ways  are 
open.  The  currents  can  be  so  guided  that  they  shall  mutually  neutralize  each  other’s 
action  upon  the  magnet,  or  the  induced  currents  can  be  completely  got  rid  ^ by  using, 
instead  of  a diamagnetic  conductor,  a diamagnetic  insulator."  To  test  the  question, 
M.  V.  Feilitzsch  resorted  to  the  latter  method : instead  of  cylinders  of  bismuth  he 
made  use  of  cylinders  of  wax,  and  also  of  a prism  of  heavy  glass,  but  in  neither  case 
was  he  able  to  detect  the  slightest  action  upon  the  magnet.  “ However  the  motions 
of  the  prism  might  be  varied,  it  was  not  possible  either  to  cause  the  motionless  mag- 
net to  oscillate,  or  to  bring  the  magnet  from  a state  of  oscillation  to  one  of  rest.” 

* It  is  not  my  place  to  account  for  the  effect  here  referred  to.  I may  however  remark,  that  there  appears 
to  be  no  difficulty  in  referring  it  to  the  ordinary  action  of  a diamagnetic  body  upon  a magnet.  It  is  the  result 
which  Brugmann  published  upwards  of  half  a century  ago  ; the  peculiar  form  of  this  result  in  one  of  the  series 
of  experiments  quoted  by  M.  Weber  must,  I think,  be  regarded  as  purely  accidental, — J.  T. 

t Also  in  page  204  : — “ II  fallait  done,  pour  prouver  si  I’influence  d’un  corps  diamagnetique  produit  sur  un 
aimant  une  variation  de  sens  contraire  k celle  developpee  dans  le  fer  doux,  opdrer  avec  ce  corps  prive  de  con- 
ductibilit^.” 

J Poggendorff’s  Annalen,  xcii.  377. 


I 


2 I 2 


240 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


M.  V.  Feilitzsch  pushes  his  experiments  further,  and  finds  that  when  the  bismuth  is 
motionless  within  its  spiral,  the  position  of  the  magnet  is  just  the  same  as  when  the 
bismuth  is  entirely  withdrawn ; hence  his  final  conclusion,  that  the  deflection  of  the 
magnet  in  Weber’s  experiments  is  due  to  induced  currents,  which  are  excited  in  the 
bismuth  by  its  mechanical  motion  up  and  down  within  the  spiral. 

These  divergent  opinions  upon  a question  of  such  vital  beating  upon  the  general 
theory  of  magnetic  phenomena,  naturally  excited  in  me  the  desire  to  make  myself 
acquainted  with  the  exact  value  of  M.  Weber’s  experiments.  The  most  direct  way 
of  accomplishing  this  I considered  to  be,  to  operate  with  an  instrument  similar  to 
that  made  use  of  by  Weber  himself ; I therefore  resolved  to  write  to  the  constructor 
of  his  apparatus,  but  previous  to  doing  so  the  thought  occurred  to  me  of  writing  to 
M.  Weber,  to  inquire  whether  his  further  reflections  on  the  subject  had  suggested 
to  him  any  desirable  modification  of  his  first  instrument.  In  reply  to  my  question  he 
undertook  to  devise  for  me  an  apparatus,  surpassing  in  delicacy  any  hitherto  made 
use  of.  The  design  of  M.  Weber  was  ably  carried  out  by  M.  Leyser  of  Leipzig, 
and  with  the  instrument  thus  placed  in  my  possession  I have  been  able,  not  only  to 
verify  the  experiments  of  M.  Weber,  but  to  satisfy  the  severest  conditions  proposed  by 
those  who  saw  in  the  results  of  these  experiments  the  effects  of  ordinary  induction. 

DESCRIPTION  OF  APPARATUS. 

A sketch  of  the  instrument  made  use  of  in  the  present  investigation  is  given  in  fig.  2. 
BO,  B'O'  is  the  outline  of  a rectangular  box,  the  front  of  which  is  removed  so  as  to 
show  the  apparatus  within.  The  back  of  the  box  is  prolonged,  and  terminates  in  two 
semicircular  projections,  which  have  apertures  at  H and  H'.  Stout  bolts  of  brass, 
which  have  been  made  fast  in  solid  masonry,  pass  through  these  apertures,  and  the 
instrument,  being  secured  to  the  bolts  by  screws  and  washers,  is  supported  in  a ver- 
tical position,  being  free  from  all  disturbance  save  such  as  affects  the  foundations  of 
the  Royal  Institution.  All  the  arrangements  presented  to  the  eye  in  fig.  2 are  made 
fast  to  the  back  of  the  box,  but  are  unconnected  with  the  front,  so  as  to  permit  of 
the  removal  of  the  latter.  WW'  are  two  boxwood  wheels  with  grooved  peripheries, 
which  permit  of  motion  being  transferred  from  one  wheel  to  the  other  by  means  of  a 
string  ss.  Attached  to  this  string  are  two  cylinders,  mn,  op,  of  the  body  to  be  exa- 
mined : in  some  cases  the  cylinders  are  perforated  longitudinally,  the  string  passes 
through  the  perforation,  and  the  cylinders  are  supported  by  knots  on  the  string.  HE, 
H'E'  are  two  helices  of  copper  wire  overspun  with  silk,  and  wound  round  two  brass 
reels,  the  upper  ends  of  which  protrude  from  H to  G,  and  from  H'  to  G'.  The  inter- 
nal diameter  of  each  helix  is  0‘8  of  an  inch,  and  its  external  diameter  about  1*3  inch  ; 
the  length  from  H to  E is  19  inches,  and  the  centres  of  the  helices  are  4 inches  apart ; 
the  diameters  of  the  wheels  WW'  being  also  4 inches.  The  cross  bar  GG'  is  of  brass, 
and  through  its  centre  passes  the  screw  R,  from  which  depends  a number  of  silk 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


241 


fibres  which  support  an  astatic  arrangement  of  two  magnets,  the  front  one  of  which, 
SN,  is  shown  in  the  figure.  An  enlarged  section  of  the  instrument  through  the 
system  of  magnets  is  shown  in  fig.  4.  The  magnets  are  connected  by  a brass  cross- 
piece, in  which  is  the  point  of  suspension  P ; and  the  position  of  the  helices  is  shown 


Fig.  1. 


Fig.  2. 


Fig.  3. 


to  be  between  the  magnets.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  astatic  system  is  a horizontal  one, 
and  not  vertical,  as  in  the  ordinary  galvanometer.  The  black  circle  in  front  of  the 
magnet  SN,  fig.  2,  is  a mirror,  which  is  shown  in  section  at  M,  fig.  4 ; to  balance  the 
weight  pf  this  mirror,  and  adjust  the  magnets  in  a horizontal  position,  a brass  washer, 
W,  is  caused  to  move  along  a screw,  until  a point  is  attained  at  which  its  weight  has 
brought  both  the  magnets  into  the  same  horizontal  plane.  There  is  also  another 
adjustment,  which  permits  of  the  magnets  being  brought  closer  together  or  separated 
more  widely  asunder.  The  motions  of  the  compound  magnet  are  observed  by  means 
of  a distant  scale  and  telescope,  according  to  the  method  applied  to  the  magneto- 
meter of  Gauss.  The  rectangle  da,  d'a',  fig.  2,  is  the  outline  of  a copper  damper, 
which,  owing  to  the  currents  induced  in  it  by  the  motion  of  the  magnet,  soon  brings 
the  latter  to  rest,  and  thus  expedites  experiment. 

It  is  well  known  that  one  end  of  a magnet  attracts,  while  the  other  end  repels  the 


242 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


same  pole  of  a magnetic  needle  ; and  that  between  both  there  is  a neutral  point  which 
neither  attracts  nor  repels.  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  helices  HE,  H'E';  so  that 
when  a current  is  sent  through  them,  if  the  astatic  magnet  be  exactly  opposite  the 
neutral  point,  it  is  unaffected  by  the  helices.  This  is  scarcely  attainable  in  practice ; 
a slight  residual  action  remains  which  draws  the  magnets  against  the  helices ; but 
this  is  very  easily  neutralized  by  disposing  an  external  portion  of  the  circuit  so  as  to 
act  upon  the  magnets  in  a direction  opposed  to  that  of  the  residual  action.  Here 
then  we  have  a pair  of  spirals  which,  when  excited,  do  not  act  upon  the  magnets,  and 
which  therefore  permit  us  to  examine  the  pure  action  of  any  body  capable  of  magnetic 
excitement  placed  within  them.  In  the  experiments  to  be  described,  it  was  always 
arranged  that  the  current  flowed  in  opposite  directions  through  the  two  spirals;  so 
that  if  the  bodies  within  them  were  polar,  the  two  upper  ends  of  these  bodies  should 
be  poles  of  opposite  names,  and  consequently  the  two  lower  ends  opposed  also.  Sup- 
posing now  our  two  cylinders  to  occupy  the  central  position  indicated  in  fig.  2 : even 
if  the  cylinders  became  polar  through  the  action  of  the  surrounding  current,  the 
magnets,  being  opposite  to  the  neutral  points  of  the  cylinders,  would  experience  no 
action  from  the  latter.  But  suppose  the  wheel  W'  to  be  so  turned  that  the  two  cylin- 
ders are  brought  into  the  position  shown  in  fig.  1,  the  upper  end 
o of  op  and  the  lower  end  n of  mn  will  act  simultaneously  upon 
the  suspended  magnets.  For  the  sake  of  illustration,  let  us  sup- 
pose the  ends  o and  n to  be  both  north  poles,  and  that  the  sec- 
tion, fig.  4,  is  taken  when  the  bars  are  in  the  position  shown  in 
fig.  1.  The  right-hand  pole  o will  attract  S'  and  repel  N,  which 
attraction  and  repulsion  sum  themselves  together  to  produce  a deflection  of  the  system 
of  magnets.  On  the  other  hand,  the  left-hand  pole  n,  being  also  north,  will  attract 
S and  repel  N',  which  two  effects  also  sum  themselves  to  produce  a deflection  in  the 
same  direction  as  the  former  two.  Hence,  not  only  is  the  action  of  terrestrial  mag- 
netism annulled  by  this  arrangement,  but  the  moving  force  due  to  the  reciprocal 
action  of  the  magnets  and  the  bodies  within  the  helices  is  increased  fourfold.  By  turn- 
ing the  wheel  in  the  other  direction  we  bring  the  cylinders  into  the  position  shown  in 
fig.  3,  and  thus  may  study  the  action  of  the  ends  m and  p upon  the  magnets. 

By  means  of  the  screw  R the  magnets  can  be  raised  or  lowered  ; and  at  the  end,  t, 
of  the  screw  is  a small  torsion  circle  which  can  be  turned  independently  of  the  screw; 
by  means  of  the  latter  the  suspending  fibre  can  be  twisted  or  untwisted  without 
altering  the  level  of  the  magnets. 

The  front  of  the  box  is  attached  by  means  of  brass  hasps,  and  opposite  to  the 
mirror  M a small  plate  of  glass  is  introduced,  through  which  the  mirror  is  observed  ; 
the  magnets  within  the  box  being  thus  effectually  protected  from  the  disturbances 
of  the  external  air.  A small  handle  to  turn  the  wheel  W'  accompanied  the  instru- 
ment from  its  maker;  but  in  the  experiments,  I used,  instead  of  it,  a key  attached 
to  the  end  of  a rod  10  feet  long;  with  this  rod  in  my  right  hand,  and  the  telescope 


Fig.  4. 

W 


m; 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE, 


243 


and  scale  before  me,  the  experiments  were  completely  under  my  own  control. 
Finally,  the  course  of  the  current  through  the  helices  was  as  follows: — Proceeding 
from  the  platinum  pole  of  the  battery  it  entered  the  box  along  the  wire  v),  fig.  2,  which 
passed  through  the  bottom  of  the  latter;  thence  through  the  helix  to  H',  returning  to 
E' ; thence  to  the  second  helix,  returning  to  E,  from  which  it  passed  along  the  wire 
to  the  zinc  pole  of  the  battery.  A commutator  was  introduced  in  the  circuit,  so 
that  the  direction  of  the  current  thus  indicated  could  be  reversed  at  pleasure. 

EXPERIMENTS — DEPORTMENT  OF  DIAMAGNETIC  BODIES. 

A pair  of  cylinders  of  chemically  pure  bismuth,  3 inches  long  and  0*7  of  an  inch 
in  diameter,  accompanied  the  instrument  from  Germany.  These  were  first  tested, 
commencing  with  a battery  of  one  cell  of  Grove.  Matters  being  as  sketched  in 
fig.  2,  when  the  current  circulated  in  the  helices  and  the  magnet  had  come  to  rest, 
the  cross  wire  of  the  telescope  cut  the  number  482  on  the  scale.  Turning  the  wheel 
W'  so  as  to  bring  the  cylinders  into  the  position  fig.  1,  the  magnet  moved  promptly, 
and  after  some  oscillations  took  up  a new  position  of  equilibrium  ; the  cross  wire  or 
the  telescope  then  cut  the  figure  468  on  the  scale.  Reversing  the  motion  so  as  to 
place  the  cylinders  again  central,  the  former  position  482  was  assumed ; and  on  turn- 
ing further  in  the  same  direction,  so  as  to  place  the  cylinders  as  in  fig.  3,  the  position 
of  equilibrium  of  the  magnet  was  at  the  number  493.  Hence  by  bringing  the  two 
ends  /rand  o to  bear  upon  the  astatic  magnet,  the  motion  was  from  greater  to  smaller 
numbers,  the  position  of  rest  being  then  fourteen  divisions  less  than  when  the  bars 
were  central.  By  bringing  the  ends  m and  p to  bear  upon  the  magnet,  the  motion 
was  from  smaller  to  greater  numbers,  the  position  of  rest  being  eleven  divisions 
more  than  when  the  bars  were  central. 

As  the  positions  here  referred  to  will  be  the  subject  of  frequent  reference,  for 
the  sake  of  convenience  I will  call  the  position  of  the  cylinders  sketched  in  fig.  1, 
Position  1;  that  sketched  in  fig.  2,  Position  2 ; and  that  sketched  in  fig.  3,  Position  3, 
The  results  which  we  have  just  described,  tabulated  with  reference  to  these  terms, 
would  then  stand  thus  : — 

I. 

Bismuth  cylinders, 
length  3 inches, 
diameter  0*7. 

Position  1.  468 

Position  2.  482 

Position  3.  493 

In  changing  therefore  from  position  1 to  position  3,  a deflection  corresponding  to 
twenty-five  divisions  of  the  scale  was  produced. 


244 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


Wishing  to  place  myself  beyond  the  possibility  of  illusion  as  regards  the  fact  of 
deflection,  I repeated  the  experiment  with  successive  batteries  of  two,  three  and  four 
cells.  The  following  are  the  results 


II. 


2 cells. 

3 cells. 

4 cells. 

Position  1. 

460 

439 

425 

Position  2. 

462 

450 

437 

Position  3. 

473 

462 

448 

In  all  the  cases  cited  we  observe  the  same  result.  From  position  2 to  position  1 
the  motion  is  from  larger  to  smaller  numbers ; while  from  position  2 to  position  3 
the  motion  is  from  smaller  to  larger  numbers. 

It  may  at  first  sight  appear  strange  that  the  amount  of  the  deflection  did  not  increase 
with  the  battery  power ; the  reason,  in  part,  is  that  the  magnet,  when  the  current 
circulated,  was  held  in  a position  free  from  the  spirals,  by  forces  emanating  partly 
from  the  latter  and  partly  from  a portion  of  the  external  circuit.  When  the  current 
increased,  the  magnetization  of  the  bismuth  increased  also,  but  so  did  the  force  which 
held  the  magnets  in  their  position  of  equilibrium.  To  remove  them  from  this  posi- 
tion, a greater  amount  of  force  was  necessary  than  when  only  the  residual  action  of  a 
feeble  current  held  them  there.  This  fact,  coupled  with  the  circumstance  that  less 
heat  was  developed,  and  less  disturbance  caused  by  air  currents,  when  a feeble  bat- 
tery was  used,  induced  me  for  some  time  to  experiment  with  a battery  of  two  cells. 
Subsequent  experience  however  enabled  me  to  change  this  for  five  cells  with  advan- 
tage. 

Notwithstanding  the  improbability  of  the  argument,  still  it  may  be  urged  that 
these  experiments  do  not  prove  beyond  a doubt  that  the  bismuth  cylinders  produce 
the  motion  of  the  magnets  in  virtue  of  their  excitement  by  the  voltaic  current ; for  it 
is  not  certain  that  these  cylinders  would  not  produce  the  same  motion  wholly  inde- 
pendent of  the  current.  Something  of  this  kind  has  occurred  to  M.  Leyser*  in  his 
experiments,  and  why  not  here  ? 

In  answer  to  this  I reply,  that  if  the  case  be  as  here  suggested,  the  motion  of  the 
magnet  will  not  be  changed  when  the  current  surrounding  the  bismuth  cylinders 
flows  in  the  opposite  direction.  Here  is  the  experiment. 

III. 

Position  1.  764 

Position  2.  742 
Position  3.  704 

We  observe  here  that  in  passing  from  position  2 to  position  1 the  motion  is  from 
smaller  to  larger  numbers ; while  in  passing  from  position  2 to  position  3 the  motion 

* Scientific  Memoirs,  New  Series,  vol.  i.  page  184. 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


245 


is  from  larger  to  smaller  numbers.  This  is  the  opposite  result  to  that  obtained  when 
the  current  flowed  in  the  opposite  direction ; and  it  proves  that  the  polarity  of  the 
bismuth  eylinders  depends  upon  the  direetion  of  the  current,  ehanging  as  the  latter 
changes.  It  was  pleasant  to  observe  the  prompt  and  steady  march  of  the  magnet  as 
the  cylinders  were  shifted  in  the  helices.  When  the  magnets,  operated  on  by  the  bars 
of  bismuth,  were  moving  in  any  direction,  by  bringing  the  two  opposite  ends  of  the 
bismuth  bars  into  aetion,  the  motion  could  be  promptly  ehecked ; the  magnets  could 
be  brought  to  rest,  or  their  movement  converted  into  one  in  the  opposite  direction. 

I may  add  to  the  above  a series  of  results  obtained  some  days  subsequently  in  the 
presence  of  Professors  Faraday,  De  la  Rive  and  Marcet. 

IV. 

Bismuth  cylinders. 

Position  1.  670 

Position  2.  650 

Position  3.  630 

The  difference  between  positions  1 and  3 amounts  here  to  forty  divisions  of  the  scale  ; 
subsequent  experience  enabled  me  to  make  it  still  greater. 

It  was  found  by  experiment,  that  when  the  motion  was  from  lower  to  higher  num- 
bers it  denoted  that  the  poles  NN',  fig.  4,  were  repelled  from  the  spirals,  and  the  poles 
SS'  attracted  towards  them.  When,  on  the  contrary,  the  motion  was  from  larger  to 
smaller  numbers,  it  indicated  that  the  poles  NN'  were  attracted  and  the  poles  SS' 
repelled.  In  the  position  fig.  1,  therefore,  of  Tables  III.  and  IV.  the  poles  NN'  were 
repelled  by  the  ends  no  of  the  bismuth  cylinders,  and  the  poles  SS'  attracted,  while  in 
the  position  fig.  3,  the  poles  NN'  were  attracted  by  the  ends  mp,  and  the  poles  SS' 
repelled;  the  ends  n and  o,  therefore,  acted  as  two  north  poles,  while  the  ends  m 
and  JO  acted  as  two  south  poles.  Now  the  direction  of  the  current  in  the  experiments 
recorded  in  the  two  tables  referred  to  was  that  shown  by  the  arrows  in  fig.  4.  Stand- 
ing in  front  of  the  instrument,  the  direetion  in  the  adjacent  face  of  the  spiral  H'E' was 
from  right  to  left,  while  it  was  from  left  to  right  in  HE.  From  this  we  may  infer  that 
the  polarity  of  the  bismuth  cylinders  was  the  reverse  of  that  whieh  would  be  excited 
in  cylinders  of  iron  under  the  same  circumstances.  The  assertion  however  shall  be 
transferred  from  the  domain  of  deduction  to  that  of  fact  before  we  conclude. 

Let  us  now  urge  against  these  experiments  all  that  ever  has  been  urged  by  the 
opponents  of  diamagnetic  polarity.  The  bismuth  cylinders  are  metallic  conductors, 
and  in  moving  them  through  the  spirals  induced  currents  more  or  less  powerful  may 
be  excited  in  these  conductors.  The  motion  observed  may  not,  after  all,  be  due  to 
diamagnetic  polarity,  but  to  the  currents  thus  excited.  I reply,  that  in  all  cases  the 
number  set  down  marks  the  permawewi  position  of  rest  of  the  magnets.  Were  the 
action  due  to  induced  currents,  these  currents,  being  momentary,  could  only  impart 

2 K 


MDCCCLVI. 


246 


PROFESSOR,  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


a shock  to  the  magnets,  which,  on  the  disappearance  of  the  currents,  would  return  to 
their  original  position.  But  the  deflection  is  permanent,  and  is  therefore  due  to  an 
enduring  cause.  In  his  paper  on  “Supposed  Diamagnetic  Polarity,”  Mr.  Faraday 
riglitly  observes, — “If  the  polarity  exists,  it  must  be  in  the  particles,  and  for  the  time 
permanent,  and  therefore  distinguishable  from  the  momentai-y  polarity  of  the  mass 
due  to  induced  temporary  currents,  and  it  must  also  be  distinguishable  from  ordi- 
nary magnetic  polarity  by  its  contrary  direction.”  These  are  the  precise  character- 
istics of  the  force  made  manifest  by  the  experiments  now  under  consideration. 

Further,  the  strength  of  induced  currents  depends  on  the  conducting  power  of 
the  mass  in  which  they  are  formed.  Expressing  the  conducting  power  of  bismuth 
by  the  number  T8,  that  of  copper  would  be  expressed  by  73‘6%  the  conductivity  of 
the  latter  being  therefore  forty  times  that  of  the  former.  Hence  the  demand  made 
by  the  opponents  of  diamagnetic  polarity,  to  have  the  experiments  repeated  with 
cylinders  of  copper;  for  if  the  effect  be  due  to  induced  currents,  they  will  show 
themselves  in  copper  in  a greatly  increased  degree.  The  following  is  the  result  of  a 
series  of  experiments  made  with  two  copper  cylinders,  of  the  same  dimensions  as  the 
bismuth  ones  already  described. 

V. 

Cylinders  of  Copper. 

Position  1.  754 

Position  2.  754 

Position  3.  755 

Now  if  the  effects  obtained  with  bismuth  were  due  to  induced  currents,  we  should 
have  the  same  effects  forty  times  multiplied  in  the  c-ise  of  copper,  in  place  of  which 
we  have  scarcely  any  sensible  effect  at  all. 

Bismuth  is  the  only  substance  which  has  hitherto  produced  an  action  in  experi- 
ments of  this  nature;  another  illustration,  however,  is  furnished  by  the  metal  anti- 
mony, which  possesses  a greater  conductive  power,  but  a less  diamagnetic  power  than 
bismuth.  The  following  results  were  obtained  with  this  substance: — 

VI. 

Cylinders  of  Antimony, 
length  3 inches. 


diameter  0*7. 

Current  direct  t- 

Current  reversed  J 

Position  1. 

693 

244 

Position  2. 

688 

252 

Position  3. 

683 

261 

* Philosophical  Magazine,  Series  4,  vol.  vii.  p.  37. 
t As  in  III.  and  IV.  1 As  in  I.  and  II. 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


247 


On  comparing  these  numbers  with  those  already  obtained  with  bismuth,  we  observe 
that  for  like  positions  the  actions  of  both  metals  are  alike  in  direction.  We  further 
observe  that  the  results  are  determined,  not  by  the  relative  conductive  powers  of  the 
two  metals,  but  by  their  relative  diamagnetic  powers.  If  the  former  were  the  deter- 
mining cause,  we  should  have  greater  deflections  than  with  the  bismuth,  which  is 
not  the  case ; if  the  latter,  we  should  have  less  deflections,  which  is  the  case. 

The  third  and  severest  condition  proposed  by  those  who  object  to  the  experiments 
of  M.  Weber  is  to  substitute  insulators  for  conductors.  I call  this  condition  severe 
for  the  following  reasons  ; — according  to  the  experiments  of  Faraday*,  when  bismuth 
and  sulphur  are  submitted  to  the  same  magnetic  force,  the  repulsion  of  the  former 
being  expressed  by  the  number  1968,  that  of  the  latter  will  be  expressed  by  118. 
Hence  an  action  which,  with  the  means  hitherto  used,  was  difficult  of  detection  in 
the  case  of  bismuth,  must  wholly  escape  observation  in  the  case  of  sulphur,  the 
’ntensity  of  whose  excitement  is  nearly  twenty  times  less.  The  same  renmrks  apply, 
in  a great  measure,  to  all  other  insulators. 

But  the  admirable  apparatus  made  use  of  in  this  investigation  has  enabled  me  to 
satisfy  this  condition  also.  To  Mr.  Faraday  I am  indebted  for  the  loan  of  two  prisms 
of  the  self-same  heavy  glass  with  which  he  made  the  discovery  of  diamagnetism. 
The  bismuth  cylinders  were  withdrawn  from  the  helices  and  the  prisms  of  glass  put  in 
their  places.  It  was  now  necessary  to  have  a perfectly  steady  magnet,  the  expected 
result  being  so  small  as  to  be  readily  masked  by,  or  confounded  with,  a motion  arising 
from  some  extraneous  disturbance.  The  feeble  warmth  developed  in  the  helices  by  a 
current  from  two  cells  I found  able  to  create  air  currents  of  sufficient  power  to  defeat 
all  attempts  to  obtain  the  pure  action  of  the  prisms.  To  break  up  these  currents  I 
stuffed  all  unfilled  spaces  of  the  box  with  old  newspapers,  and  found  the  expedient 
to  answer  perfectly.  With  a fresh  battery,  which  delivered  a constant  stream  through- 
out the  duration  of  an  experiment,  the  magnet  was  admirably  steady -f-,  and  under  these 
favourable  conditions  the  following  results  were  obtained : — 

VII. 

Prisms  of  Heavy  Glass, 
length  3 inches, 
width  0‘6. 
depth  0‘5. 

Current  direct. 

Position  1.  664 

Position  2.  662 

Position  3.  660 

* Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution,  1853,  p.  5. 

t It  was  necessary  however  to  select  a portion  of  the  day  when  Albemarle  Street  was  free  from  cabs  and  car- 
riages, as  the  shaking  of  the  entire  building,  by  the  rolling  of  these  vehicles,  rendered  the  magnets  unsteady. 

2 K 2 


248 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


Thus  in  passing  from  position  1 to  3,  or  vice  versa,  a permanent  deflection  corre- 
sponding to  four  divisions  of  the  scale  was  produced.  By  raising  or  lowering  the 
respective  prisms  at  the  proper  moments  the  amplitude  of  the  oscillations  could  be 
considerably  augmented,  and,  when  at  a maximum,  could  be  speedily  extinguished 
by  reversing  the  motions  of  the  prisms.  In  six  different  series  of  experiments  made 
with  this  substance  the  same  invariable  result  was  obtained.  It  will  be  observed  that 
the  deflections  are  in  all  cases  in  the  same  direction  as  those  produced  by  bismuth 
under  the  same  circumstances. 

The  following  results  were  afterwards  obtained  with  the  same  prisms  in  the  pre- 
sence of  M.  De  la  Rive  ; the  current  was  “direct.” 

VIII. 

Position  1.  652 

Position  2.  650 

Position  3.  648 

On  the  negative  result  arrived  at  with  this  substance,  it  will  be  remembered  that 
M.  V.  Feilitzsch  bases  one  of  his  arguments  against  the  conclusions  of  M.  Weber. 

Calcareous  spar  was  next  submitted  to  experiment.  Two  cylinders  of  the  trans- 
parent crystal  were  prepared  and  examined  in  the  manner  already  described.  The 
results  are  as  follows  : — 

IX. 

Cylinders  of  Calcareous  Spar. 

length  3 inches. 

diameter  0’7. 

Current  direct. 

Position  1.  6995. 

Position  2.  698'5. 

Position  3.  697’5. 

Here,  as  in  the  other  cases,  the  deflection  was  permanent,  and  could  be  augmented 
by  the  suitable  raising  or  lowering  of  the  respective  cylinders.  The  action  is  small, 
but  perfectly  certain.  The  magnet  was  steady  and  moved  promptly  and  invariably 
in  the  directions  indicated  by  the  numbers.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  deflections 
are  the  same  in  kind  as  those  produced  by  bismuth. 

The  intrusion  of  other  employments  compelled  me  to  postpone  the  continuation  of 
these  experiments  for  several  weeks.  On  taking  up  the  subject  again,  my  first  care 
was  to  assure  myself  that  the  instrument  retained  its  sensibility.  Since  the  experi- 
ments last  recorded  it  had  been  transported  over  several  hundred  miles  of  railway, 
and  hence  the  possibility  of  a disturbance  of  its  power.  The  following  experiments, 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


249 


while  they  corroborate  the  former  ones,  show  that  the  instrument  retained  its  power 
and  delicacy  unimpaired  : — 

X. 

Bismuth  cylinders. 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  612 

Position  2.  572 

Position  3.  526 


Current  reversed. 

264 

230 

200 


The  deflections,  it  will  be  observed,  are  the  same  in  kind  as  before  ; but  by  improved 
manipulation  the  effect  is  augmented.  In  passing  from  position  1 to  3 we  have  here 
a deflection  amounting  in  one  case  to  64,  and  in  the  other  to  86  divisions  of  the 
scale. 

To  Mr.  Noble  I am  indebted  for  two  cylinders  of  pure  statuary  marble ; the 
examination  of  these  gave  the  following  results  : — 


XI. 


Cylinders  of  Statuary  Marble. 

length  4 inches, 
diameter  0*7. 


Current  direct. 

Current  reversed. 

Position  1. 

601 

215 

Position  2. 

598 

218 

Position  3. 

596 

220 

Here,  in  passing  from  position  1 to  3,  we  have  a permanent  deflection  corresponding 
to  five  divisions  of  the  scale.  As  in  all  other  cases,  the  impulsion  of  the  magnet 
might  be  augmented  by  changing  the  position  of  the  cylinders  at  the  limit  of  each 
swing.  The  deflections  are  the  same  in  kind  as  those  produced  by  bismuth,  which 
ought  to  be  the  case,  as  marble  is  diamagnetic. 

An  upright  iron  stove  influenced  by  the  earth’s  magnetism  becomes  a magnet  with 
its  bottom  a north  and  its  top  a south  pole.  Doubtless,  though  in  an  immensely 
feebler  degree,  every  erect  marble  statue  is  a true  diamagnet,  with  its  head  a north 
pole  and  its  feet  a south  pole.  The  same  is  certainly  true  of  man  as  he  stands  upon 
the  earth’s  surface,  for  all  the  tissues  of  the  human  body  are  diamagnetic. 

A pair  of  cylinders  of  phosphorus  enclosed  in  thin  glass  tubes  were  next  exa- 
mined. 

XII. 

Cylinders  of  Phosphorus. 

length  3‘5  inches, 
diameter  0*63. 


250 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


Current  direct. 

Current  reversed. 

Position  1. 

Series  I. 
620 

Series  II. 
670 

224 

Position  2. 

618 

668 

226 

Position  3. 

616 

666 

228 

The  change  of  the  bars  from  position  1 to  3 is  in  this  case  accompanied  by  perma- 
nent deflection  corresponding  to  four  divisions  of  the  scale.  The  deflection  indicates 
the  polarity  of  diamagnetic  bodies.  The  magnet  was  remarkably  steady  during 
these  experiments,  and  the  consequent  clearness  and  sharpness  of  the  result  pleasant 
to  observe. 


XIII. 


Cylinders  of  Sulphur, 
length  6 inches, 
diameter  0'7. 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  658  5 

Position  2.  657 
Position  3.  655”5 


Current  reversed. 
222 

223-5 

225-5 


XIV. 

Cylinders  of  Nitre. 

length  3-5  inches, 
diameter  0-7. 

Current  direct;  Current  reversed. 

Position  1.  648-5  263 

Position  3.  647  265 

Finally,  as  regards  solid  diamagnetics,  a series  of  experiments  was  made  with 
wax  ; this  also  being  one  of  the  substances  whose  negative  deportment  is  urged  by 
M.  V.  Feilitzsch  against  M.  Weber. 

XV. 

Cylinders  of  Wax. 

length  4 inches, 
diameter  0-7. 

Current  direct.  Current  reversed. 

Position  1.  624-5  240 

Position  3.  623  241 

The  action  is  very  small,  but  it  is  nevertheless  perfectly  certain.  The  argument 
founded  on  the  negative  deportment  of  this  substance  must  therefore  give  way. 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


251 


When  we  consider  the  feebleness  of  the  action  with  so  delicate  a means  of  examina- 
tion, the  failure  of  M.  v.  Feilitzsch  to  obtain  the  effect,  with  an  instrument  con- 
structed by  himself,  will  not  excite  surprise. 

Thus  in  the  case  of  seven  insulating  bodies  the  existence  of  diamagnetic  polarity 
has  been  proved ; the  list  might  be  augmented  without  difficulty,  but  sufficient,  I 
trust,  has  been  done  to  remove  the  scruples  of  those  who  saw  in  M.  Weber’s  results 
an  action  produced  by  induced  currents. 

A portion  of  the  subject  hitherto  untouched,  but  one  of  great  interest,  has  reference 
to  the  polar  condition  of  liquid  bodies  while  under  magnetic  influence.  The  first 
liquid  examined  was  distilled  water ; it  was  enclosed  in  thin  glass  tubes,  corked  at 
the  ends,  and  by  means  of  a loop  passing  round  the  cork  the  tubes  were  attached  to 
the  string  passing  round  the  wheels  WW'.  Previous  to  using,  the  corks  were  care- 
fully cleansed,  so  that  any  impurity  contracted  in  cutting,  or  by  contact  with  ferru- 
ginous matters,  was  completely  removed.  The  following  are  the  results  obtained 
with  this  liquid  : — 

XVI. 


Cylinders  of  Distilled  Water. 

length  4 inches, 
diameter  0'65. 


Current  direct. 

Current  reversed. 

Position  1. 

605 

246 

Position  2. 

603 

248 

Position  3. 

601 

250 

The  experiment  was  many  times  repeated,  but  always  with  the  same  result ; indeed 
the  polarity  of  the  liquid  mass  is  as  safely  established  as  that  of  iron.  Pure  water  is 
diamagnetic,  and  the  deflections  produced  by  it  are  the  same  as  those  of  all  the 
other  diamagnetic  bodies  submitted  to  examination. 

From  the  position  which  it  occupies  in  Mr.  Faraday’s  list*,  I had  also  some  hopes 
of  proving  the  polarity  of  sulphide  of  carbon.  The  following  results  were  obtained  : — 


XVII. 

Cylinders  of  Bisulphide  of  Carbon. 

length  4 inches, 
diameter  0‘65. 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  631 

Position  2.  629 

Position  3.  626 


Current  reversed. 
210 

213 

216 


* Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Institution,  1853,  p.  5. 


252 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


As  in  the  case  of  distilled  water,  vve  observe  a deflection  in  one  direction  when  the 
current  is  “direct”  and  in  the  other  when  it  is  “reversed,”  the  action  in  the  first 
case,  in  passing  from  position  1 to  3,  amounting  to  five  and  in  the  latter  case  to  six 
divisions  of  the  scale.  The  polarity  exhibited  is  that  of  diamagnetic  bodies. 

DEPORTMENT  OF  MAGNETIC  BODIES. 

Thus  far  we  have  confined  our  examination  to  diamagnetic  substances ; turn  we 
now  to  the  deportment  of  magnetic  bodies  when  submitted  to  the  same  conditions  of 
experiment.  Here  we  must  select  the  substances  suitable  for  examination,  for  all  are 
not  so.  Cylinders  of  iron,  for  example,  of  the  same  size  as  our  diamagnetic  cylinders, 
would,  through  the  intensity  of  their  action,  quite  derange  the  apparatus ; so  that 
we  are  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  bodies  of  smaller  size  or  of  feebler  magnetic  capa- 
city. Besides,  the  remarks  of  writers  on  this  subject  render  it  of  importance  to 
examine  whether  bodies  through  which  the  magnetic  constituents  are  very  sparingly 
distributed  present  a veritable  polarity  the  same  as  that  exhibited  by  iron  itself. 

Slate  rock  usually  contains  from  eight  to  ten  per  cent,  of  oxide  of  iron,  and  a frag- 
ment of  the  substance  presented  to  the  single  pole  of  an  electro-magnet  is  attracted 
by  the  pole.  A cylinder  of  slate  from  the  Penrhyn  quarries  near  Bangor  was  first 
examined.  It  was  not  found  necessary  to  increase  the  effect  by  using  two  cylinders, 
and  the  single  one  used  was  suspended  in  the  right-hand  helix  H'E'.  The  deport- 
ment of  the  substance  was  as  follows  : — 


xvni. 

Cylinder  of  Penrhyn  Slate. 

length  4 inches, 
diameter  0'7- 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  620 

Position  2.  647 
Position  3.  667 


Current  reversed. 
280 

240 

198 


Comparing  these  deflections  with  those  obtained  with  diamagnetic  bodies,  we  see 
that  they  are  in  the  opposite  direction.  With  the  direct  current  a change  from  posi- 
tion 1 to  3 is  followed,  in  the  case  of  diamagnetic  bodies,  by  a motion  from  higher  to 
lower  numbers ; while  in  the  present  instance  the  motion  is  from  lower  numbers  to 
higher.  In  the  former  case  the  north  poles  of  the  astatic  magnet  are  attracted,  in 
the  latter  they  are  repelled.  We  also  see  that  a direct  current  acting  on  diamagnetic 
bodies  produces  the  same  deflection  as  a reverse  current  on  magnetic  ones.  Thus,  as 
we  protnised  at  a former  page,  the  opposite  polarities  of  diamagnetic  and  magnetic 
bodies  are  transferred  from  the  region  of  deduction  to  that  of  fact. 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


253 


XIX. 


Cylinder  of  Caermarthen  Slate, 
length  4 inches, 
diameter  0‘7. 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  664 

Position  2.  690 

Position  3.  720 


Current  reversed. 

300 

235 

185 


The  deflections  in  this  case  are  also  indicative  of  magnetic  polarity. 

These  two  cylinders  were  so  taken  from  the  rock  that  the  axis  of  each  lay  in 
the  plane  of  cleavage.  The  following  experiments,  made  with  a cylinder  of  the  same 
size,  show  the  capability  of  a rock  of  this  structure  to  be  magnetized  across  the 
planes  of  cleavage. 


XX. 


Cylinder  of  Slate : axis  of  cylinder  perpendicular  to  cleavage. 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  655 

Position  2.  678 

Position  3.  695 


Current  reversed. 

240 

205 

192 


Chloride  of  iron  was  next  examined : the  substance,  in  powder,  was  enclosed  in  a 
single  glass  tube,  which  was  attached  to  the  string  passing  round  the  wheels  WW'  of 
the  instrument. 

XXI. 


Cylinder  of  Chloride  of  Iron. 

length  3'8  inches, 
diameter  0*5. 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  185 

Position  2.  

Position  3.  990 


Current  reversed. 

990 

230 

185 


The  deflection  here  indicates  ordinary  magnetic  polarity.  The  action  was  very 
powerful.  When  swiftly  moving  in  any  direction,  a change  in  the  position  of  the 
cylinder  instantly  checked  the  magnet  in  its  course,  brought  it  to  rest,  or  drove  it 
forcibly  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  numbers  185  and  990  mark  indeed  the  utmost 
limit  between  which  it  was  possible  for  the  magnet  to  move ; here  it  rested  against 
the  helices. 

Two  glass  tubes  were  filled  with  red  oxide  of  iron  and  examined.  The  action  of 
the  poles  of  these  cylinders  upon  the  magnets  was  so  strong,  as  to  efface,  by  the  velo- 
city imparted  to  the  magnets,  all  distinct  impression  of  the  numbers  on  the  scale. 

2 L 


MDCCCLVI. 


254 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


By  changing  the  position  of  the  tubes  within  the  helices,  the  magnets  could  be 
driven  violently  through  the  field  of  view,  or  could  be  held  rigidly  against  the  respect- 
ive helices.  As  in  all  other  cases,  the  centre  of  the  cylinders  were  neutral  points, 
and  the  two  ends  of  each  were  poles  of  opposite  qualities.  The  polarity  was  of  course 
the  same  as  that  of  iron. 

A small  quantity  of  iron  filings  were  kneaded  thoroughly  in  wax,  and  a cylinder 
formed  from  the  mass.  Its  deportment  was  also  very  violent,  and  its  polarity  was  of 
course  just  as  clear  and  pronounced  as  that  of  a solid  cylinder  of  iron  could  possibly  be. 

Sulphate  of  iron  w’as  next  examined:  the  crystallized  substance  was  enclosed  in 
two  glass  tubes  and  tested  in  the  usual  manner. 


XXII. 


Cylinders  of  Sulphate  of  Iron, 
length  4'5  inches, 
diameter  0'7- 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  510 

Position  2.  600 

Position  3.  700 


Current  reversed. 
510 

370 

220 


The  red  ferroprussiate  of  potassa  is  a magnetic  salt ; 
ing  results  were  obtained  : — 


XXIII. 


with  this  substance  the  follow 


Cylinders  of  red  Ferroprussiate  of  Potassa. 

length  4'5  inches, 
diameter  0'65. 


Current  direct. 

Current  reversed. 

Position  1. 

610 

250 

Position  2. 

630 

220 

Position  3. 

655 

197 

In  this  case  also  the  crystallized  salt  was  enclosed  in  glass  tubes. 

Two  glass  tubes  were  next  filled  with  carbonate  of  iron  in  the  state  of  powder : the 
following  are  the  results  : — 

XXIV. 


Cylinders  of  Carbonate  of  Iron. 

length  4 inches, 
diameter  0'5. 

Current  direct. 

Position  1.  185 

Position  2.  620 

Position  3.  740 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


255 


In  all  these  cases  the  deflections  show  that  the  bodies  are  polar  after  the  manner  of 
iron. 

As  the  complement  of  the  experiments  made  with  diamagnetic  liquids,  we  now 
pass  on  to  the  examination  of  the  polarity  of  magnetic  liquids.  A concentrated 
solution  of  sulphate  of  iron  was  enclosed  in  two  glass  tubes  and  submitted  to 
examination. 

XXV. 

Sulphate  of  Iron  solution  in  tubes, 
length  4 inches, 
diameter  0'65. 

Current  direct. 

Position  1.  548 

Position  2.  600 

Position  3.  648. 


A solution  of  muriate  of  nickel,  examined  in  the  same  manner,  gave  the  following 
results : — 

XXVI. 

Muriate  of  Nickel  solution  in  tubes, 
length  3*6  inches. 


diameter  0*65. 

Current  direct. 

Position  1.  605 


Position  2. 
Position  3. 


632 

650 


Current  reversed. 

224 

200 

185 


A solution  of  muriate  of  cobalt  yielded  as  follows: — 


XXVII. 

Muriate  of  Cobalt  solution  in  tubes. 

length  3’6  inches, 
diameter  0*65. 


Current  direct. 

Position  1.  630 

Position  2.  645 

Position  3.  660 


Current  reversed. 
262 

235 

202 


In  all  these  cases  we  have  ample  evidence  of  a polar  action  the  reverse  of  that 
exhibited  by  diamagnetic  liquids.  These,  I believe,  are  the  first  experiments  on 
which  the  action  of  either  liquid  magnets  or  liquid  diamagnets  upon  a suspended 
steel  magnet  has  been  exhibited. 


2 L 2 


256 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


Thus  far  then  the  following  substances  have  been  submitted  to  examination  : — 


Diamagnetic  bodies. 

Bismuth. 

Antimony. 

Heavy  glass. 
Calcareous  spar. 
Statuary  marble. 
Phosphorus. 

Sulphur. 

Nitre. 

Wax. 


Magnetic  bodies. 

Penrhyn  slate. 

Caermarthen  slate. 

Slate  perpendicular  to  cleavage. 
Chloride  of  iron. 

Sulphate  of  iron. 

Carbonate  of  iron. 

Ferrocyanide  of  potassium. 
Oxide  of  iron, 

Iron  filings. 


Liquids. 

Distilled  water. 
Bisulphide  of  carbon. 


Liquids. 

Sulphate  of  iron. 
Muriate  of  nickel. 
Muriate  of  cobalt. 


Every  substance  in  each  of  these  lists  has  been  proved  to  be  polar  under  magnetic 
influence,  the  polarity  of  the  diamagnetic  bodies  being  invariably  opposed  to  that  of 
the  magnetic  ones. 

In  his  investigation  on  the  supposed  polarity  of  diamagnetic  bodies,  Mr.  Faraday 
made  use  of  a core  of  sixpenny  pieces,  and  obtained  with  it  the  results  he  sought. 
Wishing  to  add  the  testimony  of  silver  as  a good  conductor  to  that  of  copper,  two 
cylinders  were  formed  of  sixpenny  pieces,  covered  with  paper  and  submitted  to 
experiment.  The  following  are  the  results  obtained  : — 


XXVIII. 

Silver  cylinders  (sixpenny  pieces). 

Current  direct. 

Position  1.  724 

Position  2.  774 

Position  3,  804 

The  action  here  was  prompt  and  energetic,  strongly  contrasted  with  the  neutrality 
of  copper ; but  the  deflection  was  permanent,  and  could  not  therefore  be  the  result 
of  induced  currents.  Further,  it  was  a deflection  which  shows  magnetic  polarity, 
whereas  pure  silver  is  feebly  diamagnetic.  The  cylinders  were  removed  and  examined 
between  the  poles  of  an  electro-magnet ; they  proved  to  be  magnetic. 

On  observing  this  deportment  of  the  silver,  I tried  the  copper  cylinders  once  more. 
The  results  with  a direct  current  were, — 

XXIX. 

Position  1.  766 

Position  2.  767 

Position  3.  768 

Here  almost  the  same  neutrality  as  before  is  evidenced. 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


257 


Deeming  that  the  magnetism  of  the  cores  of  silver  was  due  to  magnetic  impurity 
attaching  itself  to  the  paper  which  covered  them,  a number  of  fourpenny  pieces  were 
procured,  washed  in  ammonia  and  water,  and  enclosed  in  thin  glass  tubes.  The  fol- 
lowing were  the  results  : — 

XXX. 

Silver  cylinders  (fourpenny  pieces). 

Current  direct. 

Position  1 . 490 

Position  2.  565 

Position  3.  660 

Here  also  we  have  a very  considerable  action  indicative  of  magnetic  polarity.  On 
examining  the  cylinders  between  the  poles  of  an  electro-magnet,  they  were  found 
decidedly  magnetic.  This,  therefore,  appears  to  be  the  common  character  of  our 
silver  coins.  The  tubes  which  contained  the  pieces  were  sensibly  neutral. 

Knowing  the  difficulty  of  demonstrating  the  existence  ot  diamagnetic  polarity  in 
ordinary  insulators,  M.  Matteucci  suggested  that  insulated  fragments  of  bismuth 
ought  to  be  employed,  the  insulation  being  effected  by  a coat  of  lac  or  resin.  I con- 
structed a pair  of  cylinders  in  accordance  with  the  suggestion  of  M.  Matteucci. 
The  following  are  the  results  they  yielded  with  a direct  current : — 


XXXI. 

Position  1.  730 

Position  2.  750 

Position  3.  768 

Here  we  have  a very  marked  action,  but  the  polarity  indicated  is  magnetic  polarity. 
On  subsequent  examination,  the  cylinders  proved  to  be  magnetic.  This  was  due  to 
impurities  attaching  themselves  to  the  resin. 

But  the  resin  may  be  done  away  with  and  the  powdered  metal  still  rendered  an 
insulator.  This  thought  was  suggested  to  me  by  an  experiment  of  Mr.  Faraday, 
which  I will  here  describe.  Referring  to  certain  effects  obtained  in  his  investiga- 
tions on  supposed  diamagnetic  polarity,  he  writes  thus  : — ‘‘  If  the  effect  were  produced 
by  induced  currents  in  the  mass,  division  of  the  mass  would  stop  these  currents,  and 
so  alter  the  effect;  whereas,  if  produced  by  a true  diamagnetic  polarity,  division  of 
the  mass  would  not  affect  the  polarity  seriously  or  in  its  essential  nature.  Some 
copper  filings  were  therefore  digested  for  a few  days  in  dilute  sulphuric  acid  to  remove 
any  adhering  iron,  then  well  washed  and  dried,  and  afterwards  warmed  and  stirred 
in  the  air,  until  it  was  seen  by  the  orange  colour  that  a very  thin  film  of  oxide  had 
formed  upon  them  ; they  were  finally  introduced  into  a glass  tube  and  employed  as 
a core.  It  produced  no  effect  whatever,  but  was  as  inactive  as  bismuth.”  (Exper. 
Resear.  2658.) 


258 


PROFESSOR  TYNDALL’S  FURTHER  RESEARCHES 


Now  when  bismuth  is  powdered  and  exposed  to  the  action  of  the  air,  it  very  soon 
becomes  tarnished,  even  without  heating.  A quantity  of  such  powder  was  prepared, 
and  its  conducting  power  for  electricity  tested.  The  clean  ends  of  two  copper  wires 
proceeding  from  a battery  of  Grove  were  immersed  in  the  powder;  but  though  the 
wires  were  brought  as  near  as  possible  to  each  other,  short  of  contact,  not  the  slight- 
est action  was  observed  upon  a galvanometer  placed  in  the  circuit.  When  the  wires 
touched,  the  needle  of  the  galvanometer  flew  violently  aside,  thus  proving  that  the 
current  was  there,  but  that  the  powder  was  unable  to  conduct  it.  Two  glass  tubes 
were  filled  with  the  powder  and  submitted  to  experiment.  The  following  results 
were  obtained  : — 

XXXII. 


Cylinders  of  Bismuth  Powder, 
length  3 inches, 
diameter  0‘7. 


Current  direct. 
Position  1 . 640 

Position  2.  625 

Position  3.  596 


Current  reversed. 

230 

245 

260 


These  deflections  are  the  same  in  kind  as  those  obtained  with  the  cylinders  of  massive 
bismuth.  This  experiment  responds  perfectly  to  the  conditions  proposed  by  Mr. 
Faraday.  We  have  here  no  cessation  of  action.  The  division  of  the  mass  does  not 
affect  the  result  seriously  or  in  its  essential  nature,  and  hence  the  deportment  ex- 
hibits the  characteristics  of ‘‘a  true  diamagnetic  polarity.” 

In  summing  up  the  results  of  his  inquiry  on  this  subject,  Mr.  Faraday  writes 
thus : — “ Finally,  I am  obliged  to  say  that  I can  find  no  experimental  evidence  to 
support  the  hypothetical  view  of  diamagnetic  polarity,  either  in  my  own  experi- 
ments, or  in  the  repetition  of  those  of  Weber,  Reich  and  others It  appears  to 

me  also,  that,  as  magnetic  polarity  conferred  by  iron  or  nickel  in  small  quantity,  . 
and  in  unfavourable  states,  is  far  moi’e  easily  indicated  by  its  effects  upon  an  astatic 
needle,  or  by  pointing  between  the  poles  of  a strong  horseshoe  magnet,  than  by  any 
such  arrangement  as  mine  or  Weber’s  or  Reich’s,  so  diamagnetic  polarity  would 
he  much  more  easily  distinguished  in  the  same  wayT  I was  struck,  on  reading  this 
passage,  to  find  how  accurately  the  surmise  has  been  fulfilled  by  the  instrument 
with  which  the  foregoing  experiments  were  made.  In  illustration  of  the  powers  of 
this  instrument,  as  compared  with  that  made  use  of  by  Mr.  Faraday,  I may  be  per- 
mitted to  quote  the  following  result  from  his  paper  on  supposed  diamagnetic  polarity, 
so  often  referred  to  : — “ A thin  glass  tube,  5^  inches  by  three-quarters  of  an  inch,  was 
filled  with  a saturated  solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron,  and  employed  as  an  experi- 
mental core;  the  velocity  given  to  the  machine  at  this  and  all  average  times  was 
such  as  to  cause  five  or  six  approaches  and  withdrawals  of  the  core  in  one  second  ; 


ON  THE  POLARITY  OF  THE  DIAMAGNETIC  FORCE. 


259 


yet  the  solution  produced  no  sensible  indication  on  the  galvanometer.”  Referring  to 
Table  XXV.,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  instrument  made  use  of  in  the  present  inquiry 
has  given  with  a solution  of  protosulphate  of  iron  a deflection  amounting  to  no  less 
than  one  hundred  divisions  of  the  scale.  Mr.  Faraday  proceeds: — “A  tube  filled 
with  small  crystals  of  protosulphate  of  iron  caused  the  needle  to  move  about  2°.  . . . 
Red  oxide  of  iron  produced  the  least  possible  effect.”  In  the  experiments  recorded 
in  the  foregoing  pages,  the  crystallized  sulphate  of  iron  gave  a deflection  of  nearly 
two  hundred  divisions  of  the  scale,  while  the  red  oxide  gave  a deflection  as  wide  as 
the  helices  would  permit,  which  corresponds  to  about  eight  hundred  divisions  of  the 
scale.  The  correctness  of  Mr.  Faraday’s  statement  regarding  the  inferiority  of  the 
means  first  devised  to  investigate  this  subject,  is  thus  strikingly  illustrated.  It  might 
be  added,  that  red  ferroprussiate  of  potash  and  other  substances,  which  have  given 
us  powerful  effects,  produced  no  sensible  impression  in  experiments  made  with  the 
other  instrument. 

Thus  have  we  seen  the  objections  raised  against  diamagnetic  polarity  fall  away 
one  by  one,  and  a body  of  evidence  accumulated  in  its  favour,  which  places  it  among 
the  most  firmly  established  truths  of  science.  This  I cannot  help  thinking  is  mainly 
to  be  attributed  to  the  bold  and  sincere  questioning  of  the  principle  when  it  seemed 
questionable.  The  cause  of  science  is  more  truly  served,  even  by  the  denial  of  what 
may  be  a truth,  than  by  the  indolent  acceptance  of  it  on  insufficient  grounds.  Such 
denials  drive  us  to  a deeper  communion  with  Nature,  and,  as  in  the  present  instance, 
compel  us  through  severe  and  laborious  inquiry  to  strive  after  certainty,  instead  of 
resting  satisfied,  as  we  are  prone  to  do,  with  mere  probable  conjecture. 

Royal  Institution^ 

November  1855. 


jCM 


V.  • A..:? ■Vr;v.:r  ^:<C,) 


:*y  y%v:'>^ 


til;!:!  A/  ■ : ^ 


‘ 4 ; V ri 


, ! ;■";  .,4M:#1'/: 4>  ;:c;:»a^ik^^Qlii’;Ki'l' 

.>i  , .';^.i-;;i.iAt^lir  ,4^tn':;''!4  V?,\.v‘  'A'' aA  ^ 4:,i^-, 

^■v/nr  da!4»  .;r-A7<44!lufev  -:■  ;-4f(!crr;x  a,.  4,. 


’ ' ‘ ) 'j  '»:(''  ijll  '’>' 


. ■ : :>iikj,  t:l;ji  :.";  .‘i^fov;;:-  v^' ' p:^/|)|i;^{jij:};u;4-;f!-  ^rj  4'  ^ ' . 

'I'ili'^!:..  . \^--ir:-'.4A^j;i'  h441V'  -i  :i4'j.!'ji':;:-V;i  yIi®  ' iP  ■ ' > 

■I.  ^.i:A!4:^..;^;4:rf^4.:r■  /;,V  .^yif,  A. 

■",'  ' .1 V :4-  ""  • ' ' '^  ;■  ■■' : ■ ■ ./.: ' 


"^H. 

Mi!.  4.'4-Ov.;.4'  ' 


[ 261  ] 


XII.  On  Axes  of  Elasticity  and  Crystalline  Forms. 

By  William  John  Macquorn  Ranking,  C.E.,  F.R.SS.  Lond.  and Edin. 

Received  June  15, — Read  June  21,  1855. 


1.  General  Definition  of  Axes  of  Elasticity. 

As  originally  understood,  the  term  ^‘Axes  of  Elasticity”  was  applied  to  the  inter- 
sections of  three  orthogonal  planes  at  a given  point  of  an  elastic  medium,  with  respect 
to  each  of  which  planes  the  molecular  actions  causing  elasticity  were  conceived  to  be 
symmetrical. 

If  the  elasticity  of  solids  arose  either  wholly  from  the  mutual  attractions  and  repul- 
sions of  centres  of  force,  such  attractions  and  repulsions  being  functions  of  the  mutual 
distances  of  those  centres,  or  partly  from  such  mutual  actions,  and  partly  from  an 
elasticity  like  that  of  a fluid,  resisting  change  of  volume  only,  it  is  easy  to  prove  that 
there  would  be  three  such  orthogonal  planes  of  symmetry  of  molecular  action  in  every 
homogeneous  solid. 

But  there  is  now  no  doubt  that  the  elastic  forces  in  solid  bodies  are  not  such  as 
can  be  analysed  into  fluid  elasticity  and  mutual  attractions  between  centres  simply; 
and  though  there  are,  as  will  presently  be  shown,  orthogonal  planes  of  symmetry  for 
certain  kinds  of  elastic  forces,  those  planes  are  not  necessarily  the  same  for  all  kinds 
of  elastic  forces  in  a given  solid. 

The  term  “Axes  of  Elasticity  f therefore,  may  now  be  taken  in  a more  extended 
sense,  to  signify  all  directions,  with  respect  to  which  certain  kinds  of  elastic  forces  are 
symmetrical ; or  speaking  algebraically,  directions  for  which  certain  functions  of  the 
coefficients  of  elasticity  are  null  or  infinite. 

The  theory  of  Axes  and  Coefficients  of  Elasticity  is  specially  connected  with 
that  branch  of  the  Calculus  of  Forms  which  relates  to  linear  transformations, 
and  which  has  recently  been  so  greatly  advanced  by  the  researches  of  Mr.  Syl- 
vester, Mr.  Cayley,  and  Mr.  Boole.  In  such  applications  of  that  Calculus  as 
occur  in  this  paper,  the  nomenclature  of  Mr.  Sylvester  is  followed*;  and  by  the 
adoption  of  the  “ Umbral  Notation"  of  that  author,  immense  advantages  are  gained 
in  conciseness  and  simplicity 

* See  Cambridge  and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal,  vol.  vii.;  and  Philosophical  Transactions,  1853, 
f See  the  Note  at  the  end  of  the  paper. 


2 M 


MDCCCLVI. 


262 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


2.  Strains,  Stresses,  Potential  Energy,  and  Coefficients  of  Elasticity. 


In  this  paper,  the  word  “Strain"  will  be  used  to  denote  the  change  of  volume  and 
figure  constituting  the  deviation  of  a molecule  of  a solid  from  that  condition  which 
it  preserves  when  free  from  the  action  of  external  forces  ; and  the  word  “Stress"  will 
be  used  to  denote  the  force,  or  combination  of  forces,  which  such  a molecule  exerts 
in  tending  to  recover  its  free  condition,  and  which,  for  a state  of  equilibrium,  is  equal 
and  opposite  to  the  combination  of  external  forces  applied  to  it. 

In  framing  a nomenclature  for  quantities  connected  with  the  theory  of  elasticity, 
OXixpic  is  adopted  to  denote  strain,  and  raaic  to  denote  stress. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  condition  of  strain  at  any  given  point  in  the  interior  of  a 
molecule  may  be  completely  expressed  by  means  of  the  following  six  elementary 
strains,  in  which  ri,  ^ are  the  components  of  the  molecular  displacement  parallel  to 
three  rectangular  axes  x,  y,  %. 

Elongations  . . . ^=a;  ^=/3i  ^=y; 


Distortions 


dy'dz  ’ dz'dx  dx'dy 


It  is  also  well  known  that  the  condition  of  stress  at  a given  point  may  be  com- 
pletely expressed,  relatively  to  the  three  rectangular  coordinate  planes,  by  means  of 
six  elementary  stresses,  viz. — 

Normal  Pressures  . . . P,,  Pg,  P3, 

Tangential  Pressures  . . Q,,  Qa,  Q3; 


these  quantities  being  estimated  in  units  of  force  per  unit  of  surface. 

Let  each  elementary  stress  be  integrated  with  respect  to  the  elementary  strain 
which  it  tends  directly  to  diminish, yrom  the  actual  amount  of  that  strain,  to  the  con- 
dition of  freedom  ; the  sum  of  the  integrals  is  the  Potential  Energy  of  Elasticity  of 
the  molecule  dxdydz,  expressed  in  units  of  work  per  unit  of  volume  ; viz. — 


^0  /*0  ^0 

U=l  P^r/jS-fi  Vfy 

«y  a ^ ^ %)  y 

To  ^0 

-f-j  Q3C?r. 

4//A  •Jv 


(!•) 


I'he  condition  that  the  function  U shall  have  the  same  value,  in  what  order  soever 
the  variations  of  the  different  elementary  strains  take  place,  amounts  to  supposing, 
that  no  transformation  of  energy  of  the  kind  well  distinguished  by  Professor  Thomson 
as  frictional  or  irreversible  takes  place  during  such  variations  ; in  other  words,  that 
the  substance  is  perfectly  elastic. 

Each  of  the  elementary  stresses  being  sensibly  a linear  function  of  the  six  elementary 
strains,  the  Potential  Energy  of  Elasticity  is,  as  Mr.  Green  first  showed,  a function 


ELASTICITV  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


263 


of  those  strains  of  the  second  degree,  having  twenty-one  constant  coefficients,  which 
are  the  coefficients  of  elasticity  of  the  body,  and  will  in  this  paper  be  called  the 
Tasmomic  Coefficients-,  that  is  to  say,  adopting  Mr.  Green’s  notation  for  such 
coefficients, — 


+ (/37)/3y+(7«)7“  +(a/3)a/3 
-}-(aX)a7  -i-{(5[M)(3iJj  + {yv)yv 

+ (7^)7^  (2.) 


From  a theorem  of  Mr.  Sylvester  it  follows,  that  every  such  function  as  U is 
reducible  by  linear  transformations  to  the  sum  of  six  positive  squares,  each  multiplied 
by  a coefficient.  The  nature  and  meaning  of  this  reduction  have  been  discussed  by 
Professor  William  Thomson. 

The  following  classification  of  the  Tasinomic  Coefficients  will  be  used  in  the 
sequel : — 


Designation  of  Coefficients. 


Orthotatic 


Euthytatic. 
Platytatic  . 
Goniotatic . 


Elasticities. 

D irect  or  Longitudinal  . 

Lateral 

Rigidities 


Symbols. 


(«^)  m (/) 

((3y)  (ya)  (a(3) 

(X^)  (f.^) 


Plagiotatic 


Unsymmetrical  . . . {^v),  &c.  &c. 


The  twenty-one  equations  of  transformation  by  which  the  values  of  these  coefficients, 
being  known  for  any  one  set  of  orthogonal  axes,  are  found  for  any  other,  are  founded 
on  the  following  principles. 

It  is  well  known,  that  for  rectangular  transformations,  the  operations 


d d d 
dx  dy  dz 

are  respectively  covariant  with 

X,  y,  %, 

from  which  it  is  easily  deduced,  that  because  the  displacements 


1,  n, 

are  respectively  covariant  with 

X,  y, 

therefore  the  elementary  strains. 

a, 

7: 

the  operations. 

d d 

d 

0 ^ 

0 ^ , 

To^  If 

d<y 

Zi—i 

d\ 

^diX 

2 M 2 


I 


264 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


and  the  strains 

P.,  P„  P3,  2Q.,  2Q„  2Q3 

iimst  be  respectively  covariant  with  the  squares  and  products, 

y"^,  z^,  2yz,  2zx,  2xy. 


3.  Thlipsimetric  and  Tasimetric  Surfaces  and  Invay'iants. 

Isotropic  functions  of  the  elementary  strains  and  stresses,  which  may  be  called 
respectively  Thlipsimetric  and  Tasimetric  Invariants,  are  easily  deduced  from  the 
principle,  that  the  strains  may  be  represented  by  the  coefficients  of  the  following 


Thlipsimetric  Surface, 

ax'^-\-^y^-{-yz’^-{-'kyz-\-y!jZX-\-vxy=.\, (3.) 

and  the  stresses  by  the  coefficients  of  the  Tasimetric  Surface, 

^f-{-V^y‘^-\-V^z‘^-{-2Q.,yz-\-2Q.,zx-\-2Q.^xy=\ (4.) 


These  surfaces,  and  others  deduced  from  them,  have  been  fully  discussed  by 
M.  Cauchy  and  M.  Lame. 

The  invariants  in  question  may  all  be  deduced  from  the  following  pair  of  contra- 
gredient  matrices ; — 


For  Strains. 

“22 


For  Stresses. 

P,  Qs 


2 


Qs  P2  Qi  V (5  A.) 


Qs  Q.  Ps 


The  following  are  the  primitive  thlipsimetric  invariants,  from  which  an  indefinite 
number  of  others  may  be  deduced  by  involution,  multiplication,  addition,  and  sub- 
traction : — 

a+/3+y=^i  (the  cubic  dilatation) ; 


-f  705  + ap — i H- -f  y")  = ^2 ; 

— i = ^s- 


(6.) 


The  Potential  Energy  U is  what  Mr.  Sylvester  calls  a “ Universal  Mixed  Con- 
comitant,” its  value  being 

U=  — KPia+Ps/S-l-  Pay-j-Qi^t-J-Qsi^+Qs*') (7-) 


4.  Tasinomic  Functions,  Surfaces,  and  Umhrce. 

If,  in  any  isotropic  function  of  the  coordinates  and  the  elementary  strains,  there 
be  substituted  for  each  square  or  product  of  elementary  strains,  that  Tasinomic 
Coefficient  which  is  covariant  with  it,  the  result  will  be  an  Isotropic  Function  of  the 
Coordinates  and  Tasinomic  Coefficients,  called  a Tasinomic  Function. 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


265 


The  following  Table  of  Covariants  is  readily  deduced  from  the  principles  stated  at 
the  end  of  § 2 : — 


("Squares  of  Strains  . 
Covariant< 

[Tasinomic  Coefficients  (cd), 

Mf), 

4f)  ; 

[Products  of  Strains  . 
Covariant<! 

ya, 

a/3, 

^v, 

vk. 

X^, 

[Tasinomic  Coefficients  (f3y), 

(7^), 

(u(3), 

4(p), 

A{vk), 

4(Xia-), 

ock,  ccfJij,  av,  /3X, 

/3^, 

j3u. 

7X, 

7(^, 

yp. 

2(a?i),  2(a^),  2{av),  2((3X),  2(/3^),  2(^v),  2(yX),  2(7^),  2{yv). ^ 

Each  Tasinomic  Function  being  equated  to  a constant,  forms  the  equation  of  a 
Tasinomic  Surface-,  and  on  the  geometrical  properties  of  such  surfaces  depend  many 
of  the  laws  of  coefficients  and  Axes  of  Elasticity. 

A convenient  and  expeditious  mode  of  forming  Tasinomic  Functions  is  obtained 
by  the  aid  of  an  Umhral  Notation  analogous  to  that  introduced  by  Mr.  Sylvester 
in  the  Calculus  of  Forms. 

Let  each  Tasinomic  Coefficient  be  regarded  as  compounded  of  two  Tasinomic 
Umbras,  those  umbrae  being  expressed  by  the  following  notation  : 

(«),  ((3),  W),  if),  (f,  (v) ; 

then  the  following  equation,  deduced  from  that  of  the  Thlipsimetric  Surface  (3),  by 
substituting  umbrae  for  elementary  strains  according  to  the  following  Table  of 
Covariance, 

Strains  ..  a,  (3,  7,  X,  v, 

Umbrae  . . (a),  (/3),  (7),  2(X),  2{f),  2{v), 

is  the  equation  of  the  Tasinomic  Umhral  Ellipsoid,  from  which,  by  elimination,  mul- 
tiplication, involution,  addition,  subtraction,  and  differentiation,  various  Tasinomic 
Functions  may  be  deduced, 

{u)x^f{^)y^-\-{y)z^-^2{X)yz-{-2{f)zx-\-2{v)xy={(p)  = \ (8  a.) 


5.  Tasinomic  Invariants  and  Spheres. 

Tasinomic  Invariants  are  constant  Isotropic  functions  of  the  Tasinomic  Coefficients, 
which  are  deduced,  either  by  substitution  from  Thlipsimetric  Invariants,  or  directly 
from  the  Umhral  Matrix, 


{dc)  (v)  (im)' 

(*')  m f)  > 

(f  (X)  (7) 


(9.) 


The  following  invariant  is  umbral  of  the  first  order: — 

(^2  ^2  ^2\ 

• ('P)  = (“)  + ((3)  + (y)  = (<’.) 


(9n.) 


266 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OP 


Invariants  of  the  second  order  in  Umbrce  are  real  quantities  of  the  first  order,  viz. — 
(a^)  +(7^)  +2(|37)+2(705)+2(o5|3)  = (^i)^  (the  cubic  elasticity) 

m+(7C‘)+w-  w-  (f*’)-  (■’’)  =(« 

(e)  +(,3>)  +(7»)  +2(X’)  +2W  +2(.*)  =(0,)=-2(4) (10.) 

The  equation  of  a Tasinomic  Sp]iere\8  formed  by  multiplying  aTasinomie  Invariant  by 

or  any  power  of  that  quantity,  and  equating  the  result  to  a constant. 

6.  Of  Two  Tasinomic  Ellipsoids,  and  their  Axes,  Orthotatic  and  Heterotatic. 

The  equations  of  two  Ellipsoids  with  tasinomic  coefficients  are  derived  from  that 
of  the  Umbral  Ellipsoid  (8a.),  in  one  case,  by  multiplying  each  term  by  the  Umbral 
Invariant  (^J,  and  in  the  other,  by  substituting  for  each  Umbra  in  the  function  {<p), 
the  contravariant  component  of  the  Inverse  to  the  Umbral  Matrix  (9.).  The  results 
are  as  follows  : — 

Orthotatic  Ellipsoid. 

(^1)  X (?>)  = { (a"*)  + (cc^)  + (7a) } { ((3^)  + ((3y)  + (705) 

+ { (7^)  + (7“)  + 

+ 2 { ( a7)  + (^7)  + (yX)  + 2 { (a^)  + (^^)  + (7^) } 20? + 2 { (ar)  + ((3p)  -\-{yv)]xy=\.  (11.) 

« 

Heterotatic  Ellipsoid. 

{ (M  — (7«)  - (f)  }f+  { W — f) } 

-i-2{(fiv)  — (ccX)}yz+2{(vX)  — ((3f/.)}zr-l-2{(Xfo)—(y!^)}ry=l.  . . (12.) 

The  three  Orthotatic  Axes  are  three  rectangular  directions  for  which  the  following 
sums  of  Plagiotatic  Coefficients  are  null : — 

(aX)  + (^X)  + (77)  = 0 ; (a^) -f  (/3/a)  + (7//,)  = 0 ; (av)  + (/3j/)  + (7v)=0.  . (13.) 

It  w^as  proved  by  Mr.  Haughton,  in  a paper  published  in  the  Transaetions  of  the 
Royal  Irish  Academy,  vol.  iii.  part  2,  that  there  are  three  rectangular  directions 
having  this  property  in  a solid  whose  elasticity  arises  solely  from  the  mutual  actions 
of  physical  points,  and  which  has  but  fifteen  independent  coefficients  of  elasticity. 
The  present  investigation  shows  that  there  are  three  such  axes  at  each  point  of 
every  solid,  independently  of  all  hypothesis.  The  physical  meaning  of  this  result  is 
expressed  by  the  following 

Theorem  as  to  Orthotatic  Axes. 

At  each  point  of  an  elastic  solid,  there  is  one  position  in  which  a cubical  molecule  may 
be  cut  out,  such,  that  a uniform  dilatation  or  condensation  of  that  molecule  by  equal 
elongations  or  equal  compressions  of  its  three  dimensions,  shall  produce  no  tangential 
stress  on  the  faces  of  the  molecule. 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


267 


The  properties  of  ihQ  Heterotatic  Axes  are  expressed  by  the  following  equations  : — 

(p)  — (a>i)  = 0;  ({'X)  — (/3^)  = 0 ; — (yv)  = 0 ; . . . . (14.) 

or  by  the  following 

Theorem  as  to  Heterotatic  Axes. 

At  each  point  of  an  elastic  solid,  there  is  one  position  in  which  a cubical  molecule  map 
be  cut  out,  such,  that  if  there  be  a distortion  of  that  molecule  round  x (x  being  any  one 
of  its  three  axes)  and  an  equal  distortion  round  y (y  being  either  of  its  other  two  axes), 
the  normal  stress  on  the  faces  normal  to  x arising  from  the  distortion  round  x,  shall  be 
equal  to  the  tangential  stress  round  z arising  from  the  distortion  round  y. 

The  six  coefficients  of  the  Heterotatic  Ellipsoid  may  be  called  the  Heterotatic  Dif- 
ferences. For  a solid  whose  elasticity  is  wholly  due  to  the  mutual  attractions  and 
repulsions  of  physical  points,  each  of  those  differenees  is  necessarily  null ; therefore 
they  represent  a part  of  the  elasticity  which  is  necessarily  irreducible  to  sueh  attrac- 
tions and  repulsions.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  part  at  least  of  the  elasticity  of 
every  substance  is  of  this  hind. 

If  this  part  of  the  elastieity  of  a solid  be,  as  suggested  in  a series  of  papers  in  the 
Cambridge  and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal  for  1851-52,  a species  of  fluid  elasti- 
city, resisting  change  of  volume  only,  the  solid  may  be  said  to  he  Heterotatically  Iso- 
tropic. The  equations  (14.)  will  be  fulfilled  for  all  directions  of  axes,  and  also  the 
following  equations : — 

— = — = — (15.) 

that  is  to  say,  the  excess  of  the  Platytatic  above  the  Goniotatic  Coefficient  will  be 
the  same  in  every  plane. 

In  a substance  Orthotatically  Isotropic,  the  equations  (13.)  are  fulfilled  for  all  direc- 
tions, and  also  the  following : — 


(a')  + («(3)-i-(ya)  = ((3")-f  (/3y)-i~(a(3)  = (/)-j-(ya)  + ((3y),  . . . (16.) 


that  is  to  say,  a uniform  compression  in  all  directions  produces  a uniform  normal 
stress  in  all  directions,  and  no  tangential  stress. 

The  equations  (16.)  may  be  reduced  to  the  following  form  : — 

(«^)  - (^y)  = ((3^)  - (y«)  = (/)  - (u(3) (17.) 

In  a substance  which  is  at  once  Orthotatically  and  Heterotatically  isotropic,  there 
may  still  be  eleven  independent  quantities  amongst  the  tasinomic  coefficients,  viz. — 


Three  Euthytatie  Coefficients, 
The  isotropic  excess . . . . 
The  isotropie  exeess . . . . 
Six  Plagiotatic  Coefficients 


(«^),  (^^),  (/),  1 

(«^)-(/3y),  ! 

m-if),  f 

(/3X),  (yX),  {yfj,  {af),  {av),  (/3r)J 


Such  a substance  may  therefore  be  far  from  being  completely  isotropic  with  respect 
to  elasticity. 


268 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


7.  Biquadratic  Tasinomic  Surface.  Homotatic  Coefficients.  Euthytatic  Axes  defined. 

If  the  equation  (8a.)  of  the  Urnbral  Ellipsoid  be  squared,  there  is  obtained  the  fol- 
lowing equation  of  a Biquadratic  Tasinomic  Surface : — 

+ 2 { (/3y)  -f  2 + 2 { (ya) + 2 V-f  2 { (a/3)  -f  2 (v") } xffi 

-{-4{2((Mi>)-{-(aX)}x^yz-{-4{2(vX)-i-((3[J.)}xy^z-jr4{2{'k[/.)-\-{yv)}xyz'^ 
-\-4{(5X)y^z-y4('yX)yz^-\-4{'y(jj)z^x-y4{a(j!j)zx^-y4{av)x^y-y4{(3v)xy^=].  . (19.) 

The  fifteen  coefficients  of  this  surface  (which  will  be  called  the  Homotatic  Coeffi- 
cients) are  covariant  respectively  with  the  fifteen  biquadratic  powers  and  products 
of  the  coordinates,  with  proper  numerical  factors. 

It  is  obvious,  that  when  the  fifteen  Homotatic  Coefficients,  and  the  six  Heterotatic 
Differences,  are  known  for  any  set  of  Orthogonal  Axes,  the  twenty-one  tasinomic 
coefficients  are  completely  determined. 

Mr.  Haughton,  in  the  paper  previously  referred  to,  discovered  the  biquadratic  sur- 
face for  a solid  constituted  of  centres  of  force.  It  is  here  shown  to  exist  for  all  solids, 
independently  of  hypotheses. 

Those  diameters  of  the  Biquadratic  Surface  which  are  normal  to  that  surface,  are 
axes  of  maximum  and  minimum  direct  elasticity,  and  have  also  this  property,  that 
a direct  elongation  along  one  of  them  produces,  on  a plane  perpendicular  to  it,  a 
normal  stress,  and  no  tangential  stress  ; so  that  they  may  be  called  Euthytatic  Axes. 
Though  such  axes  sometimes  form  Orthogonal  Systems,  their  complete  investiga- 
tion requires  the  use  of  oblique  coordinates,  and  is  therefore  deferred  till  after  the 
eighteenth  section  of  this  paper,  which  relates  to  such  coordinates. 

8.  Orthogonal  Axes  of  the  Biquadratic  Surface.  Metatatic  Axes,  Orthogonal 

and  Diagonal. 

By  rectangular  linear  transformations,  it  is  always  possible  to  make  three  of  the 
terms  with  odd  exponents,  or  three  functions  of  such  terms,  vanish  from  the  equation 
of  the  Biquadratic  Surface.  Thus  are  ascertained  sets  of  Orthogonal  Axes  having 
special  properties. 

To  exemplify  this,  let  the  rectangular  transformation  be  such  as  to  make  the  fol- 
lowing functions  vanish : — 

{ (PO  — W ) cy — ; { {yf)  — (“^) } {z^  — x^)zx  ; { (av)  - {(5i>) } {x^—y’^)xy. 

A cubical  molecule  having  its  faces  normal  to  the  axes  fulfilling  this  condition  has 
the  following  property: — if  there  he  a linear  elongation  along  y,  and  an  equal  linear 
compression  along  z (or  vice  versd),  no  tangential  stress  will  result  round  x on  planes 
normal  to  y and  z ; and  similarly  of  other  pairs  of  axes. 

This  set  of  axes  may  be  called  the  Orthogonal  or  Principal  Metatatic  Axes,  and 
their  planes,  Metatatic  Planes. 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


269 


Let  the  suffix  1 designate  coordinates  and  coefficients  referred  to  these  axes.  Let 
Oy,  be  any  new  pair  of  orthogonal  axes  in  the  plane  y^z^.  Then  since  ((3X)  — ('yX) 
is  covariant  with  {y'^  — z^)yz,  it  follows  that 

(3\)-(yX)={2(P7).+4OT,-((3’),-(/).}.5i^^  ....  (20.) 

(where  (y=  <y,Oy), 

a quantity  which  is  =0  for  all  values  of  which  are  multiples  of  45°.  There  are  of 
course  similar  equations  for  the  other  metatatic  planes.  Hence  it  appears  that  in  each 
of  the  three  Metatatic  Planes  there  is  a pair  of  Diagonal  Metatatic  Axes,  bisecting  the 
right  angles  formed  by  the  Principal  Metatatic  Axes. 

Each  pair  of  diagonal  axes  is  metatatic  for  that  plane  only  in  which  it  is  situated. 

Thus  there  are  in  all  nine  metatatic  axes,  three  orthogonal  axes,  and  three  pairs  of 
diagonal  axes.  The  diagonal  axes  are  normal  to  the  faces  of  a regular  rhombic  dode- 
cahedron. 

Let  Oy,  Oz  be  a pair  of  rectangular  axes  in  any  plane  whatsoever ; Oy’ , 0;s'  any 
other  pair  of  rectangular  axes  in  the  same  plane ; and  let 

<yOy’=cJ ; 

then 

Cl  p AfjJ 

(/3?.)'-(yXy=:{2(/3y)-h4(X^)-(/3^)-(/)}^-+{(/3X)-(yX)}cos4^',  . (21.) 

a quantity  which  is  null  for  eight  values  of  cJ,  differing  from  each  other  by  multiples 
of  45°.  Hence,  in  each  plane  in  an  elastic  solid,  there  is  a system  of  two  pairs  of  axes 
metatatic  for  that  plane  and  forming  with  each  other  eight  equal  angles  of  45°. 

In  equation  (21.),  make 

(3X)'-(yX)'=(3^),-(y>.).=0; 
then  from  equations  (20.)  and  (21.),  it  is  easily  seen  that 

2(f3y)  + 4(X")  — (^")  — (y")  = {2(^7).-f4(X")i— (/3"),— (/),}.cos4^.  . . (22.) 

The  trigonometrical  factor  cos  4iy  is  -f-l  for  all  values  of  a;  which  are  even  mul- 
tiples of  45°,  —1  for  all  odd  multiples  of  45°,  and  =0  for  all  odd  multiples  of  22^°. 
Hence,  in  every  plane  in  an  elastic  solid,  the  quantity  (22.),  which  may  be  called  the 
Metatatic  Difference,  is  a maximum  for  one  of  the  two  pairs  of  Metatatic  Axes,  a 
minimum  of  equal  amount  and  negative  sign  for  the  other,  and  null  for  the  eight 
intermediate  directions. 

9.  Of  Metatatic  Isotropy. 

A solid  is  Metatatically  Isotropic,  when  if  a cubical  molecule,  cut  out  in  any  position 
whatsoever,  undergo  simultaneously  an  elongation  along  one  axis,  and  an  equal  and 
opposite  linear  compression  along  another  axis,  no  tangential  stress  will  result  on  the 
faces  of  that  molecule. 

2 N 


MDCCCLVI. 


270 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


For  such  a substance,  the  metatatic  differences  must  be  null  for  all  sets  of  axes,  viz. — 

2(i3y)+4(X^)-(/3^)-(/)=0;- 

2(ya)+4(^")  — (y")-(a")=0;  > (23.) 

2(a/3)+4(i/")  —(«")—(, S")  = 0. 


In  a paper  in  the  Cambridge  and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal,  vol.  vi.,  this  theo- 
rem was  alleged  of  all  Homogeneous  solids,  it  having  been,  in  fact,  tacitly  taken  for 
granted,  that  Homogeneity  involves  Metatatic  Isotropy,  as  above  defined. 


10.  Of  Orthotatic  Symmetry. 

If  it  be  taken  for  granted  that  symmetrical  action  with  respect  to  a certain  set  of 
axes,  between  the  parts  of  a body  under  one  kind  of  strain,  involves  symmetrical 
action  with  respect  to  the  same  axes  under  all  kinds  of  strains,  then  one  and  the 
same  set  of  orthogonal  axes  will  be  at  once  Orthotatic,  Heterotatic,  Metatatic,  and 
Euthytatic,  and  for  them  the  whole  twelve  plagiotatic  coefficients  will  vanish  at  onee, 
and  the  independent  tasinomic  coefficients  be  reduced  to  the  nine  Orthotatic  Coeffi- 
cients enumerated  in  Article  2.  As  long  as  the  rigidity  of  solid  bodies  was  ascribed 
wholly  to  mutual  attractions  and  repulsions  between  centres  of  force,  it  is  difficult  to 
see  how,  with  respect  to  homogeneous  substances,  the  above  assumption  could  be 
avoided.  It  is  probable  that  there  exist  substances  for  which  it  is  true.  Such  sub- 
stances may  be  said  to  be  OrtJiotatically  Symmetrical. 

Orthotatic  Symmetry  requires  that  the  equation  (19.)  of  the  Biquadratic  surface 
should  be  reducible  by  rectangular  transformations  to  its  first  six  terms,  and  that  the 
axes  so  found  should  also  be  those  of  tlie  Heterotatic  Ellipsoid.  The  conditions 
which  must  be  fulfilled  in  order  that  a Biquadratic  function  of  three  variables  may  be 
reducible  by  rectangular  transformations  to  its  first  six  terms,  have  been  investigated 
by  Mr.  Boole*. 

1 1 . Of  Cyhotatic  Symmetry. 

Let  a substance  be  conceived  which  is  not  only  Orthotatically  Symmetrical,  but 
for  which  the  three  kinds  of  Orthotatic  Coefficients  are  equal  for  the  three  orthotatic 
axes,  viz. — 

(«')  = (/3')  = (r')  ; (l3y)  = (ya)  = (af3)  ; = — . . . (24.) 

Then  for  such  a substance  the  Metatatic  Difference  may  be  expressed  by 

2(/37)-1-4(X^)-2(«^); (25.) 

and  if  the  body  be  not  Metatatically  Isotropic,  this  difference  will  have  equal  maxima 
and  minima  for  the  three  Orthogonal  Axes,  normal  to  the  faces  of  a cube,  and  con- 
versely, equal  minima  or  maxima  for  the  six  diagonal  axes,  normal  to  the  faces  of 
a regular  rhombic  dodecahedron. 


• Cambridge  and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal,  vol.  vi. 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


271 


Symmetry  of  this  kind  may  be  called  Cijhotatic,  from  its  analogy  to  that  of  crystals 
of  the  Tessiilar  System. 

12.  Of  Pantatic  Isotropy. 

When  a body  fulfils  the  conditions  of  Cybotatic  Symmetry,  and  at  the  same  time 
those  of  Metatatic  Isotropy,  it  is  completely  isotropic  with  respect  to  Elasticity,  or 
Pantatically  Isotropic.  It  has  but  three  tasinomic  coefficients,  viz.  tlie  Euthytatic, 
Platytatic,  and  Goniotatic  coefficients,  which  are  equal  for  all  sets  of  axes,  and  are 
connected  by  the  following  equation,  expressing  the  condition  of  Metatatic  Isotropy: 

■ («^)  = (^y)  + 2(?.^) (26.) 

The  properties  of  such  bodies  have  been  fully  investigated  by  various  authors. 


13.  Of  Thlipsinomic  Coefficients. 

If  the  six  elementary  strains  a,  &c.  at  a given  point  in  an  elastic  solid,  be  expressed 
as  linear  functions  of  the  six  elementary  stresses  Pj,  &c.,  these  expressions  will  con- 
tain twenty-one  coefficients  of  compressibility,  extensibility,  and  pliability,  which  are 
the  second  differential  coefficients  of  the  potential  energy  of  elasticity  with  respect  to 
the  six  elementary  stresses  ; that  energy  being  represented  as  follows  : — 


u=K)f+w5+(c*)-|2+(/‘')-f+wf+('''')f 


-}-  {hc)V^V^-{-  (ca)P3Pi-l-(«&)PiP2+  (w.w)Q2Q3-1-  (n/)Q3Qi-I-  (/m)Q,Q2 
-\-{{al)  Pi-l-(^/)  P2+(c/)  PsiQi 
-h  { (am)  P, -f  ( 6m)  P2-I- ( cm)  Pg } Q2 

+ {(««)  Pi+(M  ^2-\-{cn)  PsiQa (27.) 

The  twenty-one  coefficients  in  the  above  equation  may  be  comprehended  under  the 
general  term  Thlipsinomic,  and  classified  as  follows  : — 


Designations  of  Coefficients. 


Orthothliptic^ 


Euthythliptic 

Platythliptic 

Goniothliptic 


Plagiothliptic 


Properties  expressed  by  them. 

Longitudinal  Extensibilities 
Lateral  Extensibilities  . . 

Pliabilities 

Unsymmetrical  Pliabilities  . 


Symbols. 

{a?),  {P), 

ic% 

{he). 

(ca). 

{ah). 

{1% 

(m"). 

{n^). 

{mn),  &c.  &c. 

14.  Of  Thlipsinomic  Transformations,  Umhrce,  Surfaces,  and  Invariants. 

The  equations  of  transformation  of  the  Thlipsinomic  Coefficients  are  easily  deduced 
from  the  principle,  that  the  operations 

d d d d d d 


are  respectively  covariant  with 


d?^  dV^  dV^  dQ^  dQ^  dQ.^ 

l\,  P3,  2Q.,  2Q.„  2Q3, 


and  these  with 


y\ 


s’,  "^yz,  2zx,  '2xy. 

2 N 2 


272 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


We  may  regard  the  Thlipsinomic  Coefficients,  like  the  Tasinomic  Coefficients,  as 
binary  compounds  of  the  following  six  Umbrae, 

(a),  (b),  (c),  (/),  (m),  (n), 

which  being  respectively  substituted  for 

P„  P^,  P3,  2Q„  2Q„  2Q3 


in  the  equation  of  the  Tasimetric  Surface  (4.),  produce  the  following  equation  of  the 
Umbral  Thlipsinomic  Ellipsoid, 

{m)zx-^{nt)xy=\, (28.) 

from  which,  by  involution,  multiplication,  and  other  operations  exactly  analogous  to 
those  performed  on  the  Umbral  Tasinomic  Ellipsoid,  there  may  be  deduced  the 
equations  of  Thlipsinomic  Surfaces  exactly  corresponding  to  the  Tasinomic  Surfaces 
already  described;  while,  from  the  Umbral  Matrix, 


(«)  i(m) 

m (b)  \{l) 


(29.) 


l{m)  !(/)  (c)  J 

may  be  formed  Thlipsinomic  Invariants  corresponding  to  the  Tasinomic  Invariants. 

Hence  it  appears,  that  every  function  of  the  Tasinomic  Coefficients  is  converted  into 
a function  of  the  Thlipsinomic  Coefficients  with  analogous  properties,  by  the  substi- 
tution of  Thlipsinomic  for  Tasinomic  Umbrae  according  to  the  following  table  : — 


Tasinomic  Umbrae (a),  (j3),  (y),  (X),  {(ju),  (v), 

Thlipsinomic  Umbrae  ....  (a),  (b),  (c),  \{l),  \{m),  ^(n). 

Amongst  the  Thlipsinomic  Invariants  may  be  distinguished  the  Cubic  Compressibility, 
which  is  formed  by  squaring  the  umbral  invariant  (a)-|-(6)-|-(c),  and  has  the  follow- 
ing value : 

(a") -f  ( 6-) -1- (c") -h  2 ( 6c) -b  2 (ca) -f- 2 (a &) . 


15.  Thlipsinomic  and  Tasinomic  Contragredient  Systems. 

Let  the  following  square  matrices  be  formed  with  the  Tasinomic  and  Thlipsinomic 
Coefficients  respectively : — 


(a[3) 

(ya) 

{aX) 

(av) 

(a^) 

(ab) 

(ca) 

(al) 

(am) 

(an) 

(«^) 

m 

CM 

{(5X) 

((Bv) 

{ah) 

(be) 

(bl) 

(bm) 

(bn) 

(y«) 

(M 

(f) 

(yX) 

ivy') 

(yv) 

(ca) 

(be) 

(cl) 

(cm) 

(cn) 

(aX) 

m 

(yX) 

(¥) 

{vX) 

(al) 

(bl) 

(cl) 

cn 

(Im) 

(nl) 

(a/x) 

Cry^) 

(/^^) 

(y.u) 

(am) 

(bm) 

(cm) 

(Im) 

(m^) 

(mn) 

{yi>) 

((XV) 

f) 

(an) 

(bn) 

(cn) 

(nl) 

(mn) 

Then  will  these  matrices  be  mutually  the  two  systems  of  coefficients  arrayed 

in  them,  with  their  respective  systems  of  functions,  mutually  contragredient,  and 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


273 


each  coefficient  or  function  belonging  to  one  system  contravariant  to  the  correspond- 
ing coefficient  or  function  belonging  to  the  other  system. 

The  values  of  the  coefficients  in  either  of  those  matrices  are  expressed  in  terms  of 
those  in  the  other  matrix,  in  Mr.  Sylvester’s  umbral  notation,  by  twenty-one  equa- 
tions, of  which  the  following  are  examples : — 


(«^)  = 


{ah)  = 


O), 

(i3), 

(/3), 

(a)j 


(y). 

(y)> 

(y)j 

(y)^ 

({^)> 

(/3), 

(7), 

w, 

(f^)>  w 

• 

(a), 

(/3), 

(y)> 

w, 

(0 

9 

(“)j 

0), 

(7), 

w, 

({^)>  w 

r 

((3), 

(y)j 

w. 

(f^),  (*') 

9 

(32.) 


16.  Of  Thlipsinomic  Axes. 


If,  under  given  conditions,  any  symmetrical  system  or  function  of  the  constituents 
of  one  of  the  above  matrices  be  null,  then  under  the  same  conditions  will  the  contra- 
variant system  or  function  of  the  constituents  of  the  inverse  matrix  be  null  or  infinite. 
Therefore  Systems  of  Thlipsinomic  Axes  coincide  with  the  corresponding  systems  of 
Tasinomic  Axes. 


17.  Platythliptic  Coefficients  are  negative. 


It  may  be  observed  as  a matter  of  fact,  that  in  consequence  of  the  largeness  of 
the  Euthytatic  Coefficients  (a^),  iffi),  (ffi),  as  compared  with  the  other  Tasinomic 
Coefficients,  the  Platythliptic  Coefficients  (^c),  (ca),  {ah')  are  generally,  if  not  always, 
negative. 

To  illustrate  this,  the  case  of  Pantatic  Isotropy  may  be  taken,  for  which  the  two 
matrices  have  the  following  forms : — 


(a^) 

'(M 

(M 

0 

0 

0 

(a^) 

(he) 

{he) 

0 

0 

0 ■ 

(M 

(«^) 

0 

0 

0 

(he) 

{a^) 

{he) 

0 

0 

0 

(M 

(M 

(«^) 

0 

0 

0 

{he) 

{he) 

{a^) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

(n 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

(x^) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

in 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

(X^) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

in . 

from  which  it  is  easily  seen 
value : 


that  the  sole  Platythliptic  coefficient  has  the  following 

— (/3r)  


{he): 


•(aT+(«")(/3y)-2(/3y)^ 


(33a.) 


The  denominator  of  this  fraction  is  always  positive  so  long  as  {od)  exceeds  (j3y) ; a 
condition  invariably  fulfilled  by  solid  bodies,  and,  in  fact,  necessary  to  their  exist- 


ence. 


974 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


1 8.  Of  Oblique  Coordinates  and  Contraordinates. 

As  there  are,  in  the  relations  between  two  systems  of  oblique  coordinates,  or 
between  a system  of  oblique  coordinates  and  a system  of  rectangular  coordinates, 
six  independent  constants  of  transformation,  it  is  possible,  by  referring  the  equation 
of  the  Biquadratic  Surface  (19.)  to  Oblique  Coordinates,  to  make  the  six  terms  vanish 
which  contain  the  cubes  of  the  coordinates. 

The  conception  of  the  physical  meaning  of  such  a transformation  is  much  facili- 
tated by  the  employment  of  a system  of  three  auxiliary  variables,  which  will  be  desig- 
nated as  Contraordinates. 

The  relations  between  coordinates  and  contraordinates  are  as  follows : — 

Through  an  origin  O let  any  three  axes  pass,  right  or  oblique.  Let  R be  any  point, 

and  let  Tvd 

UK=r„ 

Through  R draw  three  planes,  parallel  respectively  to  the  three  coordinate  planes, 
and  intersecting  the  axes  respectively  in  the  points  X,  Y,  Z.  Also,  on  OR,  as  a dia- 
meter, describe  a sphere,  intersecting  the  axes  respectively  in  U,  V,  W.  Then  will 

OX=^,  0Y=3/,  OZ=z 
be  the  coordinates  of  R,  as  usual,  and 

OU=?^,  OV=^;,  OW=m; 

its  contraordinates,  being,  in  fact,  the  projections  of  OR  on  the  three  axes. 

For  rectangular  axes,  coordinates  and  contraordinates  are  identical. 

Coordinates  and  Contraordinates  are  connected  by  the  following  equation  : — 

r^=ux-\-vy  -{-wz (34.) 

In  the  language  of  Mr.  Sylvester,  a system  of  Coordinates  and  the  concomitant 
system  of  Contraordinates  are  mutually  Contragredient ; and  the  square  of  the  radius- 
vector  is  their  universal  mixed  concomitant. 

Let  the  cosines  of  the  angles  made  by  the  axes  with  each  other  be  denoted  as 
follows:  coS3/Oa=Cj ; cos20a?  = C2i  cos.rOy  = C3; 

then  the  contraordinates  of  a given  point  are  the  following  functions  of  the  coordi- 
nates : — 


Also  let 


U—X  d-Cgl/d-CaZ 
v=c^x-\-y  -{-c,z 
iv~C2X-\-Ciy-\-z 


(35.) 


1 1 

C3,  1 , 


= l — c‘l—cl—cl-^2c,c^c,=C ; ' 


2 — 

1 —h  . 

c “ 


1 — 


c 


c 

Cci  ”” 


S'-} 


c 


=h 


1-cl 

c 

Cq  CjCg 


— he. 


C 


= ka 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


275 


then  the  coordinates  are  the  following  linear  functions  of  the  contraordinates : — 


Also, 


x-=.  h{u — 

y= — \ L . . 

z=  —k.2U—h{v-\-h^w. 

r^z=zx^-\-y^-\-z^-\-2c^yz-\-2c2Zx-{-2c^xy  . . 

= A,  — 2Ti{vw — 2h^wu — 2k  ^uv. 


(36.) 

(37.) 

(37a.) 


Differentiations  with  respect  to  the  contraordinates  are  obviously  covariant  with 
the  coordinates,  and  vice  versd ; that  is  to  say. 


the  operations 

are  respectively  co- 
variant with 


d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

dx’ 

dy 

dz^ 

du’ 

dv 

dw 

u. 

V, 

w, 

X, 

y. 

z. 

(38.) 


By  making  substitutions  according  to  the  above  law  of  covariance  in  the  equations 
(34.),  (37.),  (37a.),  three  equivalent  symbols  of  operation  are  obtained,  which,  being 
applied  to  isotropic  functions  of  the  second  degree,  produce  invariants  of  the  first 
degree. 


19.  Of  Molecular  Displacements  and  Strains  as  referred  to  Oblique  Axes. 


If  the  displacement  of  a particle  from  its  free  position  be  resolved  into  three  com- 
ponents, I,  7i,  parallel  respectively  to  three  oblique  axes,  Oj?,  Oy,  O2,  those  com- 
ponents are  evidently  covariant  respectively  with  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z. 

It  is  now  necessary  to  find  a method  of  expressing  the  strain  at  any  particle  in  an 
elastic  solid  by  a system  of  six  elementary  strains,  which  shall  be  covariant  respect- 
ively with  the  squares  and  doubled-products  of  these  oblique  coordinates.  This  con- 
dition is  fulfilled  by  considering  the  elementary  strains  as  being  constituted  by  the 
variations  of  the  components  of  the  molecular  displacement  with  respect  to  the 
distances  of  the  strained  particle  from  three  planes  passing  through  the  origin,  and 
normal  respectively  to  the  three  axes ; that  is  to  say,  with  respect  to  the  contraordi- 
nates of  the  particle,  as  expressed  in  the  following  equations  : — 


Elongations . . . 

Quasi-Distortions  . 


dv'dw'  dw  ' du'  ^ du'dv. 


(39.) 


The  six  elementary  strains,  as  above  defined,  are  obviously  covariant  with  the 
squares  and  doubled-products  of  the  coordinates,  according  to  the  following  table  : — 


a,  7,  X,  f/.,  V,  ] 

X*,  y\  z\  2yz,  2zx,  2xy.\ 


(40.) 


276 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKING  ON  AXES  OF 


20.  Of  Stresses,  as  referred  to  Oblique  Axes. 

It  is  next  required  to  express  the  stress  at  any  particle  of  an  elastic  solid  by  means 
of  a system  of  six  elementary  stresses  which  shall  be  contragredient  to  the  system  of 
six  elementary  strains  defined  in  the  preceding  article.  This  is  accomplished  in  the 
following  manner. 

It  is  known  that  the  total  stress  at  any  point  may  be  resolved  into  three  normal 
stresses  on  the  three  principal  planes  of  the  tasimetric  surface.  Let  the  direction 
and  sign  of  any  one  of  those  three  'principal  stresses  be  represented  by  those  of  a line 
OR,  and  its  magnitude,  as  reduced  to  unity  of  area  of  the  plane  normal  to  that 
direction,  by  the  square  of  that  line. 


Let  u,  V,  w be  the  contraordinates  of  R,  as  referred  to  the  oblique  axes  OX,  OY, 
OZ.  Then  will  the  stresses  on  unity  of  area  of  planes  normal  to  those  axes,  in  the 
direction  OR,  be  represented  respectively  by 

ur,  vr,  wr. 

Let  the  Elementary  Stresses  be  defined  to  be,  the  projections  on  the  three  axes  of 
coordinates,  of  the  total  stresses  on  unity  of  area  of  the  three  pairs  of  faces  of  a paral- 
lelopiped,  normal  to  the  three  axes  respectively'. — then,  if  we  take  S to  denote  the 
summation  of  three  terms  arising  from  the  three  principal  stresses,  the  elementary 
stresses  will  be  expressed  as  follows  : — 


Normal  Stresses  on  the  faces  normal  to 


57,  y, 

Pj=:S.M^;  P2=S.i!;^; 

Oblique  Stresses  on  the  faces  normal  to 

y z z X 

in  the  directions  y x z 

Q2  = S.WU; 


Ps=S.W^  ; 

> • 


(41.) 


X y 

y X 

Q3=S.^^^;.  ^ 


These  expressions  fulfil  the  condition  of  making  the  elementary  stresses 

PlJ  I*2J  P35  QlJ  Q2J  Q3 
contravariant  respectively  to  the  elementary  strains 

f^,  7,  P',  V, 

so  that  for  oblique  axes,  as  for  rectangular  axes,  the  potential  energy  of  elasticity  is 
represented  by 

U=  — 5(PiaH-P2/3+P37-j-Qi?.-l-Q2jM<+Q3j'), 

the  universal  concomitant ; and  may  be  expressed  either  by  a homogeneous  quadratic 
function  of  the  six  elementary  strains  (as  in  equation  2),  with  twenty-one  tasinomic 
coefficients,  or  by  a homogeneous  quadratic  function  of  the  six  elementary  stresses. 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


277 


as  in  equation  (27.),  with  twenty-one  thlipsinomic  coefficients,  forming  a system  con- 
tragredient  to  that  of  the  tasinomic  coefficients. 

21.  Of  Tasinomic  and  Thlipsinomic  Umhrce  for  Oblique  Axes. 

The  tasinomic  coefficients  for  oblique  axes  may  be  regarded  as  compounded  of 
Umbrse 

(«).  (j')’ 

contravariant  respectively  to  the  elementary  strains 

Pi  7} 

and  consequently  covariant  with  the  squares  and  products  of  the  contraordinates 

uf,  vw,  wu,  uv ; 

and  the  thlipsinomic  coefficients  for  Oblique  Axes  may  be  regarded  as  compounded  of 
Umbrse 

{a),  (&),  (c),  {1),  (m),  (n), 

contravariant  respectively  to  the  stresses 

Pi,  P2,  P3,  2Q,,  2Q2,  2Q3, 

and  consequently  covariant  with  the  squares  and  products  of  the  coordinates 

x^,  z^,  2yz,  2zx,  2xy. 

22.  Of  the  Biquadratic  Surface,  and  of  Principal  Euthytatic  Axes. 

For  oblique  as  well  as  for  rectangular  axes  of  coordinates,  the  characteristic  function 
of  the  Biquadratic  Tasinomic  Surface  is  represented  by  equation  (19.) ; and  the  fifteen 
Homotatic  Coefficients  are  covariant  respectively  with  suitable  multiples  of  the  fifteen 
biquadratic  powers  and  products  of  the  contraordinates. 

If  by  linear  transformations  a system  of  three  axes,  oblique  or  rectangular,  be  found 
which  reduce  the  characteristic  function  of  the  Biquadratic  Surface  to  the  canonical 
form,  consisting  of  not  more  than  nine  terms,  viz. — 

(^)^=(o.^)^H(W+(/)^^ 

+2{  (/3y)-l-2(X^)  }3/V-|-2{  (ya)-f  2(/^")  2{  (a/3)  -]-2(i/^)}^y 

+4{2(f/.v)-\-{a'k)}x^yz-\-4{2{vX)-\-{^lx)}xy^z+4{2(X[A)-{-('yv)}xyz^=l  ; . (42.) 

then  for  that  system  of  axes,  the  following  six  Plagiotatic  Coefficients  are  null, 

(|3X)  = 0;  (yX)=0;  (y^)=0;  ^=0;  («v)  = 0;  (/30=0;  . . (43.) 

and  each  of  those  axes  is  Euthytatic,  according  to  the  definition  in  § 7,  that  is  to 
say,  is  a direction  of  maximum  or  minimum  direct  Elasticity  (absolute  or  relative), 
and  also  a direction  in  which  a direct  elongation  or  compression  produces  a simply 
normal  stress. 

There  are  necessarily  three  Euthytatic  Axes  at  least  in  every  solid,  viz.  the  three 
Principal  Euthytatic  Axes  as  above  described,  which  are  normal  to  the  faces  of  a 

MDCCCLVI.  2 o 


278 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


Hexahedron,  right  or  oblique  as  the  case  may  be ; but  in  special  cases  of  symmetry 
there  are  additional  or  secondary  euthytatic  axes,  of  which  examples  will  now  be  given. 

23.  Of  Rhombic  and  Hexagonal  Symmetry. 

When  a solid  has  three  oblique  principal  euthytatic  axes  making  equal  angles  with 
each  other  round  an  axis  of  symmetry,  and  having  equal  systems  of  Homotatic 
Coefficients  corresponding  to  them,  viz. — 

(«=)  = (/3’)  = (/);  ((3>)+2(X»)  = (y«)+2(f<,=)  = («(3)+2Wl 

Y . . . (43  A.) 

2 igv)  + (aX)  = 2 (j/X)  + ((3g) = 2 (X^)  + (yv) J 

it  may  be  said  to  possess  Rhombic  Symmetry,  because  the  three  oblique  axes  are 
normal  to  the  faces  of  one  Rhombohedron,  and  to  the  edges  of  another  belonging  to 
the  same  series,  crystallographically  speaking.  It  is  evident  in  this  case,  that  the 
Axis  of  Symmetry  must  be  a fourth  Euthytatic  Axis. 

In  the  limiting  case,  when  the  three  oblique  axes  make  with  each  other  equal 
angles  of  120°,  they  lie  in  the  same  plane,  normal  to  the  axis  of  symmetry,  and  are 
normal  to  the  faces  of  one  hexagonal  prism,  and  the  edges  of  another. 

Let  0?/i  denote  the  longitudinal  axis  of  symmetry  of  the  prism  ; O^i  any  one  of 
the  three  transverse  axes  perpendicular  to  Oy^.  The  equation  of  a section  of  the 
Biquadratic  surface  by  the  Plane  of  Hexagonal  Symmetry  y^Zi,  is  as  follows  : — 

0’).y;+(/).^:+2{((3y).+2(x’),}^;*;=i (44.) 

The  equation  of  the  same  section,  referred  to  any  other  pair  of  orthogonal  axes 
Oy,  0^2,  in  the  plane  of  y^Zi,  is  as  follows : — 

(/3')./+(y').a'+2{(/3y)+2(X")}3/V+4{(^X)3/"+(yX)2:"}3/2:  = l.  . . (44a.) 

From  considerations  of  symmetry,  it  is  evident  that  the  coefficient  ((3i^)  must  be 
null  for  every  direction  of  the  axis  in  the  plane  of  yiZ^ ; consequently,  every 
direction  Oy  in  that  plane,  for  which  ((3X)=0,  is  an  Euthytatic  Axis. 

To  ascertain  whether,  and  under  what  conditions,  there  are  other  Euthytatic  Axes 
in  the  planes  of  hexagonal  symmetry  besides  the  longitudinal  and  transverse  axes,  it 
is  to  be  considered,  that  for  rectangular  coordinates  (/3x)  is  covariant  with  y^z ; 
hence,  let 

Zy,Oy=^, 

then  = [{2(|3y).  + 4(X*), -(/),}  cos  2»-(/3').  + (/),]  . (45.) 

The  first  factor  of  the  above  expression  is  null  for  the  longitudinal  and  transverse 
axes  only.  The  conditions  of  there  being  additional  euthytatic  axes  in  the  plane  y,z, 
is,  that  the  second  factor  shall  vanish  ; that  is  to  say,  that 

(/B^)4-(y^)i 


COS  2iy 


• (46.) 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


279 


and  that  the  value  of  u which  makes  it  vanish  shall  neither  be  0°  nor  90° ; that  is  to 
say,  that  the  second  member  of  the  above  equation  (46.)  shall  lie  between  +1  and 
— 1 ; in  which  case  the  equation  is  satisfied  by  equal  values  of  a with  opposite  signs. 
Hence  are  deduced  the  following  theorems,  which  are  stated  in  such  a form  as  to  be 
applicable  to  planes  of  symmetry,  whether  hexagonal  or  otherwise. 

If,  in  any  -plane  of  tasinomic  symmetry  containing  a pair  of  Orthogonal  Euthy- 
tatic  Axes,  the  difference  of  the  Euthytatic  coefficients  for  these  axes  be  equal  to  or 
greater  than  the  Metatatic  Difference,  there  are  no  additional  euthytatic  axes  in  that 
plane. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  difference  of  such  Euthytatic  coefficients  be  less  than  the 
metatatic  difference,  there  are,  in  such  plane  of  symmetry,  a pair  of  additional  euthy- 
tatic axes  making  with  each  other  a pair  of  angles  bisected  by  the  orthogonal  euthytatic 
axes. 

2a  is  the  angle  bisected  by  the  axis  Oy^. 

In  the  case  of  Hexagonal  Symmetry,  the  additional  axes  thus  found  are  normal  to 
the  faces  of  one  pyramidal  dodecahedron,  and  the  edges  of  another. 

24.  Of  Orthorhombic  Symmetry. 

Let  a solid  have  one  of  the  three  principal  euthytatic  axes,  O^i,  normal  to  the 
other  two,  Ox^,  Opi ; let  the  last  two  be  oblique  to  each  other,  and  have  equal  sets 
of  homotatic  coefficients,  viz. — 

(/3y).+2(X*),  = (y«),+2(f.^).i  2(rt  + («^)=2(.X)  + (fr),  (47.) 

then  that  solid  may  be  said  to  have  Orthorhombic  Symmetry,  its  principal  euthytatic 
axes  being  normal  to  the  faces  of  a right  rhombic  prism. 

The  existence  or  non-existence,  and  the  position,  of  a pair  of  additional  euthytatic 
axes  in  the  longitudinal  planes  of  yiZ^,  z^x^,  is  to  be  determined  as  in  the  preceding 
article.  When  such  axes  exist,  they  are  normal  to  the  faces  of  an  Octahedron  with  a 
Rhombic  Base. 

25.  Of  Orthogonal  Symmetry. 

If  the  three  principal  Euthytatic  Axes  be  orthogonal,  they  are  normal  to  the  faces 
of  a right  rectangular  or  square  prism,  and  to  the  edges  of  a right  rhombic  or  square 
prism.  The  existence  or  non-existence,  and  position,  of  a pair  of  additional  euthy- 
tatic axes  in  each  of  the  principal  planes  of  such  a solid,  are  determined  as  in 
article  (23.). 

If  there  be  a pair  of  such  additional  axes  in  each  of  the  three  principal  planes,  they 
are  normal  to  the  faces  of  an  irregular  Rhombic  Dodecahedron,  and  to  the  edges  of  a 
Rhombic  Octahedron. 

If  there  be  a pair  of  such  additional  axes  in  two  of  the  three  principal  planes,  those 
axes  are  normal  to  the  faces  of  an  Octahedron  with  a Rectangular  or  square  base,  and 
to  the  edges  of  an  Octahedron  with  a Rhombic  or  square  base. 

2 o 2 


280 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OP 


If  there  be  a pair  of  such  additional  axes  in  one  of  the  planes  of  orthotatic  sym- 
metry only,  those  axes  are  normal  to  the  lateral  faces  of  a Right  Rhombic  Prism. 

26.  Of  Cybo'id  Symmetry. 

The  case  of  Cybo'id  Symmetry  is  that  in  which  the  Homotatic  Coefficients  are  equal 
for  three  Orthogonal  Axes,  viz. — - 

M = (/3’)  = (r’‘)  ! (/3r)+2(X’)  = (y«=)+2(,».^)  = («^)H-2(.’)  ; 

2 {^v)  -j-  (aX)  “ 2 (vX)  -j-  ~ 2 (Xf)  -f-  {<yv) =0 (48.) 

In  this  case,  the  Principal  Metatatic  Axes  coincide  with  the  Principal  Euthytatic 
Axes,  which  are  normal  to  the  faces  of  a cube  j the  Diagonal  Metatatic  Axes,  normal 
to  the  faces  of  a regular  Rhombic  Dodecahedron,  are  Euthytatic  also  ; and  there  are, 
besides,  four  additional  euthytatic  axes  symmetrically  situated  between  the  first  nine, 
and  normal  to  the  faces  of  a regular  octahedron,  making  in  all  thirteen  euthytatic 
axes. 

27.  Of  Monaxal  Isotropy. 

Monaxal  Isotropy  denotes  the  case  in  which  the  homotatic  coefficients  are  com- 
pletely isotropic  round  one  axis  only.  In  this  case,  the  principal  euthytatic  axes  are, 
the  axis  of  isotropy,  and  every  direction  perpendicular  to  it ; and  when  there  are 
additional  axes,  determined  as  in  the  preceding  articles,  they  are  normal  to  the  sur- 
face of  a cone. 

28.  Of  Complete  Isotropy. 

In  the  case  of  Complete  Isotropy  of  the  Homotatic  coefficients,  every  direction 
is  a euthytatic  axis. 

29.  Probable  Relations  between  Euthytatic  Axes  and  Crystalline  Forms. 

In  the  preceding  articles  it  has  been  shown,  what  must  be  the  nature  of  the  rela- 
tions between  the  fifteen  homotatic  coefficients,  for  various  solids,  having  systems  of 
euthytatic  axes  normal  to  the  faces  and  edges  of  the  several  Primitive  Forms  known 
in  Crystallography. 

It  is  probable  that  the  normals  to  Planes  of  Cleavage  are  Euthytatic  Axes  of  Mini- 
mum Elasticity. 

It  may  also  be  considered  probable,  that  in  some  cases,  especially  in  the  Tessular 
System,  which  corresponds  to  Cybo'id  Symmetry,  and  in  the  case  of  the  pyramidal 
summits  of  crystals  of  the  Rhombohedral  System,  Euthytatic  Axes  correspond  to 
symmetrical  summits  of  crystalline  forms.  In  the  icositetrahedral  crystals  of  leucite 
and  analcime,  and  the  tetracontaoctahedral  crystals  of  diamond,  there  are  twenty-six 
symmetrical  summits,  one  pair  corresponding  to  each  of  the  thirteen  axes  of  cybo'id 
symmetry. 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


281 


The  following  is  a synoptical  table  of  the  various  possible  systems  of  euthytatic 
axes,  arranged  according  to  their  degrees  and  kinds  of  symmetry,  and  of  the  crystal- 
line forms  to  the  faces  and  edges  of  which  such  systems  of  axes  are  respectively 
normal. 


Systems  op  Euthytatic  Axes. 

Crystalline  Forms. 

c 

I.  Asymmetry. 

Faces.  Edges. 

Tetarto-prismatic  System. 

1.  Three  unequal  Oblique  Axes 

. Oblique  Hexahedron. 

II.  Symmetry  about  one  plane. 

Hemipeismatic  System. 

2.  Two  unequal  oblique  axes,  and  one  rectangular  axis..  Right  Rhomboidal  Prism  Oblique  Rhombic  Prism. 


3.  Two  equal  and  one  unequal  oblique  axis  

..  Oblique  Rhombic  Prism Right  Rhomboidal  Prism. 

III.  Rhombic  and  Hexagonal  Symmetry. 

Rhombohedral  System. 

4.  Three  equi-oblique  principal  axes  round  one  axis] 

of  symmetry J 

5.  Three  equi-oblique  principal  axes  in  one  plane,] 

normal  to  axis  of  symmetry  J 

|-  Rhombohedron  Rhombohedron. 

)■  Hexagonal  Prism  Hexagonal  Prism. 

6.  Three  pairs  of  secondary  axes  in  planes  of  symmetry.  Pyramidal  Dodecahedron  Pyramidal  Dodecahedron. 


IV.  Orthorhombic  Symmetry. 

Prismatic  and  Pyramidal  Systems. 

7.  Two  equal  oblique  transverse  axes  normal  to  one  ] 

longitudinal  axis J 

8.  Two  pairs  of  secondary  axes  in  longitudinal  planes . 

Right  Rhombic  Prism Rectangular  Prism. 

..  Octahedron  with  Rhombic  Base  ...  Octahedron  with  Rectangular  Base. 

V.  Okthogonal  Symmetky. 


9.  Three  orthogonal  axes,  not  all  equal 

1.  Rectangular  and  Square  Prisms Right  Rhombic  and  square  prisms. 

10.  Three  pairs  of  secondary  axes  in  principal  planes 

. -TV  , , , r Octahedron  with  Rhombic  Base  and 

..  Irregular  Rhombic  Dodecahedron  •< 

L Rectangular  Pnsm. 

11.  Two  pairs  of  secondary  axes  -j 

C Octahedron  with  square  or  rectan-  ] Octahedron  with  square  or  Rhombic 

L gular  base  J Base. 

Same  with  7.  One  pair  of  secondary  axes 

Right  Rhombic  Prism Rectangular  Prism. 

VI.  Cyboid  Symmetry. 

Tessular  System. 

12.  Three  equal  Orthogonal  Axes 

13.  Six  Diagonal  Axes  

14.  Four  symmetrical  intermediate  axes  

. Cube. 

Regular  Rhombic  Dodecahedron  ...  Cube  and  regular  Octahedron- 
..  Regular  Octahedron  Rhombic  Dodecahedron. 

VII.  Monaxal  Isoteopy. 


15.  One  Axis  of  Isotropy  

16.  Innumerable  Transverse  Axes  

17.  Innumerable  Equi-Oblique  Axes 

. Isotropic  Laminae. 

. Isotropic  Fibres. 

. Conical  Cleavage. 

VIII.  Complete  Isotropy. 

18.  Innumerable  Axes  of  Isotropy 


Amorphism. 


282 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


30.  Mutual  Independence  of  the  Euthytatic  and  Heterotatic  Axes,  and  of  the  Homotatic 

and  Heterotatic  Coefficients. 

The  fifteen  Homotatic  Coefficients  of  the  Biquadratic  Surface,  on  which  the 
Euthytatic  Axes  depend,  and  the  six  Heterotatic  Differences,  coefficients  of  the 
Heterotatic  Ellipsoid,  constitute  twenty-one  independent  quantities ; so  that  the 
Euthytatic  Axes  may  possess  any  kind  or  degree  of  symmetry  or  asymmetry,  and  the 
Heterotatic  Axes  any  other  kind  or  degree,  in  the  same  solid. 

Hence  if  it  be  true  that  crystalline  form  depends  on  the  arrangement  of  Euthytatic 
Axes,  it  follows  that  two  substances  may  be  exactly  alike  in  crystalline  form,  and  yet 
differ  materially  in  the  laws  of  their  elasticity,  owing  to  differences  in  their  respective 
Heterotatic  Coefficients. 

It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  this  complete  independence  of  those  two  systems 
of  axes  and  coefficients  is  mathematical  only ; and  that  their  physical  dependence  or 
independence  is  a question  for  experiment. 

31.  On  Real  and  Alleged  Diffierences  between  the  Laws  of  the  Elasticity  of  Solids,  and 

those  of  the  Luminiferous  Force. 

For  every  conceivable  system  of  tasinomic  coefficients  in  a solid,  the  plane  of 
polarization  of  a wave  of  distortion  is  that  which  includes  the  direction  of  the 
molecular  vibration  and  the  direction  of  its  propagation,  being,  in  fact,  the  plane  of 
distortion. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  appears  to  be  impossible  to  avoid  concluding,  from  the  laws 
of  the  Diffraction  of  Polarized  Light,  as  discovered  by  Professor  Stokes,  and  from 
those  of  the  more  minute  phenomena  of  the  reflexion  of  light,  as  investigated 
theoretically  by  M.  Cauchy  and  experimentally  by  M.  Jamin,  that  in  plane-polarized 
light  the  plane  of  polarization  is  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  vibration,  or  rather 
(to  avoid  hypothetical  language)  to  the  direction  of  some  physical  phenomenon  whose 
laws  of  communication  are  to  a certain  extent  analogous  to  those  of  a vibratory 
movement. 

This  constitutes  an  essential  difference  between  the  laws  of  the  Elastic  Forces  in  a 
solid,  and  those  of  the  luminiferous  force. 

In  order  to  frame,  in  connexion  with  the  wave-theory  of  light,  a mechanical 
hypothesis  which  should  take  that  difference  into  account,  it  has  been  proposed  to 
consider  the  elasticity  of  the  luminiferous  medium  to  be  the  same  in  all  substances, 
and  for  all  directions,  or  Pantatically  Isotropic,  and  to  ascribe  the  various  retardations 
of  light  to  variations  in  the  inertia  of  the  mass  moved  in  luminiferous  waves,  in  dif- 
ferent substances,  and  for  different  directions  of  motion*. 

Anotlier  essential  difference  between  the  laws  of  Solid  Elasticity  and  those  of  the 

* Philosophical  Magazine,  June  1851,  December  1853. 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


283 


luminiferous  force  is,  that  under  no  conceivable  system  of  tasinomic  coefficients  in  a 
homogeneous  solid,  would  the  plane  of  distortion  in  a wave  be  rotated  continuously 
round  the  direction  of  propagation. 

Much  has  been  written,  both  recently  and  in  former  times,  concerning  an  alleged 
difficulty  in  the  theories  of  waves,  both  of  sound  and  of  light,  arising  from  the 
physical  impossibility  of  the  actual  divergence  of  waves  from,  or  their  convergenc<" 
to,  a mathematical  point.  This  impossibility  must  be  admitted;  but  the  supposed 
difficulty  to  which  it  gives  rise  in  the  theories  of  waves  is  completely  overcome  in 
Mr.  Stokes’s  paper  on  the  Dynamical  Theory  of  Diffraction*,  in  which  that  author 
proves,  that  waves  spreading  from  a focal  space,  or  origin  of  disturbance,  of  finite 
magnitude,  and  of  any  figure,  sensibly  agree  in  all  respects  with  waves  spreading 
from  an  imaginary  focal  point,  so  soon  as  they  have  attained  a distance  from  the 
focal  space,  which  is  large  as  compared  with  the  dimensions  of  that  space ; so  that 
the  equations  of  the  propagation  of  waves  spreading  from  imaginary  focal  points  may 
be  applied  without  sensible  error  to  all  those  cases  of  actual  waves  to  which  it  is  usual 
to  apply  them. 

The  physical  impossibility  of  focal  points  applies  to  light  independently  of  all 
hypotheses ; for  at  such  points  the  intensity  would  be  infinite.  It  appears  to  be 
worthy  of  consideration,  whether  this  impossibility  may  not  be  connected  with  the 
appearance  of  spurious  disks  of  fixed  stars  in  the  foci  of  telescopes. 

32.  On  the  Action  of  Crystals  on  Light. 

If  we  set  aside  those  actions  on  light  to  which  there  is  nothing  analogous  in  the 
phenomena  of  the  elasticity  of  homogeneous  solids,  the  laws  of  the  refractive  action 
of  a crystal  on  light  are  in  general  of  a more  symmetrical  kind,  or  depend  on  fewer 
quantities  than  those  of  its  elasticity. 

Thus,  the  elasticity  of  a homogeneous  solid  depends  on  twenty-one  quantities ; its 
crystalline  form,  on  fifteen  (the  Homotatic  Coefficients),  while  its  refractive  action 
on  homogeneous  light  in  most  cases  is  expressible  by  means  of  the  magnitudes  and 
directions  of  the  Orthogonal  axes  of  Fresnel’s  Wave-Surface,  making  in  all  six 
quantities.  Crystals  which  possess  only  Rhombic  or  Hexagonal  Symmetry  in  their 
Eiithytatic  Axes,  are  usually  Monaxally  Isotropic  in  their  action  on  light ; while 
crystals  which  possess  only  Cyboi'd  Symmetry  in  their  euthytatic  axes,  are  completely 
isotropic  in  their  action  on  light. 

From  these  remarks,  however,  there  are  exceptions,  as  in  the  case  of  the  extra- 
ordinary optical  properties  discovered  by  Sir  David  Brewster  in  Analcime,  which, 
in  its  refraction  as  well  as  in  its  form,  is  Cyboi'dally  Symmetrical  without  being  Iso- 
tropic. 

* Cambridge  Transactions,  vol.  ix.  part  1. 


Glasgow^  June  1855. 


284 


MR.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  ON  AXES  OF 


Note  referred  to  at  page  261. 

On  Sylvestrian  Umhrce. 

Without  attempting  to  enter  into  the  abstract  theory  of  the  Umbral  Method,  it 
may  here  be  useful  to  explain  the  particular  case  of  its  application  which  is  employed 
in  this  paper. 

Let  U be  a quantity  having  an  absolute  value,  constant  or  variable  (such,  for  ex- 
ample, as  any  physical  magnitude),  and  u,v,  . ..  &c.  a set  of  quantities,  m in  num- 
ber, such  that  U is  of  them  a homogeneous  rational  function  of  the  wth  degree. 
There  are  an  indefinite  number  of  possible  sets  of  m quantities  satisfying  this  con- 
dition ; and  the  quantities  of  each  set  are  related  to  those  of  each  other  set  by  m 
equations  of  the  first  degree,  called  equations  of  linear  transformation.  Let 

Wo  Wl, 


W2J  Wj, 


be  two  such  sets. 

Let  denote  the  coefficient  of  mV, 


in  the  development  of 


and  let 


(M-hM-f....)”, 

= WaV*....}. 


The  two  sets  of  coefficients  A,,  are  connected  by  linear  equations  of  trans- 
formation, the  investigation  of  which  is  much  facilitated  by  the  following  process. 
Let  two  sets,  each  of  m symbols,  Kj,  /3i,  &c.  ...  jSg,  ...  &c.  be  assumed,  such  that 

= ci^u^ + /32^;2  + 


and  that,  consequently, 

(a,M,  -l-/3,Vi  +....)”= 2 { 4, .. .. 

= (a2M2-l-^24^2+  • • • •)“=  2 { 4 . . . M2V. 


Then  if  the  m equations  of  transformation  between  the  two  sets  of  symbols  Mj,  /3,... 
and  0^2 j fie  formed,  and  if  from  them  be  deduced  the  equations  between  the  two 
sets  of  products  and  &c.,  and  if,  in  the  latter  system  of  equations, 

there  be  substituted  for  each  product  a“/3*.....  the  corresponding  coefficient  A„,4 , 

the  result  will  be  the  system  of  equations  sought.  Also,  if  any  function  of  the  pro- 
ducts be  invariant  {i.  e.  a function,  whose  value,  like  that  of  the  original 

function  U,  is  not  altered  by  the  transformation),  the  corresponding  function  of  the 
coefficients  A will  be  invariant. 

The  symbols  «,  /3,  &c.,  with  reference  to  their  relation  to  the  coefficients  A,  are 
called  umhrce',  that  is,  factors  of  symbols,  whose  equations  of  transformation  are  simi- 


ELASTICITY  AND  CRYSTALLINE  FORMS. 


285 


lar  to  those  of  the  coefficients  A.  In  the  iimhral  notation,  umbrae  are  usually  distin- 
guished from  symbols  denoting  actual  quantities  by  being  enclosed  in  brackets  thus: 

(a),  (/3),  &c 

and  each  coefficient  A is  represented  by  enclosing  in  brackets  that  product  of  umbrae 
with  which  it  \s  covariant  thus: 

= ). 


The  Umbral  Notation  is  applied  to  abbreviate  the  expression  of  determinants  in  a 
manner  of  which  the  following  are  examples  : — 


^5  7. 

a?  7? 


&c. 

&c. 


denotes 


(«^) 

(a/3) 

(«7) 

&c. 

(a/3) 

m 

(M 

&c. 

(a7) 

(M 

(f) 

&c. 

&c. 

&c. 

&c. 

&c. 

a,  7, 
7, 


K 


&c. 

&c. 


denotes 


(a/3) 

(M 

(W 

&c. 

M 

(f) 

(7§) 

&c. 

(a§) 

(7^) 

&c. 

&c. 

&c. 

See. 

&c. 

February  24,  1856. 


2 p 


iuucccLvr. 


[ 287  ] 


XIII.  Introductory  Research  on  the  Induction  of  Magnetism  by  Electrical  Currents. 
By  J.  P.  Joule,  F.R.S.,  Corr.  Mem.  R.A.,  Turin,  Hon.  Mem.  of  the  Philosophical 
Society,  Carnhridge,  8^c. 


Received  June  21, — Read  June  21,  1855. 

The  researches  of  Jacobi  and  Lenz  led  them  some  years  ago  to  the  announcement 
as  a law,  that  when  two  bars  of  iron  of  different  diameters  but  equal  to  one  another 
in  length  and  surrounded  with  coils  of  wire  of  the  same  length  carry  equal  streams 
of  electricity,  the  magnetism  developed  in  the  bars  is  proportional  to  their  respective 
diameters.  Experiments  which  I made  about  the  same  time  threw  doubts  on  my 
mind  as  to  the  general  accuracy  of  the  above  proposition,  for  I found  that  the  mag- 
netism induced  in  straight  bars  of  a variety  of  dimensions  varying  from  ^ to  1 inch 
in  diameter,  and  from  7 inches  to  one  yard  in  length,  was  nearly  proportional  to  the 
length  of  the  wire  and  the  intensity  of  the  current  it  conveyed,  irrespectively  of  the 
shape  or  magnitude  of  the  bars.  The  valuable  experimental  researches  which  have 
recently  been  made  by  Weber,  Robinson,  Muller,  Dub  and  others,  refer  chiefly  to  .the 
attraction  of  the  keeper  or  submagnet,  and  are  not  calculated  to  confirm  or  disprove 
either  of  the  above  propositions ; and  the  correct  view  is  probably  that  of  Professor 
Thomson,  who  considers  both  of  them  as  corollaries  (applying  to  the  particular  con- 
ditions under  which  the  experiments  were  made)  of  the  general  law,  that  “similar 
bars  of  different  dimensions,  similarly  rolled  with  lengths  of  wire  proportional  to  the 
squares  of  their  linear  dimensions  and  carrying  equal  currents,  cause  equal  forces  at 
points  similarly  situated  with  reference  to  them*.”  I have  been  induced  to  under- 
take some  further  experiments  with  an  endeavour  to  elucidate  the  subject,  and  also 
to  open  the  way  to  the  investigation  of  the  molecular  changes  which  occur  during 
magnetization. 

I procured  four  iron  bars  one  yard  long  and  of  the  respective  diameters  \ and 
1 inch,  their  weights  being  1736,  3802,  14560,  and  55060  grs.  Each  bar  was  wound 
with  56  feet  of  copper  wire  -^th  of  an  inch  in  diameter  covered  with  silk,  the  number 
of  convolutions  being  1020,  712,  388,  and  207  respectively.  The  smallest  bar  was 
closely  covered  throughout  its  entire  length,  but  on  account  of  the  larger  surface  of 
the  other  bars  the  coils  had  to  be  distributed  upon  them  as  evenly  as  possible.  Four 
other  bars  were  also  procured  of  the  same  diameters  as  the  above.  They  were 
however  twice  as  long,  weighing  3500,  7624, 29944,  and  108574  grs.,  and  were  wrapped 
with  double  the  length  of  wire,  forming  2060,  1435,  768,  and  418  convolutions 
respectively. 

* Letter  to  the  author. 

2 p 2 


288 


MR.  joule’s  introductory  RESEARCH  ON  THE 


To  measure  the  electrical  currents,  I employed  a galvanometer  of  tangents,  the 
needle  of  which,  half  an  inch  long,  carried  a glass  index  over  a divided  circle  6 inches 
in  diameter.  This  instrument  was  furnished  with  a coil  of  sixteen  circumvolutions 
of  1 foot  diameter,  which  could  be  exchanged  for  a single  circle  of  1 foot  diameter 
when  the  intensities  to  be  measured  were  very  considerable.  It  was  ascertained  by 
experiment  that  the  tangent  of  deflection  by  the  former  coil  was  exactly  sixteen  times 
that  of  the  latter  when  the  same  intensity  of  current  was  employed.  For  convenience 
sake  I have  reduced  all  the  observations  to  the  latter  standard;  the  unit  current 
being  therefore  that  which,  passing  through  a circle  1 foot  in  diameter,  is  able  to 
deflect  the  needle  through  45°. 

The  amount  of  magnetism  induced  in  a bar  was  ascertained  by  placing  it  vertically 
with  its  lower  end  at  a distance  of  6 or  12  inches  from  a magnetized  needle  i^ths  of 
an  inch  long  and  4-oth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  suspended  by  a filament  of  silk,  and 
having  a fine  glass  index  traversing  over  a graduated  circle  6 inches  in  diameter. 
The  force  of  torsion  of  the  filament  was  found  to  be  so  trifling,  that  the  tangents  of 
the  deflections  of  the  needle  conld  be  taken  as  representing,  without  sensible  error, 
the  magnetism  of  the  bar.  Observations  with  so  small  a needle  were  made  with 
great  facility,  the  pointer  moving  steadily  up  to  and  attaining  a new  angle  of  deflec- 
tion in  eight  or  ten  seconds  after  the  electrical  circuit  was  completed,  the  resistance 
of  the  air  to  the  motion  of  the  pointer  being  such  as  to  prevent  the  smallest  degree  of 
oscillation.  This  resistance,  however,  of  the  air,  so  useful  in  bringing  the  needle 
speedily  to  rest,  renders  it  necessary  to  guard  carefully  against  any  irregularity  of  the 
temperature  of  the  case  in  which  it  is  enclosed.  A ray  of  sun-light  would  speedily 
occasion  a deflection  of  several  degrees*  ; and  I found  that  the  heat  of  the  hand  held 
over  a part  of  the  thick  glass  case  45°  in  advance  of  the  pointer  was  sufficient,  after 
penetration  through  the  glass,  to  produce  a current  of  air  causing  a steady  deflection 
of  no  less  than  30°,  a deflection  which  subsided  with  extreme  regularity  and' great 
slowness  after  the  hand  was  removed.  I would  suggest  that  this  circumstance  points 
to  the  means  of  constructing  a new  and  exceedingly  sensible  thermometer  which 
would  be  valuable  in  many  researches,  particularly  those  on  the  conduction  of  heat. 

Previously  to  employing  electric  currents,  I made  some  experiments  simply  with  a 
view  to  ascertain  the  inductive  power  of  the  earth’s  magnetism  on  the  bars ; and  in 
which  the  action  on  the  suspended  needle  was  observed  both  at  the  distance  of 
12  and  6 inches,  in  order  to  determine  the  influence  of  distance  for  the  convenience 
of  future  reductions.  Having  noticed  the  deflection  produced  by  any  bar,  it  was 
reversed  and  the  observation  repeated,  the  sum  of  the  tangents  of  deflection  showing 
the  total  effect  produced  on  the  magnetism  of  the  bar  by  its  reversion.  I may  here 
remark,  that  both  ends  of  the  pointer  of  the  needle  were  invariably  observed,  though 
to  save  unnecessary  detail  the  tangent  of  the  mean  is  only  given. 

* Dr.  Tyndall  has  drawn  attention  to  the  importance  of  guarding  against  these  effects  of  heat  on  a deli- 
cately poised  needle.  Philosophical  Magazine,  4th  series,  vol.  iii.  p.  127. 


INDUCTION  OF  MAGNETISM  BY  ELECTRIC  CURRENTS. 


289 


Effect  of  Reversal  of  Bars  two  yards  long. 

Sum  of  tangents  of  deflection. 


Diameter  of  bar.  At  6 inches  distance.  At  12  inches  distance. 

i inch -0450  ‘0088 

i inch -0850  -0300 

finch *5912  -1922 

1 inch 1-3910  -4598 


The  magnetism  induced  in  the  smaller  bars  appears  to  be  nearly  proportional  to 
the  square  of  the  diameter,  as  might  have  been  anticipated.  The  ratio  of  the 
attraction  at  6 inches  to  that  at  12  inches  is  2-98. 

Effect  of  Reversal  of  Bars  one  yard  long. 

Sum  of  tangents  of  deflection. 


Diameter  of  bar.  At  6 inches  distance.  At  12  inches  distance. 

f inch  ......  *0480  *0138 

finch *1260  *0384 

f inch *4926  *1430 

1 inch 1*0380  *3084 


The  magnetism  induced  in  the  smaller  bars  of  the  above  set  is  nearly  proportional  to 
the  square  of  the  diameter;  the  greater  amount  of  discrepancy  arising  in  all  pro- 
bability from  the  inferior  length  of  the  bars  compared  with  those  of  the  last  set. 
The  ratio  of  the  attractions  at  the  two  distances  is  as  3*39  to  unity. 

In  the  following  experiments  on  the  induction  of  magnetism  in  the  above  bars  by 
electrical  currents,  the  method  employed  was, — 1st,  to  observe  the  magnetism  of  a bar 
under  the  influence  of  the  current ; 2nd,  that  left  permanently  developed ; 3rd,  to 
observe  the  magnetism  when  the  current  was  reversed ; and  4th,  the  magnetism 
remaining  after  the  current  was  the  second  time  cut  off.  The  difference  between  the 
first  and  third  observations  gives  the  entire  change  in  the  magnetism  of  the  bar  con- 
sequent on  the  reversal  of  the  current ; the  difference  between  the  second  and  fourth 
gives  the  entire  permanent  change,  or  as  I may  term  it  for  convenience,  the  mag- 
netic  set. 

The  results  were  obtained  by  using  currents  of  four  degrees  of  intensity,  in  the 
first  two  of  which  the  needle  was  at  6 inches  distance,  in  the  last  two  at  12  inches. 
The  latter  results  are  reduced  to  the  action  at  6 inches  distance  by  employing  the 
data  arrived  at  from  the  foregoing  experiments. 


290 


MR.  JOULE’S  INTRODUCTORY  RESEARCH  ON  THE 


Table  I, 

Attraction,  at  6 inches,  of  bars  one  yard  long  wrapped  with  56  feet  of  wire. 


Diameter  of  bar. 

Intensity  of 
current. 

Total  change  of 
magnetism  by 
reversal  of 

Magnetic  set. 

Total  change 
minus  magnetic 
set. 

Set  divided  by 
square  of  current. 

Total  change 
minus  set,  divided 
by  current. 

current. 

r 

•0044 

•0164 

•0014 

•0150 

72-31 

3-409 

i i'wli < 

•0197 

•1012 

•0266 

•0746 

68-54 

3-787 

•0417 

•3020 

•1085 

•1935 

62-40 

4-640 

L 

•1450 

2-7747 

1-7036 

1-0711 

81-03 

7-387 

r 

•0041 

•0364 

•0038 

•0326 

226-05 

7-951 

i inch < 

•0197 

•0414 

•2336 

•8798 

•0628 

•4085 

•1708 

•4713 

161-82 

238-34 

8-670 

11-384 

L 

•1446 

8-2871 

4-9179 

3-3692 

235-20 

23-300 

r 

•0045 

•0857 

•0113 

•0744 

558-02 

16-533 

^ inch 

•0194 

•4573 

•0882 

•3691 

234-35 

19-026 

•0419 

1-2162 

•3207 

•8955 

182-67 

21-372 

•1460 

8-6948 

2*7628 

5-9320 

129-61 

40-630 

r 

•0045 

•1017 

•0128 

•0889 

632-10 

19-755 

inch <; 

•0195 

•5089 

•0817 

•4272 

214-86 

21-908 

•0416 

1-0935 

•1377 

•9558 

79-57 

22-976 

•1404 

5-6858 

1-0248 

4-6610 

51-99 

33-198 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Although  the  covered  wire  was  fine  and  wound  close  to  the  iron,  it  could  not  be 
expected  to  act  with  exactly  equal  advantage  in  the  bars  of  small  as  of  large  diameter, 
chiefly  on  account  of  the  circuit  taken  by  the  wire  being,  relatively  to  the  circum- 
ference of  the  bar,  greater  in  the  small  than  in  the  large  bars.  In  comparing  the 
results  together,  it  should  therefore  be  borne  in  mind,  that  those  obtained  with  the 
bar  of  ^th  of  an  inch  diameter  are  somewhat  diminished  from  the  above  circum- 
stance. 

A very  cursory  inspection  of  the  results  convinced  me  that  the  magnetic  set 
followed  a very  different  law  from  that  which  regulated  the  magnetic  action  under 
the  influence  of  the  current.  I have  therefore  subtracted  the  former  from  the  latter 
in  the  5th  column  of  the  Table.  Even  after  this  separation  has  been  effected,  it  will 
be  seen  from  column  7 that  the  magnetic  action  over  and  above  the  set  increases 
with  considerably  greater  rapidity  than  the  intensity  of  the  current,  a result  which 
is  I believe  owing  to  a portion  of  the  set  actually  existing  during  the  action  of  the 
current  being  destroyed  on  the  breaking  of  the  circuit.  It  will  be  remarked,  on 
inspecting  column  6,  that  the  set  of  the  bars  of  ^ and  of  an  inch  diameter  increases 
nearly  in  proportion  to  the  square  of  the  current,  but  that  with  the  thicker  bars  the 
ratio  is  diminished  ; so  that,  although  the  set  of  the  bars  of  small  diameter  is  greater 
than  that  of  the  large  bars  when  a current  of  powerful  intensity  is  employed,  the 
reverse  takes  place  when  a weak  stream  is  used.  From  the  7th  column  it  may  be 


INDUCTION  OF  MAGNETISM  BY  ELECTRICAL  CURRENTS. 


291 


gathered  that  the  magnetism  induced  by  an  equal  current,  increasing  at  first  nearly 
with  the  section  of  the  bars,  becomes  ultimately  almost  independent  of  their  thick- 
ness, the  attractions  of  the  half-inch  and  inch  burs  being  almost  exactly  equal  to  one 
another. 

Table  II. 

Attraction,  at  6 inches,  of  bars  two  yards  long  wrapped  with  1 12  feet  of  wire. 


Diameter  of  bar. 

Intensity  of 
current. 

Total  change  of 
magnetism  by 
reversal  of 
current. 

Magnetic  set. 

Total  change 
minus  magnetic 
set. 

Set  divided  by 
square  of  current. 

Total  change 
minus  set,  divided 
by  current. 

r 

•0042 

•0150 

•0009 

•0141 

51-02 

3-357 

•0160 

•0826 

•0190 

•0636 

74-22 

3-975 

i X 

•0281 

•1440 

•0410 

•1030 

51-92 

3-665 

L 

■0988 

1-6531 

1-0030 

•6501 

102-75 

6-580 

r 

•0042 

•0451 

•0037 

•0414 

209-7o 

9-857 

•0167 

•2555 

•0513 

•2042 

183-94 

12-227 

\ inch < 

•0297 

•6227 

•2392 

•3835 

271-17 

12-912 

1 

•1048 

6-5007 

4-3887 

2*1120 

399-59 

20-152 

r 

•0044 

•0937 

•0095 

•0842 

490-70 

19-136 

•0192 

•5275 

•0870 

•4405 

236-00 

22-943 

inch  < 

•0386 

1-2243 

•2597 

•9646 

174-30 

24-990 

L 

•1338 

10-6557 

4-9784 

5-6773 

278-08 

42-429 

r 

•0043 

•1280 

•0128 

•1152 

692-27 

26-791 

•0178 

•6088 

•0822 

•5266 

259-44 

29-584 

inch 

•0316 

1-0440 

•1833 

•8607 

183-56 

27-237 

L 

•1154 

6-1017 

1-6200 

4-4817 

121-65 

38-836 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

An  inspection  of  the  above  results,  obtained  from  bars  of  double  length  wrapped 
with  twice  the  length  of  wire,  leads  to  conclusions  similar  to  those  we  drew  from 
Table  I. 

It  appeared  to  me  a matter  of  very  great  importance  to  investigate  more  closely 
the  laws  which  regulate  the  magnetic  set,  and  to  determine  with  certainty  whether 
the  proportionality  between  the  set  and  the  square  of  the  current,  leading  as  it  inevi- 
tably would  to  the  better  understanding  of  the  nature  of  the  molecular  changes  which 
occur  in  a magnetized  bar,  existed,  and  to  what  modifications  it  was  subject.  Seeing, 
therefore,  that  the  supposed  law  began  to  fail  when  the  thicker  bars  were  employed, 
in  which  the  mutual  action  of  the  particles  distributed  over  a large  section  would 
naturally  tend  to  counteract  the  magnetic  induction  developed  on  the  exterior  sur- 
face, I constructed  two  straight  electro-magnets,  one  of  an  iron  wire  one  yard  long 
and  2^  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  the  other  of  an  iron  wire  one  yard  long  and  7^  of 
an  inch  in  diameter.  The  former  was  wrapped  with  a single  layer  of  covered  copper 
wire  i^th  of  an  inch  in  diameter  and  21  feet  long,  the  latter  similarly  with  wire 
27  feet  long.  The  attractions  of  these  wire  electro-magnets  were  ascertained  at 


292 


MR.  joule’s  introductory  RESEARCH  ON  THE 


distances  of  2 and  6 inches.  They  are  all  however  reduced  to  the  latter  distance  by 
means  of  the  data  derived  from  the  comparison  of  the  action  of  the  wire  electro- 
magnets at  the  respeetive  distances. 

In  the  adjoining’ Table,  all  the  results  except  the  last  six  were  obtained  at  2 inches 
distance,  and  the  observations  are  divided  by8'96,  the  relative  attraction  at  2 inches 
to  that  at  G inches,  called  unity;  the  first  recorded  magnetic  set  was  deduced  from 
the  mean  of  thirty-six  experiments  on  the  attraetion  at  2 inches  distance.  The  mean 
deflection  amounted  to  no  more  than  ’247  of  a minute  of  a degree,  and  as  the  error 
incident  to  any  single  observation  is  from  1 to  2 minutes  of  a degree,  it  follows  that 
no  great  reliance  can  be  placed  on  this  first  result. 


Table  III. 

Attraction,  at  6 inches,  of  wire  electro-magnet,  5^  inch  diameter,  wrapped  with 

21  feet  of  wire. 


No.  of  experi- 
ments forming 
the  mean  result. 


36 

32 

18 

20 

9 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

6 


Intensity 

of 

current. 


Total  change  of 
magnetism  by  re- 
versal of  current. 


•00441 

•0086/ 

•0195 

■0391 

•0568 

•0787 

•08061 

•0848  V0841 

•0870 J 

•O9O8I 

'llll  ^963 

•0992  J 

•10191 

:1!!85  p*"' 

•1089 J 
•1134^ 

•1151  >•1156 
•1184  J 

•4372 

1-2919 


•00072 

•00145 

•00377 

•00929 

•01528 

•02657 

•02798 

•02998 

•03220 

•03529 

•03976 

•04570 

•04413 

•04573 

•04838 

•05338 

•09969 

•05972 

•10190 

•06622 

•14570 

•19320 

•29710 

•32810 

•38750 

•52980 


Magnetic  set. 


•00001 

•00010 

•00029 

•00152 

•00330 

•00782 

•00855 

•00939 

•01001 

•01228 

•01488 

•02090 

•01809 

•01904 

•02047 

•02355 

•06240 

•02835 

•06580 

•03269 

•09900 

•14220 

•21420 

•22900 

•24760 

•26400 


Total  change 
minus 

magnetic  set. 


•00071 

•00135 

•00348 

•00777 

•01198 

•01875 

•01943 

•02059 

•02219 

•02301 

•02488 

•02480 

•02604 

•02669 

•02791 

•02983 

•03729 

•03137 

•03610 

•03353 

•04670 

•05100 

•08290 

•09910 

•13990 

•26580 


Set  divided 
by  square  of 
current. 


Total  change 
minus  set,  divided 
by  current. 


•934 


•5161 
1-352/ 

•763 

•994 

1-023 
1-263 
1-3161 
1*306  >1-315 
1-323/ 

1- 489'/ 

2- 124 
1-838 J 
1-8341 

1- 871  L-40 

2- 000 
5-262 J 
2-205^ 

4-967  >3-168 
2-332 J 

1-293 
•158 


•178 
•198 
•211 
•238 
•2411 
•243  >-246 
•255  J 
•253  ] 

■^^9  ^-256 

•250  f 

•262  J 
•2621 

•2fi7  • 

•S5 

•342 J 
•2771 
•314  >-291 
•283 J 

•320 

•206 


2 


4 


From  the  results  of  the  above  Table,  it  appears  that,  through  the  range  of  electrical 
intensities  from  ’0065  to  ’0841,  the  set  of  the  wire  electro-magnet  is  proportional  to 
tlie  square  of  the  cuirent;  that  fi-om  the  latter  intensity  to  -1060  the  set  increases 
with  much  greatei’  rapidity,  varying  at  one  point  with  the  6th  or  7th  power  of  the 


INDUCTION  OF  MAGNETISM  BY  ELECTRICAL  CURRENTS. 


29.3 


current;  and  that  from  the  intensity  *1060  the  rate  of  increase  rapidly  declines  as 
the  limit  of  magnetization  is  approached.  From  the  last  column  of  the  Table,  it  will 
be  seen  that  the  magnetic  effect  of  the  current,  separated  from  the  set,  increases  very 
uniformly  with  the  current,  though  a little  more  rapidly.  Similar  conclusions  may 
be  drawn  from  the  results  of  experiments  with  the  electro-magnet  of  thicker  wire 
contained  in  the  next  Table,  in  which  all  the  observations  but  the  last  four  were  made 
at  2 inches  distance,  and  are  reduced  to  the  standard  of  the  rest  by  dividing  by  6'668, 
the  observed  action  on  the  needle  at  the  distance  of  2 inches  compared  with  that  at 
6 inches. 


Table  IV. 

Attraction,  at  6 inches,  of  wire  electro-magnet,  ^2  inch  diameter,  1 yard  long, 

wrapped  with  27  feet  of  wire. 


Number  of  expe- 

Intensity 

Total  change  of 

Total  change 

Set  divided 

Total  change 

riments  forming 

of 

magnetism  by  re- 

Magnetic  set. 

minus 

by  square  of 

minus  set,  divided 

the  mean  result. 

current. 

versal  of  current. 

magnetic  set. 

current. 

by  current. 

44 

•0043 

•00213 

•00007 

•00206 

3-786 

•479 

20 

•0089 

•00443 

•00027 

•00416 

3-408 

•469 

20 

•0248 

•01498 

•00180 

•01318 

2-927 

•531 

10 

•0493 

•03835 

•00719 

•03116 

2-958 

•632 

10 

•0900 

•10720 

•03611 

•07109 

4-458 

•790 

10 

•18702 

•08508 

•10194 

6-739 

10 

•19404 

•10560 

•08844 

10 

•1998 

•45360 

•31840 

•13520 

7-976 

•677 

10 

•3448 

•68450 

•43310 

•25140 

3-643 

•729 

^ 6 

1*1633 

1-07320 

•48640 

•58680 

•359 

•504 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

My  next  experiments,  recorded  in  the  following  Table,  were  made  with  a bar  of 
hard  steel,  7f  inches  long,  ^ of  an  inch  in  diameter,  wound  with  34  feet  of  silked 
copper  wire  ^th  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  distributed  in  two  layers.  The  first  five 
observations  were  obtained  at  the  distance  of  3 inches,  and  are  reduced  to  the  stand- 
ard of  the  remaining  observations  at  9 inches  by  dividing  by  22*762,  the  number  of 
times  that  the  attraction  at  3 inches  was  observed  to  surpass  that  at  9 inches. 


2 Q 


MDCCCLVI. 


294 


MR.  joule’s  introductory  RESEARCH  ON  THE 


Table  V. 

Attraction,  at  9 inches,  of  steel  electro-magnet,  7f  inches  long,  ^ inch  diameter, 

wound  with  34  feet  of  wire. 


Number  of 
experiments 
forming  the 
mean  result. 

Intensity  of 
current. 

Total  change  of 
magnetism  on 
reversing  the 
current. 

Magnetic  set. 

Total  change 
minus  magnetic 
set. 

Set  divided  by 
square  of  current. 

Total  change 
minus  set,  divided 
by  current. 

40 

•0045 

•00281 

•0000092 

•00280 

•454 

•622 

40 

•0089 

•00543 

•0000448 

•00539 

•566 

•606 

20 

•0263 

•01663 

•0002157 

•01641 

•312 

•624 

10 

•0489 

•03132 

•0008769 

•03044 

•367 

•622 

8 

•0921 

•06046 

•0032278 

•05723 

•381 

•621 

j 20 

•1594 

•22992 

•02356 

•20636 

•927 

1-294 

8 

•3201 

•65241 

•17791 

•47450 

1-736 

1-482 

6 

•4582 

1 09119 

•39722 

•69397 

1-892 

1-514 

6 

•5688 

1-45540 

•58421 

•87119 

1-806 

1-531 

6 ■ 

•8381 

2-22020 

1-03410 

1-18610 

1-472 

1-415 

2 

1-5108 

2-96510 

1-29880 

1-66630 

•569 

1-103 

1 

2 

3 

4 

6 

6 

7 

From  the  preceding  Table  it  appears  that  the  set  of  the  steel  bar  increases  almost 
exactly  with  the  square  of  the  current  from  the  intensity  ‘0045  to  ‘0921  ; that  thence 
to  ‘1594  it  increases  more  rapidly  than  the  cube  of  the  current;  and  that  from  that 
point  it  increases  in  a gradually  diminishing  ratio  as  the  point  of  saturation  is 
approached.  It  will  be  remarked  that  the  first  five  numbers  of  column  7 are  nearly 
equal  to  one  another ; but  that  when  the  set  begins  to  increase  more  rapidly  than 
with  the  square  of  the  current,  the  magnetism  of  the  bar  over  and  above  the  set 
increases  more  rapidly  than  the  current. 

There  is  a striking  and  instructive  analogy  between  the  phenomena  above  pointed 
out  and  those  relating  to  the  set  and  elasticity  of  materials.  Professor  Hodgkinson 
has  pointed  out  that  the  set  or  permanent  change  of  figure  in  any  beam  is  propor- 
tional to  the  square  of  the  force  which  has  been  applied,  a law  which  of  course  is 
transgressed  near  the  breaking-point.  May  we  not  with  propriety  term  the  point  at 
which,  in  the  foregoing  experiments,  the  set  increases  so  abruptly,  the  magnetic  hreak- 
ing-polnt}  Mr.  Thomson  has  propounded  the  view,  that  the  elasticity  of  all  bodies  is 
perfect  when  abstraction  is  made  of  the  effect  of  set.  The  foregoing  Tables  indicate 
approximately  the  same  law  respecting  what  might  be  termed  the  magnetic  elasticity. 
The  analogy  thus  established  between  magnetic  and  ordinary  molecular  actions, 
when  viewed  in  connexion  with  those  changes  of  dimension  which  take  place  in  iron 
bars  by  magnetization,  and  which  I propose  to  study  more  deeply,  promises  to  afford 
a point  of  view  whence  a more  perfect  insight  into  the  nature  of  magnetism  than  we 
at  present  possess,  may  ultimately  be  attained. 


Oak  Field,  Moss  Side,  Manchester, 
June  20,  1855. 


INDUCTION  OF  MAGNETISM  BY  ELECTRICAL  CURRENTS. 


295 


Postscript. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  I have  made  the  subjoined  experiments  on  the  eiec- 
tro-magnetic  attraction  of  contact.  A cylinder  of  wrought  iron,  9 inches  long  and 
4 inches  in  diameter,  had  a hole  3 inches  in  diameter  bored  along  its  axis.  The  thick- 
ness of  the  metal  of  the  hollow  cylinder  thus  formed  was  exactly  half  an  inch.  This 
was  cut  longitudinally  into  two  exactly  equal  pieces,  the  surfaces  of  which  were  then 
carefully  finished.  Each  of  these  semicylinders  was  wound  with  25  feet  of  covered 
copper  wire  -j^th  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  making  fifteen  complete  convolutions. 
One  of  the  semlcylindrical  electro-magnets  thus  formed  was  firmly  secured  with  its 
flat  surfaces  upwards ; and  the  other,  with  its  surfaces  downwards,  was  suspended 
to  the  beam  of  a balance  sensitive  to  2 or  3 grains  when  several  pounds  were  in 
each  scale.  A cup  containing  mercury  was  affixed  to  one  of  the  terminals  of  the  wire 
of  the  subelectro-magnet,  into  which  a terminal  of  the  wire  of  the  suspended  magnet 
dipped.  And  similarly,  a mercury  cup  attached  to  the  other  terminal  of  the  sus- 
pended electro-magnet  was  dipped  into  by  a wire  in  connexion  with  the  voltaic  bat- 
tery, so  as  to  counteract  any  effect  on  the  balance  which  might  be  produced  by  the 
other  mercury  cup.  Each  semicylindrical  electro-magnet  was  thus  acted  upon  by 
the  same  current  of  electricity,  and  the  resulting  attractions  are  tabulated  below, 
each  recorded  number  being  the  mean  of  four  experimental  determinations,  two  with 
the  current  in  one  direction,  and  the  other  two  with  it  in  the  reverse  direction. 

Table  VI. 


Attraction  in  contact  of  two  semicylindrical  electro-magnets. 


Intensity 

of 

current. 

Attraction 
in  lbs. 
avoirdupois. 

Attraction 

of 

magnetic  set. 

Attraction  divided 
by  the  4th  power  of 
the  current. 

Attraction  of  magnetic 
set  divided  by  the  4th 
power  of  the  current. 

•0410 

•0.365 

•0045 

12917 

1592 

•0690 

•242 

•0185 

10676 

816 

•1013 

1-203 

•0835 

11424 

793 

•1388 

5-595 

•3280 

15074 

883 

•2074 

17-937 

2-5095 

9694 

1356 

•2364 

32-812 

4-9685 

10506 

1590 

•3682 

not  observed 

17-5 

952 

•7013 

not  observed 

40-25 

166 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

The  numbers  in  column  5 show  that  the  magnetic  set  obtained  by  a weak  current 
is  nearly  proportional  to  the  square  of  its  intensity.  On  inspecting  column  4,  it  will 
also  appear  that  the  magnetism  existing  during  the  flow  of  the  current  follows  the 
same  law  so  nearly,  that  we  may  infer  that  it  possesses  the  character  of  the  magnetic 
set.  Experiments  that  I have  recently  made  on  the  attraction  of  ordinary  electro- 
magnets for  their  armatures  lead  to  the  same  conclusions. 


December  21,  1855. 


[ 297  ] 


XIV.  Account  of  Pendulum  Experiments  undertaken  in  the  Harton  Colliery,  for  the 
purpose  of  determining  the  Mean  Density  of  the  Earth. 

By  G.  B.  Airy,  Esq.,  Astronomer  Royal. 


Received  December  26,  1855, — Read  January  24  and  31,  1856. 

Section  Introductory  and  Historical. 

1.  In  the  spring'  of  the  year  1826,  the  idea  occurred  to  me  of  attempting  a deter- 
mination of  the  Mean  Density  of  the  Earth  by  means  of  pendulum-experiments  at 
the  top  and  the  bottom  of  a deep  mine;  and  rough  preliminary  calculations,  which 
seemed  to  show  that  the  effect  of  accidental  errors  of  observation  on  the  ultimate 
result  would  probably  be  less  than  in  the  methods  which  up  to  that  time  had  been 
used,  confirmed  me  in  the  wish  to  try  it.  The  nature  of  these  preliminary  calculations 
was  nearly  the  following. 

2.  Conceive  the  earth  to  be  a sphere  of  radius  R and  mean  density  D,  surrounded 
by  a spherical  shell  of  thickness  c and  density  d,  so  that  the  radius  of  the  external 
surface  is  R-f-c.  As  the  attraction  of  the  spherical  shell  upon  a point  at  or  within 
its  inner  surface  is  nothing,  the  attraction  at  the  confines  of  the  inner  sphere  and 

shell  is  represented  by  _ and  the  attraction  at  the  external  surface  of 

the  shell  is  represented  by  y which  to  the  first  power  of  ~ is 

y RD^l  Calling  the  gravity  at  those  two  points  respectively  G and  g, 

:D=rcG~(i~l)-  considering  the  fractions  ^ 

and  ^ as  the  only  quantities  in  this  equation  liable  to  sensible  numerical  error, 

i density  of  the  shell,  or  d,  may  be  ascertained  by  actual 

examination,  = 5 therefore  ^ 

\D/  D D ’ D d G 

3.  In  order  to  give  a numerical  value  to  the  error  of  result,  suppose  that  ^=2 

R 

nearly  (a  proportion  rather  higher  than  Maskelyne’s)  ; that— =16000  (which  sup- 
poses the  thickness  of  the  shell,  or  the  depth  of  the  mine,  to  be  a quarter  of  a mile 
nearly) ; and  that  ”43^00  corresponds  to  an  error  of  0‘1  per  day  in  the 

2 R 


MDCCCLVI. 


298 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


vibrations  of  a seconds’  pendulum).  Then  ^ — 2 • ^"3^^ •439QQQ oi’ the  mean 

density  would  be  determined  with  an  error  not  exceeding  4-oth  part  of  the  whole. 
This  error,  I apprehend,  is  far  less  than  those  to  which  Cavendish’s  experiments 
were  liable  (Reich’s  and  Baily’s  experiments  had  not  been  made  at  the  date  of  this 
investigation,  but  I do  not  except  thetn  from  the  same  remark).  It  is  also  quite  as 
small  as  that  to  which  the  mere  astronomical  determination  in  the  Schehallien 
experiment  was  subject.  When  other  elements  of  calculation  are  examined,  as  the 
general  simplicity  in  the  form  of  the  ground  for  the  mine-experiment  and  the  com- 
plexity for  the  mountain-experiment,  the  accurate  knowledge  of  the  geology  for  the 
mine-experiment  and  the  obscurity  for  the  mountain-experiment,  the  difference 
becomes  still  more  striking  in  favour  of  the  mine-experiment  as  compared  with  that 
on  Schehallien. 

4.  In  a subsequent  section,  means  will  be  given  for  enabling  the  reader  to  judge 
whether  an  accuracy  like  OT  vibration  per  day  in  the  difference  of  the  rates  of  pen- 
dulums above  and  below,  in  tlie  mine-experiment,  has  really  been  obtained.  Methods 
will  also  be  indicated  for  computing  the  corrections  depending  on  the  irregularities 
of  the  earth’s  surface.  I advert  to  these  at  present  only  to  have  the  opportunity  of 
explaining  that  the  form  of  computation  exhibited  above  is  not  final,  but  is  merely 
intended  for  a preliminary  calculation,  showing  the  antecedent  plausibility  of  the 
experiment. 

5.  Upon  communicating  my  views  to  Mr.  (now  Dr.)  Whewell  (then,  like  myself, 
a resident  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge),  I found  him  entirely  disposed  to 
join  me  in  undertaking  the  experiment.  My  first  idea  had  been,  to  ascertain  the 
rate  of  a clock  at  the  top  and  the  bottom  of  a mine;  and  the  locality  which  first 
occurred  to  me  was  the  Ecton  Mine  in  Staffordshire.  But  it  was  soon  settled,  on 
discussion  with  Mr.  Whewell,  that  detached  pendulums  would  be  preferable  to 
clock  pendulums;  and,  the  Ecton  Mine  having  proved  on  examination  to  be  ill 
suited  to  our  purpose,  the  Dolcoath  Mine  near  Camborne  in  Cornwall  was  selected 
(partly  at  the  suggestion  of  John  Taylor,  Esq.).  The  Royal  Society  and  the  Board 
of  Longitude  most  liberally  lent  to  os  invariable  pendulums,  clocks,  and  other 
apparatus,  sufficient  for  the  simultaneous  observation  of  a pendulum  above  and  one 
below  ; and  the  Board  of  Admiralty  lent  us  box  and  pocket  chronometers,  to  be  used 
principally  for  the  comparison  of  the  upper  and  lower  clocks. 

6.  About  the  end  of  May  1826  we  proceeded  to  Dolcoath,  assisted  by  the  friendly 
introductions  of  the  late  Davies  Gilbert,  Esq.  and  of  Dr.  Paris  ; and  we  received 
from  the  resident  authorities  of  the  mine  every  possible  assistance  to  our  experiment ; 
and  from  the  late  Lord  De  Dunstanville,  E.  W.  W.  Pendarves,  Esq.,  and  other 
gentlemen  of  the  country  the  most  hospitable  attention  to  our  personal  comforts. 
And,  in  spite  of  the  labours  and  misfortunes  of  the  Cornish  enterprises,  I do  not  doubt 
that  they  are  regarded  by  my  companion  (as  well  as  by  myself)  as  among  the  most 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


299 


interesting  in  our  lives.  Stations  were  provided  for  us  at  the  surface  and  near  the 
lowest  part  of  the  mine ; the  latter  being  at  a short  distance  from  the  South  Shaft  or 
Harriet  Shaft,  near  the  junction  of  the  granite  and  the  killas,  in  the  180-fathom 
level  (the  depth  being  measured  from  the  adit  for  the  discharge  of  the  water  pumped 
from  the  mine),  or  nearly  1200  feet  below  the  surface.  This  place,  as  is  usual  in  the 
Cornish  mines,  could  only  be  reached  by  ladders. 

7.  Our  intention  was,  to  compare  the  vibrations  of  a detached  pendulum  in  each 
station  with  the  vibrations  of  a clock  pendulum,  in  the  manner  which  has  acquired 
so  much  celebrity  from  the  labours  of  Kater  and  Sabine,  and  to  compare  the  two 
clocks  by  means  of  chronometers  carried  on  the  person  of  an  attendant.  One  set  of 
observations,  extending  over  several  hours  (including  if  necessary  more  than  one 
series  of  coincidences),  was  to  be  observed  each  day.  When  this  should  be  carried 
far  enough,  the  pendulums  were  to  be  reversed  and  the  observations  were  to  be 
repeated,  or  the  two  pendulums  were  to  be  compared,  as  might  seem  best.  After 
overcoming  some  difficulties,  and  with  very  great  personal  labour,  we  found  on  com- 
puting approximately  the  results  that  the  chronometer-comparisons  were  not  trust- 
worthy. We  resumed  the  work,  with  a modification  of  the  method  of  using  the  chro- 
nometers which  promised  to  render  the  results  more  accurate.  We  were  raising  the 
lower  pendulum  up  the  South  Shaft  for  the  purpose  of  interchanging  the  two  pendu- 
lums, when  (from  causes  of  which  we  are  yet  ignorant)  the  straw  in  which  the  pendu- 
lum-box was  packed  took  fire,  the  lashings  were  burnt  away,  and  the  pendulum  with 
some  other  apparatus  fell  to  the  bottom.  This  terminated  our  operations  of  1826. 

8.  In  the  summer  of  1828  we  again  attempted  the  experiment,  in  the  same  locali- 
ties, and  with  the  same  general  instrumental  means.  Our  personal  powers  however 
were  far  greater  than  in  1826.  We  had  now  the  assistance  of  the  Rev.  R.  Sheep- 
shanks and  of  two  junior  observers  (my  brother  Mr.,  now  the  Rev.  W.  Airy,  and 
the  late  Rev.  S.  Jackson).  Our  plan,  principally  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Sheepshanks, 
was  so  modified  as  to  admit  of  incessant  observations  being  made,  day  and  night,  for 
several  days  consecutively;  and  this  arrangement  greatly  diminished  the  injurious 
effects  of  chronometer-errors.  A new  difficulty  now  presented  itself  in  the  irregular 
and  varying  foi’in  of  the  pendulums’  knife-edges.  After  tedious  experiments  on  these, 
which  seemed  at  last  likely  to  be  successful,  our  labours  were  suddenly  stopped  by 
the  occurrence  of  a “ fall”  in  the  mine.  The  lodes  or  metalliferous  veins  in  the 
Cornish  mines  are  usually  bounded  by  nearly  parallel  planes  inclined  perhaps  30°  or 
40°  to  the  vertical,  and  the  removal  of  the  vein-stuff  (even  when,  as  in  this  case,  the 
vacuity  has  been  filled  up  as  much  as  circumstances  permit)  endangers  the  falling  of 
the  rock  which  is  on  the  upper  side  of  the  lode.  On  this  occasion,  the  general  fall 
(in  consequence  of  the  precautions  above  described)  did  not  exceed  a few  inches ; 
but  large  masses  of  rock  were  detached  from  their  places,  and  interrupted  the  work- 
ing of  the  pumps;  and  our  lower  station  was  soon  flooded  by  the  rise  of  the  water. 
And  thus  for  the  second  time  our  attempts  were  defeated. 

2 R 2 


300 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIxMENT 


9.  Many  years  passed  on  before  sufficient  leisure  or  sufficient  motive  for  again 
trying  the  experiment  presented  itself  to  me.  The  only  great  improvement  in  the 
application  of  the  pendulum  to  the  measure  of  gravity  was  Bessel’s  discovery, 
reduced  to  a practical  form  (as  regarded  the  English  construction  of  the  pendulum) 
by  Colonel  Sabine,  of  the  necessity  of  an  increased  correction  for  the  pendulum’s 
buoyancy  in  the  atmosphere.  I had,  however,  opportunities  of  observing  the  dif- 
ficulties inherent  in  the  Cavendish  experiment,  from  witnessing  the  repetition  of  that 
experiment  by  my  late  friend  Mr.  F.  Baily.  At  length,  in  the  year  1854,  a new 
power  was  placed  in  my  hands.  The  galvanic  system  was  established  at  the  Royal 
Observatory,  and  in  the  familiarity  which  we  now  possessed  with  telegraphic  appli- 
cations I perceived  that  the  difficulty  of  comparing  the  upper  and  lower  clocks  would 
be  almost  entirely  removed.  The  coal-mines  of  the  Durham  coal-field  had  been 
worked  much  deeper,  and  the  facility  of  access  to  these  mines  would  materially 
diminish  the  labour  of  the  experiment;  while  the  intimate  acquaintance  with  the 
geological  character  of  the  country  possessed  by  the  coal-owners,  and  the  general 
regularity  of  the  beds,  would  give  great  confidence  in  the  ultimate  calculations  of  the 
attraction  of  the  mass  of  matter  principally  affecting  the  experiment.  After  a lapse 
of  twenty-six  years  from  the  last  attempt  in  Cornwall,  1 therefore  seriously  took  up 
the  subject  again,  and  proceeded  personally  to  examine  the  fitness  of  the  coal-mines 
of  Durham  for  the  experiment. 

10.  Assisted  by  the  introductions  of  David  Lietch,  Esq.,  M.D.,  and  by  the  local 
knowledge  of  James  Mather,  Esq.,  I had  little  difficulty  in  fixing  on  a mine.  The 
deepest  mines  in  the  Durham  coal-field  are  near  the  coast.  The  deepest  of  all  is  the 
Monk  Wearmouth  Colliery  ; but  it  is  so  close  to  the  sea  (its  workings  in  fact  extending 
far  under  the  sea),  that  it  seemed  probable  that  more  of  disadvantage  would  be  intro- 
duced by  the  complication  of  the  elements  of  final  computations  than  of  advantage 
by  its  extreme  depth.  The  next  in  depth,  I believe,  is  the  Harton  Pit,  at  the  distance 
of  somewhat  more  than  two  miles  from  South  Shields,  and  about  the  same  distance 
from  the  coast.  The  general  circumstances  of  form  of  surface,  &c.  are  as  favourable 
as  can^usiially  be  found.  Its  depth  is  reputed  to  be  1260  feet.  On  making  known 
to  William  Anderson,  Esq.,  the  principal  owner  of  the  coal-mine,  my  wish  to  try 
the  experiment  in  that  place,  I was  at  once  assured  that  every  assistance  should  be 
given  to  me.  In  company  with  C.  W.  Anderson,  Esq.  and  with  G.  W.  Arkley,  Esq. 
(local  viewer  and  superintendent  of  the  mine-works)  in  1854,  August  5,  I examined 
the  buildings  on  the  surface  and  the  workings  underground  in  the  “Bensham  seam,” 
and  stations  for  the  pendulums  were  speedily  chosen.  The  two  stations  were  exactly 
in  the  same  vertical.  The  upper  station  was  a stable  near  the  Mine  Office.  The 
lower  station  was  a wide  part  of  a gallery  (now  disused),  less  than  200  yards  from 
the  bottom  of  the  shaft:  in  going  from  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  to  the  station,  one- 
half  (roughly  speaking)  of  the  way  passed  along  one  of  the  tram-ways  of  the  mine, 
and  the  other  half  was  along  the  disused  gallery;  and  at  this  distance  the  sound  of 


FOR  DETERAJINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


301 


tbe  coal-trams,  &c.  on  the  tram-way  was  inaudible.  The  Harton  shaft  is  the  dovvn- 
cast  air-shaft  for  a very  extensive  series  of  workings,  of  which  the  upcast  shaft  is  at 
the  St.  Hilda  pit  in  the  town  of  South  Shields  ; and  the  lower  pendulum  station,  from 
its  proximity  to  the  Harton  pit,  was  constantly  and  agreeably  ventilated  with  pure 
fresh  air. 

The  owners  of  the  mine  immediately  proceeded,  at  their  own  expense,  to  make  the 
following  preparations  for  the  pendulums. 

11.  In  the  stable  for  the  upper  station,  an  additional  brick  wall  was  built  round 
three  sides  of  the  space  (about  16  feet  square)  intended  for  the  pendulum  room,  and 
an  additional  substantial  ceiling  was  constructed  above  it ; and  an  anteroom  was 
constructed  on  the  fourth  side ; so  that  the  room  was  in  fact  surrounded  by  double 
walls  and  ceiling.  The  immediate  entrance  from  the  external  air  was  into  the  ante- 
room ; and  from  the  anteroom  there  were  doors  into  the  pendulum  room  and  into  a 
narrow  room  at  one  side.  [In  this  narrow  room  were  afterwards  placed  the  galvanic 
batteries  and  journeyman-clock,  and  the  lamp  for  illuminating  the  pendulum  disk. 
The  lamp  for  illuminating  the  face  of  the  principal  clock  was  in  the  anteroom,  giving 
its  light  through  a hole  in  the  dividing  wall ; and  the  observer  was  stationed  in  the 
anteroom,  his  observing  telescope  being  fixed  in  a hole  in  the  wall.]  From  the 
gas-works  of  the  mine,  gas  was  led  to  a gas-stove  in  the  anteroom,  and  also  to  a 
writing-lamp.  In  order  to  make  the  support  of  the  pendulum  firm,  the  soft  earth 
was  removed  to  the  depth  of  3 feet  (at  which  level  the  hard  clay  was  reached,  which 
extends  about  90  feet  lower  to  the  first  bed  of  rock),  and  the  cavity  was  filled  with 
ashlar  stones  united  with  mortar  at  the  joints:  the  surface  was  paved  level  with  flag- 
stones and  bricks. 

12.  In  the  lower  station,  some  upright  shores  which  had  been  placed  in  the  space 
assigned  for  the  pendulum  room  were  removed,  and  inclined  rafters  were  substituted. 
The  rock  was  cut  level,  and  the  bricks  and  flagstones  were  laid  immediately  on  it. 
Brick  walls  were  built  enclosing  a trapezoidal  room  nearly  representing  a square  of 
16  feet,  with  an  anteroom,  and  a third  room;  and  level  ceilings  were  constructed 
above  them. 

13.  For  the  galvanic  communication  between  the  two  stations,  two  wires  covered 
with  gutta  percha  were  led  underground  from  the  stable  to  the  mouth  of  the  pit ; and 
were  then  carried  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  pit,  being  supported  in  the  following 
manner.  The  shaft  is  divided  from  top  to  bottom  by  a wooden  partition  or  brattice. 
At  every  100  feet  in  the  descent,  a wooden  peg  about  6 inches  long  and  2 inches  in 
diameter  was  fixed  in  the  brattice.  The  galvanic  wires  were  wrapped  round  this  peg, 
and  were  pinched  fast  by  a piece  of  wood  which  was  screwed  to  the  peg.  In  this 
manner  the  wires  were  held  perfectly  steady,  and  no  part  was  strained  by  an  ex- 
cessive weight  hanging  upon  them.  On  reaching  the  bottom  of  the  shaft,  the  wires 
were  carried  horizontally  along  the  top  of  the  galleries,  protected  by  boards  of  wood, 
till  they  entered  the  lower  station.  The  labour  of  Telegraph  Engineers,  which  was 


302 


MR,  airy’s  account  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


required  for  fixing  these  wires  and  for  other  adjustments  of  the  galvanic  apparatus, 
was  contributed  gratuitously  by  the  Electric  Telegraph  Company;  the  work  being 
done  under  the  direction  of  their  resident  agent  at  Newcastle,  Mr.  Mathews. 

14.  The  local  arrangements  being  thus  brought  to  a very  satisfactory  state,  I had 
next  to  provide  the  proper  apparatus.  On  my  request,  through  Colonel  Sabine, 
Treasurer  of  the  Royal  Society,  the  Council  of  the  Society  immediately  placed  at  my 
disposal  the  instruments  which  they  possessed  and  which  applied  to  ray  wants.  These 
were  two  invariable  pendulums,  both  by  Thomas  Jones  (distinguished  by  the  marks 
“ 1821  ” and  “ No.  8”  respectively),  which  were  preserved  in  the  Kew  Observatory  ; 
iron  stands  for  the  pendulums,  accompanied  by  wooden  stands  for  the  comparison 
clocks,  preserved  in  the  Magnetic  Office  at  Woolwich  ; and  a clock  by  Shelton 
(which  I had  formerly  used  in  Cornwall,  and  which  still  bore  my  paper  marks  upon 
its  pendulum).  To  these  I added  a clock  by  Earnshaw  (from  the  east  dome  of  the 
Royal  Observatory) ; a journeyman-clock  (from  the  Royal  Observatory)  to  be  used 
in  signal-transmission;  two  galvanometers,  similar  to  the  ordinary  speaking-needle 
of  the  galvanic  telegraph  ; galvanic  batteries  ; barometers,  thermometers,  &c.  Every 
instrument  was  brought,  for  trial,  to  the  Royal  Observatory. 

15.  Each  iron  stand  consists  of  a horizontal  triangle  of  iron  bars  for  base;  two 
inclined  iron  bars  in  a vertical  plane  for  front,  their  tops  being  screwed  to  the  sides 
of  an  iron  box-frame  which  supports  the  agate-frame  on  which  the  knife-edge 
vibrates ; and  one  inclined  bent  iron  bar  behind,  screwed  to  the  back  of  the  same 
box-frame.  On  erecting  one  of  the  iron  stands  at  the  Royal  Observatory,  it  was 
found  impossible  to  pass  the  upper  brass  block  of  the  pendulums  (to  which  the  steel 
knife-edge  is  screwed)  through  the  holes  of  the  box-frame.  It  was  necessary  there- 
fore to  enlai’ge  the  holes  by  filing ; and  as  this  weakened  the  front  of  the  box-frame, 
the  following  apparatus  was  introduced  in  order  to  strengthen  it.  A small  hexagonal 
iron  frame  was  prepared,  consisting  of  a horizontal  base  nearly  equal  in  length  to  the 
interior  measure  of  the  box-frame,  two  vertical  sides  nearly  half  the  height  of  the  box- 
frame,  two  inclined  sides,  and  a horizontal  top  about  one-third  as  long  as  the  bottom. 
Screws  were  tapped  through  the  horizontal  base.  This  apparatus  was  placed  in  the 
front  opening  of  the  box-frame  ; and,  when  the  screws  were  driven,  the  short  horizon- 
tal top  was  forced  up  to  the  upper  bar  of  the  box-frame  so  as  to  give  it  all  desirable 
firmness.  As  the  weakened  stand,  furnished  with  this  apparatus,  was  evidently  firmer 
than  the  other  stand,  a similar  apparatus  was  provided  for  the  other  stand. 

16.  The  agate-planes,  and  the  knife-edges  (which  were  much  injured  by  rust),  were 
reground  and  polished  by  Mr.  Simms  with  the  utmost  care ; the  knife-edges  being 
finished  to  an  angle  of  about  120°.  On  mounting  them  at  the  Royal  Observatory,  it 
was  found  that  they  touched  the  agate-planes  only  in  a few  points  ; and  the  singularity 
of  the  mode  of  contact  reminded  me  so  strongly  of  the  contact  in  Cornwall  in  1828, 
that  I do  not  doubt  that  one  pendulum  was  the  same  and  affected  by  the  same  faults. 
A few  interchanges,  &c.  of  pendulums  showed  that  the  fault  was  not  in  the  agate- 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


303 


planes,  but  in  the  knife-edges.  Mr.  Simms  on  examination  found  that,  when  the 
attaching  screws  were  relaxed,  the  bearing  on  the  agate-planes  was  continuous  and 
perfect.  It  was  evident  therefore  that  the  fault  was  in  the  surface  of  the  brass 
blocks  which  carry  the  knife-edges.  On  filing  these  it  was  found  easy  to  bend  the 
knife-edge  into  any  form.  A surface  was  at  length  given  to  the  brass  which  made 
the  bearing  of  the  knife-edges  upon  the  agates  absolutely  perfect,  as  far  as  the  eye 
could  discover. 

The  upper  and  lower  pendulums,  when  mounted  in  their  proper  stations,  vibrated 
in  parallel  planes,  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  direction  of  magnetic  East  and  West. 

The  graduated  arcs  for  measuring  the  extent  of  vibration  were  divided  to  inches, 
with  continuous  numeration  from  one  end ; and  were  placed  behind  the  pendulum 
tails. 

The  thermometers  (two  for  each  pendulum)  were  suspended  in  front,  at  about  ^ 
and  f the  distances  from  the  knife-edge  to  the  bob.  Their  indications  were  found  to 
be  all  sensibly  accordant. 

17.  In  fitting  up  the  comparison-clocks,  a small  alteration  was  made  which  proved 
exceedingly  convenient.  The  illuminated  disk  (to  be  concealed  by  the  tail  of  the 
invariable  pendulum)  was  an  inclined  section  of  a small  cylindrical  block  attached 
by  a central  screw  to  the  bob  of  the  clock  pendulum.  The  inclined  surface  was 
covered  with  gold-leaf.  A hole  (covered  with  glass)  was  made  in  each  side  of  the 
clock-case,  and  through  either  of  these  the  light  of  the  illuminating  lamp  was  thrown 
upon  the  gold-leaf.  By  shifting  the  lamp  and  turning  the  small  cylindrical  block,  a 
brilliant  light  was  reflected  to  the  observing-telescope,  the  lamp  being  always  in 
a distant  position  and  in  a lateral  direction.  Moreover,  by  slightly  turning  the  clock 
stand  in  azimuth,  the  apparent  breadth  of  the  inclined  disk  was  altered,  and  it  could 
thus  be  adapted  to  disappearance  behind  the  pendulum-tail. 

The  adjustible  aperture  through  which  the  disk  was  seen,  and  which  was  covered 
by  the  pendulum-tail  in  its  quiescent  position,  was  in  front  of  the  clock-case. 

18.  By  the  side  of  each  clock-face  a galvanometer  was  fixed.  The  galvanic  wires 
were  led  to  and  from  the  terminals  of  the  galvanometer,  not  immediately,  but  through 
the  intermediation  of  a circuit-breaker;  so  that  the  observer  could  at  any  time  inter- 
rupt the  current. 

19.  The  journeyman-clock  was  thus  fitted  up.  Two  wires  were  led  into  it  (one 
from  the  galvanic  battery,  and  the  other  in  continuation  of  the  course  of  the  same 
wire  from  the  journeyman  to  the  next  comparison-clock),  terminating  within  the 
journeyman  in  a pair  of  springs  which  performed  the  duty  of  circuit-breaker.  Upon 
the  minute-wheel  of  the  journeyman  were  four  pins,  which,  as  the  wheel  revolved, 
pressed  the  two  springs  together,  thus  completing  the  circuit  (in  that  part)  at  every 
15®  of  the  journeyman’s  time. 

20.  The  battery  was  the  ordinary  sand-battery,  of  24  cells.  The  batteries  and 
journeyman  were  in  the  side-room  of  the  upper  station. 


304 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BARTON  EXPERIMENT 


The  wire  from  one  end  of  the  battery  was  led  to  one  terminal  of  the  journeyman. 
From  the  other  terminal  of  the  journeyman  a wire  was  led  to  the  circuit-breaker  in 
connexion  with  the  galvanometer  of  the  upper  clock.  From  the  other  terminal  of 
the  galvanometer  a wire  was  led  down  the  mine-shaft  to  the  circuit-breaker  in  con- 
nexion with  the  galvanometer  of  the  lower  clock.  From  the  other  terminal  of  this 
lower  galvanometer  a wire  was  led  up  the  mine-shaft  to  the  other  pole  of  the  battery. 
Thus  when  both  the  upper  and  the  lower  circuit-breakers  completed  contact  (and  at 
no  other  time),  the  journeyman-clock  made  the  circuit  complete  and  sent  a current 
through  both  the  galvanometers  at  every  15®  of  the  journeyman’s  time. 

20*.  Plate  XI.  contains  views  of  the  pendulum-apparatus  nearly  in  the  state  in 
which  it  was  used  in  the  upper  station.  The  principal  diagram  is  a front  view  of 
the  apparatus  as  mounted  at  Greenwich,  taken  with  the  camera  lucida,  and  may  be 
trusted  for  general  accuracy.  The  iron  bars  of  the  pendulum-stand  are  about  inch 
square.  The  stand  of  the  clock  does  not  touch  the  pendulum-stand  in  any  part.  The 
hexagonal  frame  introduced  into  the  box-frame  is  conspicuous  in  this  view.  The 
battery  is  not  the  same  which  was  used  at  the  mine.  The  mounting  at  the  lower 
station  was  exactly  similar,  wanting  only  the  journeyman-clock  and  the  battery. 
The  frame  with  agate-planes  (represented  on  a larger  scale),  which  is  planted  on  the 
top  of  the  box-frame,  is  supported  on  three  screw-feet : the  screw-stalks  are  per- 
forated ; two  are  cut  with  an  internal  screw-thread,  and  long  screws  are  passed 
upwards  through  smooth  holes  in  the  box-frame,  and  act  in  these  internal  screw- 
threads  and  draw  them  firmly  down:  the  perforation  in  the  third  is  smooth,  and  the 
long  screw  which  passes  down  through  it  acts  in  a screw-thread  cut  in  the  box-frame. 
At  the  sides  of  the  blocks  which  carry  the  agate-planes  are  notched  brass  plates  turn- 
ing upon  pins,  connected  by  a stouter  piece  of  brass  beyond  the  pins,  through  which 
a screw  passes  that  acts  in  the  solid  block  below;  by  driving  this  screw  the  notches 
are  raised,  and  engage  with  the  ends  of  the  pendulum-knife-edge,  and  lift  it  off  the 
agates. 

21.  The  system  of  observations  which  I proposed  was  the  following.  One  of  the 
invariable  pendulums  was  to  be  mounted  at  the  upper  station  and  the  other  at  the 
lower  station,  and  the  two  pendulums  were  to  be  observed  simultaneously  by  two  ob- 
servers. The  “Swings”  or  series  of  vibrations  were  to  follow  each  other  incessantly, 
day  and  night,  with  no  more  interruption  than  would  be  required  for  observing  the 
galvanic  signals,  reading  thermometers,  and  making  petty  adjustments.  Six  Swings 
(each  occupying  in  the  gross  four  hours)  were  to  be  taken  in  each  day.  At  con- 
certed minutes  of  time  before  the  first  and  after  the  last  Swing,  and  between  the  end 
of  each  preceding  Swing  and  the  beginning  of  that  which  followed,  galvanic  signals 
were  to  be  observed.  Several  “Coincidences”  of  the  vibrations  of  the  detached 
pendulum  with  the  clock  pendulum  were  to  be  observed  in  Rater’s  manner  at  the 
beginning  and  end  of  each  Swing,  This  system  was  to  be  maintained  during  the 
whole  efficient  time  of  one  week : then  the  pendulums  with  their  agate-planes  and 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


305 


thermometers,  but  with  no  other  apparatus,  w^ere  to  be  interchanged,  and  a week’s 
observations  were  to  be  made  in  this  state.  The  pendulums  were  to  be  interchanged 
a second  time  and  a third  time,  so  that,  in  the  whole,  four  series  of  observations 
would  be  taken:  but  I thought  it  probable  that  less  than  a week  would  suffice  for 
each  of  these  latter  series. 

22.  On  considering  the  amount  of  labour  required  for  carrying  out  this  plan,  and 
considering  also  that  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  take  an  active  part,  I judged  that  six 
observers  would  be  necessary.  With  the  sanction  of  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the 
Admiralty,  I appointed  Mr.  Edwin  Dunkin  and  Mr.  William  Ellis,  Assistants  of 
the  Royal  Observatory,  as  two  of  the  observers.  With  the  permission  of  M.  J.  John- 
son, Esq.,  I was  enabled  to  solicit  and  to  obtain  the  services  of  Mr.  Norman  Pogson, 
Assistant  of  the  Oxford  Observatory ; Professor  Challis  consented  to  my  asking  the 
aid  of  Mr.  G.  S.  Criswick,  Assistant  of  the  Cambridge  Observatory ; by  permission 
of  Professor  Chevallier,  Mr.  George  Rumker,  Astronomer  of  the  Durham  Ob- 
servatory, joined  the  party ; and  finally  I w'as  enabled,  by  the  kindness  of  R.  C.  Car- 
rington, Esq.,  to  avail  myself  of  the  services  of  Mr.  G.  H.  Simmonds,  Assistant  of 
the  Red  Hill  Observatory.  Mr.  Dunkin  superintended  the  parly,  and,  during  the 
observations,  controlled  the  local  operations  of  every  kind.  Under  the  admirable 
management  of  Mr.  Dunkin,  and  the  zealous  and  orderly  assistance  of  all  the  gentlemen 
whom  I have  named,  the  work  went  on  with  the  most  perfect  regularity,  t cannot 
express  how  much  I am  indebted  to  the  hearty  cooperation  of  every  individual 
Assistant  during  the  whole  course  of  the  operations  from  the  beginning  to  the  end. 

Lodgings  were  provided  for  the  party  in  the  town  of  South  Shields.  Their  com- 
fort, during  their  singular  occupation,  as  well  as  my  own  on  the  occasions  of  my 
visits,  were  greatly  increased  by  the  uniform  kindness  of  the  authorities  of  the  mine, 
and  by  the  hospitable  attentions  of  Robert  Ingham,  Esq.,  M.P.,  John  Robinson,  Esq., 
Mayor  of  South  Sliields,  James  Mather,  Esq.,  J.  C.  Stevenson,  Esq.,  of  the  Jarrow 
Chemical  Works,  and  other  gentlemen  resident  in  the  town  or  neighbourhood. 
Attendants  in  the  mine  were  selected  and  placed  under  the  command  of  the  observers 
by  the  owners  of  the  mine. 

23.  I may  now  give  a brief  journal  of  the  operations. 

1854.  August  5. — I examined  the  mine,  and  stations  were  selected. 

Instruments  were  procured,  repaired,  and  sent  to  the  Harton 
Mine;  and  observers  were  collected. 

September  26. — I went  to  South  Shields. 

September  27. — I erected  the  clocks  and  pendulum  at  the  upper  station. 

September  28. — I erected  the  clocks  and  pendulum  at  the  lower  station.  In 
the  evening,  four  of  the  observers  arrived. 

September  29. — In  the  morning,  the  remaining  observers  arrived.  All  were 
en)ployed  in  adjusting  the  pendulums,  &c.  and  in  the 
practice  of  observations. 

2 s 


mdccclvi. 


306 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


1854.  September  30. — I returned  to  Greenwich,  leaving  all  in  the  charge  of 

Mr.  Dunkin. 

October  2. — Observations  commenced  in  the  morning  with  Swing  1.  Pen- 
dulum 1821  above,  No.  8 below.  Observers  for  the  day, 
Mr.  Dunkin  (above),  Mr.  Ellis  (below),  from  the  begin- 
ning of  Swing  1 to  the  beginning  of  Swing  3. 

Observers  for  the  night,  Mr.  Pogson  and  Mr.  Rumker, 
from  the  end  of  Swing  3 to  the  beginning  of  Swing  6. 

October  3. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Criswick  and  Mr.  Simmonds,  from 
the  end  of  Swing  6 to  the  beginning  of  Swing  9 : for  the 
night,  Mr.  Ellis  and  Mr.  Pogson,  from  the  end  of  Swing  9 
to  the  beginning  of  Swing  12. 

October  4. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Rumker  and  Mr.  Criswick,  from 
the  end  of  Swing  12  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  15  : for 
the  night,  Mr.  Ellis  and  Mr.  Simmonds,  from  the  end  of 
Swing  15  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  18. 

October  5. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Criswick  and  Mr.  Pogson,  from  the 
end  of  Swing  18  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  21  : for  the 
night,  Mr.  Simmonds  and  Mr.  Rumker,  from  the  end  of 
Swing  21  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  24. 

October  6. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Dunkin  and  Mr.  Ellis,  from  the 
end  of  Swing  24  to  the  end  of  Swing  26.  The  First 
Series  was  closed  at  the  end  of  Swing  26. 

October  7- — Mr.  Dunkin,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Ellis  and  Mr.  Pogson, 
interchanged  the  pendulums. 

October  9. — The  Second  Series  commenced  with  Swing  27-  Pendulum 
No.  8 above,  1821  below. 

Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Simmonds  and  Mr.  Cris- 
wick, from  the  beginning  of  Swing  27  to  the  beginning 
of  Swing  29:  for  the  night,  Mr.  Ellis  and  Mr.  Dunkin, 
from  the  end  of  Swing  29  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  32. 

October  10. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Rumker  and  Mr.  Pogson,  from  the 
end  of  Swing  32  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  35  : for  the 
night,  Mr.  Criswick  and  Mr.  Simmonds,  from  the  end  of 
Swing  35  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  38. 

October  11. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Dunkin  and  Mr.  Ellis,  from  the 
end  of  Swing  38  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  41  : for  the 
night,  Mr.  Rumker  and  Mr.  Pogson,  from  the  end  of 
Swing  41  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  44. 

October  12. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Simmonds  and  Mr.  Criswick,  from 
the  end  of  Swing  44  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  47 : for 


FOR  DETERxMINlNG  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


307 


the  night,  Mr.  Dunkin  and  Mr.  Ellis,  from  the  end  of 
Swing  47  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  50. 

1854.  October  13. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Pogson  and  Mr.  Rumker,  from  the 

end  of  Swing  50  to  the  end  of  Swing  52.  The  Second 
Series  was  closed  at  the  end  of  Swing  52. 

October  14. — Mr.  Dunkin,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Ellis  and  Mr.  Pogson, 
interchanged  the  pendulums. 

October  16. — The  Third  Series  commenced  with  Swing  53.  Pendulum  1821 
above.  No.  8 below.  Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Criswick 
and  Mr.  Simmonds,  from  the  beginning  of  Swing  53  to  the 
beginning  of  Swing  55  : for  the  night,  Mr.  Rumker  and 
Mr.  Pogson,  from  the  end  of  Swing  55  to  the  beginning 
of  Swing  58. 

October  17. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Ellis  and  Mr.  Dunkin,  from  the 
end  of  Swing  58  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  61  : for  the 
night,  Mr.  Simmonds  and  Mr.  Criswick,  from  the  end  of 
Swing  61  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  64. 

October  18. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Pogson  and  Mr.  Rumker,  from  the 
end  of  Swing  64  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  67  ; of  which 
the  end  was  observed  by  Mr.  Dunkin  and  Mr.  Ellis. 
The  Third  Series  was  closed  at  the  end  of  Swing  67. 
Mr.  Dunkin  and  Mr.  Ellis  interchanged  the  pendulums 
at  night. 

October  19. — The  Fourth  Series  commenced  wdth  Swing  68,  begun  by 
Mr.  Dunkin  and  Mr.  Ellis.  Pendulum  No.  8 above, 
1821  below.  Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Criswick  and 
Mr.  Simmonds,  from  the  end  of  Swing  68  to  the  beginning 
of  Swing  71  : for  the  night,  Mr.  Rumker  and  Mr.  Pogson, 
from  the  end  of  Swing  71  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  74. 

October  20. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Dunkin  and  Mr.  Ellis,  from  the 
end  of  Swing  74  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  77 : for  the 
night,  Mr.  Simmonds  and  Mr.  Criswick,  from  the  end  of 
Swing  77  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  80. 

October  21. — Observers  for  the  day,  Mr.  Pogson  and  Mr.  Rumker,  from  the 
end  of  Swing  80  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  82  : the  end  of 
Swing  82  was  observed  by  Mr.  Dunkin  and  Mr.  Pogson. 
The  Fourth  Series  and  the  whole  operation  closed  with 
Swing  82. 

October  22. — I arrived  from  Greenwich. 

October  23. — I inspected  the  instruments  in  position,  and  dismounted  them. 

October  24. — The  instruments  were  mounted  in  the  Central  Hall  of  South 

2 s 2 


308 


MR,  airy’s  account  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


Shields,  and  I explained  the  nature  of  the  observations 
to  an  assembly  of  the  residents  of  South  Shields  and  its 
neighbourhood. 

1854.  October  25. — The  instruments  were  finally  dismounted,  and  packed  up  for 

return  to  Greenwich  ; and  the  party  dispersed. 

24,  In  terminating  this  general  history  of  the  operation,  it  is  proper  perhaps  that 
I should  briefly  allude  to  the  sources  from  which  the  expenses  were  defrayed. 

The  Royal  Society,  in  granting  the  loan  of  their  pendulums  and  clock,  not  only 
enabled  me  to  undertake  the  operation  with  promptitude  and  with  the  security  of 
using  trustworthy  instruments,  but  also  removed  one  of  the  most  serious  causes  of 
expense.  I have  already  alluded  to  the  extensive  works  constructed  by  the  owners 
of  the  Harton  Colliery,  and  which  they  made  entirely  at  their  own  expense;  and  to 
the  liberality  of  the  Electric  Telegraph  Company,  who  gratuitously  gave  me  their 
important  assistance  in  the  galvanic  connexions.  In  transmitting  the  instruments 
from  the  wharfs  at  Newcastle  to  South  Shields,  Messrs.  Stevenson  and  Co.,  of  the 
Jarrow  Chemical  Works,  gave  the  use  of  their  river-craft.  The  Mayor  and  Corpo- 
ration of  South  Shields,  unsolicited,  caused  the  surveys  to  be  made  which  were 
needed  for  computation  of  the  attraction  of  the  ground.  Some  parts  of  the  appa- 
ratus (galvanometers,  wires,  stoves,  &c.)  were  so  evidently  applicable  to  the  pro- 
spective wants  of  the  Royal  Observatory,  that  they  were  not  considered  as  a charge 
on  the  Experiment.  The  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty,  on  my  laying  before 
them  my  proposals,  contributed  £100,  which  defrayed  the  greater  part  of  the  miscel- 
laneous expenses.  The  residual  charges  were  borne  by  myself. 

Section  II. — Comparisons  of  the  Upper  and  Lower  Clocks. 

25.  In  the  ordinary  state,  the  galvanic  circuit  was  interrupted  at  both  circuit- 
breakers.  At  the  pre-arranged  minute  for  commencing  signals,  as  nearly  as  possible, 
each  of  the  observers  completed  the  connexion,  and  then  gave  his  attention  to  the 
galvanometer.  The  movement  of  the  needle,  at  intervals  of  15®  nearly,  assured  each 
observer  that  the  other  was  prepared  to  observe  ; and  every  observation  of  the  clock- 
time of  the  movement  of  the  needle  was  then  efficient  for  comparison  of  the  two 
clocks.  Only,  it  was  necessary  to  know  precisely,  when  the  time  of  examining  the 
written  record  of  the  time-signals  should  arrive,  which  were  the  corresponding  obser- 
vations of  the  same  galvanic  current.  For  this  purpose,  the  following  instructions 
were  given.  After  observing  the  clock-times  of  a few  signals,  the  upper  observer 
interrnjited  the  circuit  during  one  signal  only,  and  then  restored  the  connexion.  The 
lower  observer,  after  waiting  one  or  two  minutes,  did  the  same  thing.  After  another 
short  delay,  the  upper  observer  interrupted  the  circuit  during  two  signals.  The  lower 
observer,  after  a sliort  delay,  did  the  same.  Then  the  observations  were  continued 
till  the  upper  observer  was  satisfied  with  the  number,  after  which  he  definitively 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


309 


broke  the  circuit ; the  lower  observer  then  broke  circuit ; and  both  prepared  to 
observe  Coincidences  of  the  pendulums.  On  examining'  the  interruptions  of  signals, 
no  difficulty  was  found  in  confronting  the  corresponding  observations.  In  one 
instance  only  (between  Swings  16  and  17)  was  the  comparison  totally  lost,  in  conse- 
quence of  one  of  the  needles  sticking  fast.  The  observation  of  the  time  of  the  start 
of  the  needle  is  not  very  delicate;  and  this  part  of  the  operation  would  be  made 
much  more  exact,  by  causing  each  clock  to  register  its  own  seconds  upon  a common 
revolving  barrel,  in  the  manner  of  the  American  transits. 

26.  The  observations  on  each  side  which  had  no  corresponding  observations  on  the 
other  side  being  struck  out,  the  means  of  all  the  times  of  the  remaining  observations 
in  each  group  were  taken,  and  the  difference  of  means  was  formed.  As  a check,  the 
differences  of  the  times  by  the  two  clocks  for  each  individual  signal  were  formed,  and 
the  mean  of  the  differences  was  taken.  In  this  manner  there  were  formed,  for  every 
group,  mean  corresponding  times  of  Shelton  (the  upper  clock)  and  Earnshaw  (the 
lower  clock)  ; the  differences  of  these,  from  group  to  group,  gave  the  corresponding 
changes  of  clock-indications  by  the  two  clocks  during  the  same  period  of  absolute 

. , , . ^ Earnshaw’s  change  of  indication  , . . 

time  ; and  the  quotient  ; — ; ^ ^ — gave  the  apparent  ratio  of 

^ bHELTON  s change  ol  indication  ^ ‘ 

rates.  The  logarithm  of  this  ratio  was  formed,  by  means  of  Callet’s  logarithms,  to 
eight  decimals. 

27.  A very  cursory  examination  of  these  ratios  showed  that  there  was  a consider- 
able personal  equation  in  the  observation  of  the  galvanometer-signals.  Though  (from 
the  nature  of  the  combination  to  be  hereafter  described)  this  scaicely  produces  an 
appreciable  effect  on  the  ultimate  result,  I thought  it  desirable  to  ascertain  approxi- 
mately its  magnitude,  and  to  apply  the  corresponding  correction.  I proceeded  as 
follows: — In  every  instance  in  which  the  signal  observations  at  the  beginning  and  at 
the  end  of  a Swing  were  made  by  different  observers,  I compared  the  logarithms  of 

apparent  rates  of  during  that  swing  with  the  logarithms  for  the  preceding 

and  following  swings  (in  three  instances,  however,  with  only  the  preceding  swing)  ; 
and  formed  the  excess  of  the  logarithm  of  the  intermediate  swing  above  the  mean  of 
the  preceding  and  following  logarithms.  I'his  numerical  excess  may  be  compared 
with  a symbolical  formula,  in  which  the  symbols  represent,  not  the  actual  error  in 
time  committed  by  each  observer,  but  the  logarithm  (in  8-figure  units)  of  the  influ- 
ence of  his  error  on  rates  deduced  from  comparisons  at  4-hour  intervals.  Twenty- 
seven  equations  were  thus  formed.  By  the  method  of  minimum  squares,  these  were 
reduced  to  six,  of  which  (from  the  nature  of  the  case)  one  was  unnecessary,  their  sum 
being  identically  equal  to  zero.  Assuming  D (Mr.  Dunkjn’s  error)  =0,  the  others 
are  found  by  solution  of  the  equations.  Though  the  equations  are  not  very  favour- 
able, they  suffice  for  giving  very  good  corrections,  and  they  show  in  particular  that 
Mr.  SiMMONDS  recorded  his  times  too  early  by  nearly  half  a second.  The  following 


3i0  MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 

Table  exhibits  this  work  ; the  fundamental  numbers  being  obtained  from  a table 
which  is  to  follow : — 


No.  of 
Swing. 

Order  of 
Observers. 

Symbol  for  the  Errors 
of  Logarithmic  Rate 
Earnshaw 

Errors 

inferred  from 
the  computed 
Logarithmic 
Rates. 

No.  of 
Swing. 

Order  of 
Observers. 

Symbol  for  the  Errors 
of  Logarithmic  Rate 
Earnshaw 

Errors 

inferred  from 
the  computed 
Logarithmic 
Rates. 

Above. 

Below. 

Shelton 
produced  by  each 
observer’s  error  in  the 
estimation  of  time. 

1 

Above. 

Below. 

Shelton 
produced  by  each 
observer’s  error  in  the 
estimation  of  time. 

3. 

D 

P 

E 

R 

D+R-P-E 

- 277 

47. 

s 

D 

C 

E 

S +E-D-C 

- 946 

6. 

P 

C 

R 

S 

P-hS  -C-R 

— 45 

50. 

D 

P 

E 

R 

D+R-P-E 

+ 135 

9. 

C 

E 

S 

P 

C+P-E-S 

+ 134 

55. 

C 

R 

S 

P 

C+P-R-S 

+ 2850 

12. 

E 

R 

P 

C 

E-bC-R-P 

-1957 

58. 

R 

E 

P 

D 

R+D-E-P 

— 381 

15. 

R 

E 

c 

s 

R+S -E-C 

+ 512 

61. 

E 

S 

D 

C 

E+C-S -D 

— 254 

18. 

E 

C 

s 

p 

E+P-C-S 

+ 2257 

64. 

S 

P 

C 

R 

S +R-P-C 

— 1621 

21. 

C 

s 

p 

R 

C-f  R-S  -P 

+ 1125 

67. 

P 

D 

R 

E 

P+E-D-R 

+ 443 

24. 

s 

D 

R 

E 

S +E-D-R 

+ 177 

68. 

D 

C 

E 

S 

D+S -C-E 

-1079 

29- 

s 

E 

C 

D 

S -bD-E-C 

- 933 

71. 

C 

R 

S 

P 

C+P-R-S 

+ 1156 

32. 

E 

R 

D 

P 

E+P-R-D 

+ 360 

74. 

R 

D 

P 

E 

R+E-D-P 

— 1135 

35. 

R 

C 

P 

S 

R+S -C-P 

— 1581 

77. 

D 

S 

E 

C 

D+C-S -E 

+ 1083 

38. 

C 

D 

s 

E 

C+E-D-S 

+ 747 

80. 

s 

p 

C 

R 

S +R-P-C 

— 1706 

41. 

D 

R 

E 

P 

D+P-R-E 

+ 956 

82. 

p 

D 

R 

P 

2P— D — R 

— 465 

44. 

R 

S 

P 

C 

R+C-S-P 

+ 531 

Equations, 

18. C—  2.D+  2.E+  P—  4. R— 15.8=4-10557 

— 2.C+15.D— 14.E-  5.P4-  5.R+  8=4-  577 

4-  2.C- 14.DH-18.E-f  2.P—  6.R—  2.8=—  458 

C-  5.D-1-  2.E-1-22.P— 16.R—  4.8=H-14048 

— 4.C-f  5.D—  6.E-16.P4-19.R-I-  2.8=—  7873 

— 15.C4-  D—  2.E-  4. PH-  2.R4-18.8=  — 16851. 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


311 


Approximate  Solution,  assuming  D— 0 

C = — 720 
D=  0 
E = — 240 
P=+  180 
R=-  330 
S = — 1500 

These  are  applied,  with  signs  changed,  to  correct  the  computed  Logarithmic  Rates 
in  the  Swings  which  are  included  in  the  last  Table : and  thus  are  formed  the  Cor- 
rected Logarithmic  Rates”  in  the  Table  which  follows  next. 

28.  It  is  impossible  to  give  here  in  detail  the  whole  of  the  observations  of  Galvanic 
Signals.  The  whole  number  of  eflScient  signals  observed  at  each  station  was  2454 
(or  4908  observations  of  signals  in  all).  It  will  be  sufficient  to  give  here  the  mean  of 
each  group  (which,  from  the  check  described  above,  is  extremely  certain),  and  the 
calculations  founded  on  those  means. 

It  will  be  remarked  that  the  pendulums  of  the  clocks  were  altered  at  the  titnes  of 
interchanging  the  detached  pendulums;  that  is,  between  Swings  26  and  27,  between 
52  and  53,  and  between  67  and  68. 


Mean  of  Times 
by  Shelton. 

Mean  of  Times 
by  Earnshaw. 

h 

m 

s 

h 

m 

s 

3 

19 

36-505 

21 

23 

28-764 

7 

19 

59-605 

1 

24 

7-486 

11 

18 

21-257 

5 

22 

44-886 

16 

3 

49-086 

10 

8 

31-307 

20 

20 

55-618 

14 

25 

54-541 

23 

34 

17-516 

17 

39 

29-336 

3 

24 

0-019 

21 

29 

26-990 

7 

19 

2-090 

1 

24 

44-423 

11 

21 

43-600 

5 

27 

41-868 

15 

52 

49-386 

9 

59 

5-459 

19 

20 

39-133 

13 

27 

8-783 

23 

20 

26-425 

17 

27 

11-971 

3 

23 

56-841 

21 

30 

58-000 

7 

22 

17-846 

1 

29 

35-058 

12 

37 

16-581 

6 

44 

54-325 

15 

17 

40-815 

9 

25 

29-184 

0 

4 

30-435 

18 

12 

53-509 

3 

38 

31-257 

21 

47 

8-990 

7 

22 

43-210 

1 

31 

35-486 

11 

20 

58-654 

5 

30 

6-754 

15 

24 

25-414 

9 

33 

49-910 

19 

21 

5-003 

13 

30 

44-920 

23 

19 

37-063 

17 

29 

32-489 

3 

20 

35-327 

21 

30 

46-555 

7 

20 

24-754 

1 

30 

51-725 

11 

20 

39-762 

5 

31 

22-579 

Approximate 

Time 

(Astronomical 

Reckoning). 


a §3 


Interval 
by  Shelton. 


Interval 
by  Earnshavv. 


Rate 


Earnshaw 


Shelton 


Logarithm  of 

T,  , Earnshaw 
Rate 


Shelton 


Corrected 
Logarithm  of 
Earnshaw 


Rate 


Shelton 


1- 

2- 

3- 

4- 

5- 

6- 

7- 

8- 
9- 

lo- 

ll- 

12- 

13- 

14- 

15- 
16 
17 
18- 

19- 

20- 
21- 
22- 

23- 

24- 

25- 

26- 


Oct. 

1. 

2. 

2. 

2. 

2. 

2. 

2. 

3. 

3. 

3. 

3. 

3. 

3. 

4. 
4. 
4. 


4. 

4. 

5. 
5. 
5. 
5. 
5. 

5. 

6. 

6. 


h 

23 

3 

7 

11 

16 

19 

23 

3 

7 
11 
15 
19 
23 

3 

8 
11 


20 

23 

3 

7 

11 

15 

19 

23 

3 

7 


22 

21 

21 

29 

17 

25 

31 

21 

25 

22 

24 

24 

17 

24 

16 

13 

31 

21 

21 

24 

29 

30 
19 
22 
24 
24 


-4  45 
•4  17 
•3  13 
49 
55 
2 
31 
27 
59 
3 
58 
14 


23- 100 
21-652 
27-829 

6-532 

21-898 

42-503 

2-071 

41-510 

5-786 

49-747 

47-292 

30-416 

21-005 

58-735 

24- 234 


•2  40 
•8  46  49-620 


34 

44 

68 

3 

56 

58 
0 

59 
0 


0-822 

11-953 

15-444 

26-760 

39-589 

32-060 

58-264 

49-427 

15-008 


m 

0 

58' 

45 

17 

13 

49 

55 

2 

31 

28 

0 

3 

58 

15 


38-722 

37-400 

46-421 

23-234 

34-795 

57-654 

17-433 

57-445 

23-591 

3-324 

3-188 

46-029 

37-058 

19-267 

34-859 


2 40 
8 47  24-325 


34  15-481 
44  26-496 
58  31-268 
3 43-156 
56  55-010 
58  47-569 
1 14-066 

0 5-170 

0 30-854 


1-0010831 

1-0011011 

1-0010855 

1-0010827 

1-0011116 

1-0010994 

1-0010893 

1-0010944 

1-0010947 

1-0010888 

1-0011049 

1-0010686 

1-0011225 

1-0010865 

1-0011040 

1-0010979 

1-0011416 

1-0010812 

1-0011071 

1-0011225 

1-0010861 

1-0010836 

1-0010930 

1-0010942 

1-0010993 


0-00047012 

0-00047793 

0-00047117 

0-00046995 

0-00048249 

0-00047720 

0-00047282 

0-00047503 

0-00047516 

O-OOO4726O 

0-00047959 

0-00046384 

0-00048723 

0-00047160 

0-00047920 

0-00047655 

0-00049550 

0-00046930 

0-00048054 

0-00048723 

0-00047142 

0-00047034 

0 00047442 

0-00047495 

0-00047716 


0-00047387 

0-00047990 

0-00046316 

0-00047194 

0-00048790 

0-00047390 

0-00048453 

0-00048852 


31*2 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


No.  of 
Swing. 

Approximate 

Time 

(Astronomical 

Reckoning). 

Number  of 
Signals. 

Oct. 

h 

8. 

23 

49 

/ 

9. 

3 

43 

^0  * * • 

29--- 

QA... 

9. 

9. 

7 

11 

28 

24 

9- 

15 

25 

3^3... 

9. 

19 

27 

9. 

23 

24 

00 

10. 

3 

23 

• 

10. 

7 

24 

3g... 

10. 

11 

39 

10. 

15 

32 

0/  • • • 

10. 

19 

39 

10. 

23 

38 

39” 

40.. . 

41 .. . 

11. 

11. 

3 

7 

26 

26 

45... 

11. 

11 

22 

43... 

11. 

15 

24 

44... 

11. 

19 

22 

45  •* 

11. 

23 

46 

46--- 

12. 

3 

35 

4^7 .. . 

12. 

7 

30 

'I/  ••• 

4ft  • 

12. 

11 

28 

40  •• 

12. 

15 

29 

50... 

12. 

19 

27 

51- 

12. 

13. 

23 

3 

27 

25 

13. 

7 

29 

15. 

23 

104 

0 »3  * * * 

16. 

3 

25 

04  • * • 

16. 

7 

26 

o5*** 

■"16. 

11 

og 

5.7 . . . 

ri6. 

15 

28 

0/ 

58--- 

16. 

16. 

19 

23 

25 

25 

60*** 

17. 

3 

23 

61  ••• 

17. 

7 

29 

17. 

1 1 

.31 

6-3... 

17. 

15 

29 

64... 

17. 

19 

34 

65  • 

17. 

23 

29 

66-.. 

18. 

3 

30 

67-.- 

18. 

7 

27 

18. 

1 1 

45 

f^ft  . . . 

18. 

19 

55 

ICiO... 

18. 

23 

28 

!*rn . . . 

19. 

3 

25 

1 / u 

I7 1 . . . 

19. 

7 

31 

'/I 

,70. . . 

19. 

1 1 

56 

T'i... 

19. 

1 0 

27 

/ •> 

74  ■ . 

19. 

19 

28 

19. 

23 

27 

/.->■■■ 

20. 

3 

28 

77... 

20. 

7 

24 

J 4 

20. 

1 1 

30 

20. 

1 0 

31 

/ O**' 
W A . . . 

20. 

19 

30 

ft  1 ... 

20. 

23 

30 

82--. 

21. 

3 

28 

21. 

4 

06 

Table  (continued). 


Mean 

of  Times 

Mean 

of  Times 

by  Shelton. 

by  Ea 

RNSHAW. 

h 

in 

s 

h 

m 

S 

3 

14 

11-153 

21 

37 

30-535 

7 

5 

28-335 

1 

29 

8-074 

11 

3 

59-086 

5 

28 

0-068 

15 

10 

13-763 

9 

34 

36-246 

19 

10 

55-648 

13 

35 

39-344 

23 

3 

9-796 

17 

28 

14-011 

3 

21 

34-825 

21 

47 

1-900 

7 

21 

9-339 

1 

46 

57-395 

11 

4 

11-154 

5 

30 

18-967 

15 

5 

44-566 

9 

32 

13-120 

19 

4 

23-337 

13 

31 

12-775 

23 

4 

19-227 

17 

31 

29-687 

3 

19 

38-884 

21 

47 

11-955 

7 

4 

23-004 

1 

32 

15-723 

11 

4 

15-577 

5 

32 

29-061 

15 

22 

8-855 

9 

50 

45-077 

19 

9 

3'871 

13 

37 

59-867 

23 

4 

17-750 

17 

33 

34-191 

3 

19 

34-541 

21 

49 

13-263 

7 

4 

54-177 

1 

34 

52-317 

11 

3 

51-880 

5 

34 

10-673 

15 

14 

4-168 

9 

44 

44-254 

19 

7 

12-252 

13 

38 

12-479 

23 

4 

58-141 

17 

36 

18-748 

3 

27 

18-618 

21 

59 

1-711 

7 

4 

2-968 

1 

36 

4-528 

11 

2 

53-297 

5 

35 

15-189 

2 

51 

48-661 

22 

3 

1-492 

6 

24 

31-280 

1 

35 

55-852 

10 

24 

35-061 

5 

36 

12-788 

14 

26 

49-607 

9 

38 

41-534'" 

18 

44 

44-739 

13 

56 

50-736 

22 

23 

5-716 

17 

35 

23-696 

2 

25 

8-388 

21 

37 

39-488 

6 

24 

5-987 

1 

36 

50-126 

10 

25 

1-100 

5 

37 

58-355 

14 

26 

49-803 

9 

40 

0-171 

18 

26 

20-928 

13 

39 

44-404 

22 

27 

15-182 

17 

40 

51-521 

2 

45 

4-417 

21 

58 

53-931 

6 

27 

17-680 

1 

41 

19-037 

10 

26 

6-444 

5 

40 

20-118 

14 

29 

14-087 

9 

43 

40-451 

21 

34 

41-845 

17 

32 

42-435 

1 

36 

40  043 

21 

34 

58-875 

5 

37 

1 8-936 

1 

35 

56-268"’ 

9 

37 

36-387 

5 

36 

31-803 

13 

41 

57-245 

9 

41 

11-578 

17 

36 

14-544 

13 

35 

46-770’" 

21 

37 

46-375 

17 

37 

36-82l‘" 

1 

49 

22-985 

21 

49 

31-91 1 

5 

38 

17-214 

1 

38 

43-214 

9 

35 

52-683 

5 

36 

36-362"' 

13 

51 

13-747 

9 

52 

16-680'” 

17 

38 

14-806 

13 

39 

34-400 

21 

37 

3-387 

17 

38 

40-577 

1 

42 

59-657 

21 

44 

54-297 

5 

35 

31-132 

1 

37 

42-732  " 

9 

46 

46-654 

5 

49 

16-422'"  ■ 

by 


••4 

••4 

••4 

••4 

••3 

••4 

•4 

•3 

••3 

••4 

•■3 

••3 

••4 

••3 

••4 


Interval 

Shelton. 

by 

m 

S 

h 

51 

17-182 

3 

58 

30-751 

3 

6 

14-677 

4 

0 

41-885 

4 

52 

14-148 

3 

18 

25-029 

4 

59 

34-514 

3 

43 

1-815 

3 

1 

33-412 

4 

58 

38-771 

3 

59 

55-890 

4 

15 

19-657 

4 

44 

44-120 

3 

59 

52-573 

4 

17 

53-278 

4 

46 

55-016 

3 

55 

13-879 

3 

15 

16-791 

4 

45 

19-636 

3 

58 

57-703 

3 

10 

12-288 

4 

53 

8-084 

3 

57 

45-889 

3 

22 

20-477 

4 

36 

44-350 

3 

58 

50-329 

3 

32 

42-619 

3 

0 

3-781 

4 

2 

14-546 

4 

17 

55-132 

4 

38 

20-977 

3 

2 

2-672 

4 

58 

57-599 

3 

0 

55-113 

4 

1 

48-703 

4 

59 

31-125 

3 

0 

54-254 

4 

17 

49-235 

4 

42 

13-263 

3 

58 

48-764 

3 

3 

7-643 

4 

1 

58-198 

4 

0 

38-893 

4 

0 

17-451 

4 

4 

20-858 

4 

54 

17-299 

3 

1 

31-831 

4 

11 

36-610 

4 

48 

54-229 

3 

57 

35-469 

3 

15 

21-064 

4 

47 

1-059 

3 

58 

48-581 

3 

5 

56-270 

4 

52 

31-475 

3 

11 

15-522 

4 

Rate 


Earnshaw 


Shelton 


Loganthm  of 

„ Earnshaw 

Rate  „ 

Shelton 


Interval 

Earnshaw. 


ra 

s 

51 

37-5.39 

58 

51-994 

6 

36-178 

1 

3-098 

52 

34-667 

18 

47-889 

59 

55-495 

43 

21-572 

1 

54-153 

58 

59-655 

0 

16-912 

15 

42-268 

45 

3-768 

0 

13-338 

18 

16-016 

47 

14-790 

55 

34-324 

15 

39-072 

45 

39-054 

59 

18-356 

10 

33-581 

53 

28-225 

58 

6-269 

22 

42-963 

37 

2-8I7 

59 

10-661 

32 

54-360 

0 

16-936 

2 

28-746 

18 

9-202 

38 

32-960 

2 

15-792 

59 

10-638 

1 

8-229 

2 

1-816 

59 

44-233 

1 

7-117 

18 

2-410 

42 

25-106 

59 

1-081 

3 

20-333 

2 

16-440 

0 

57-393 

0 

35-535 

4 

39-775 

54 

35-192 

1 

50-051 

11 

55-090 

49 

11-303 

57 

53-148 

15 

40-318 

47 

17-720 

59 

6-177 

6 

13-720 

52 

48-435 

11 

33-690 

1-0014670 

1-0014844 

1-0014553 

1-0014690 

1-0014726 

1-0014744 

1-0014596 

1-0014765 

1-0014311 

1-0014586 

1-0014603 

1-0014760 

1-0014572 

1-0014427 

10014696 

1-0014524 

1-0014486 

1-0014547 

1-0014363 

1-0014405 

1-0014184 

1-0014399 

1-0014286 

1-0014286 

1-0014201 

1-0014188 


1-0009200 

1-0009134 

1-0009770 

1-0009092 

1-0009148 

1-0009034 

1-0009095 

1-0009074 

1-0009039 

1-0009121 

1-0008899 

1-0008518 

1-0008884 

1-0008597 

I-OOO8699 


1-0012565 

1-0012814 

1-0012544 

1-0012903 

1-0012729 

1-0012573 

1-0012241 

1-0012432 

1-0012402 

1-0012567 

1-0012232 

1-0012281 

1-0011826 

1-0012158 

1-0012051 


0-00063664 
0-00064419 
0-00063157 
0-00063751 
0-00063907 
0-00063985 
0-00063344 
0 00064076 
0-00062107 
0-00063300 
0-00063374 
0-00064054 
0-00063240 
0-00062610 
0-00063777 

0 00063031 
0-00062866 
0-00063131 
0-00062333 
0-00062515 
0-00061556 
0-00062489 
0-00061999 

0-00061999 

0-00061630 

0-00061574 


000039937 

0-00039650 

0-00042410 

0-00039469 

0-00039712 

0-00039216 

0-00039482 

0-00039390 

0-00039238 

0-00039594 

0-00038631 

0-00036977 

0-00038565 

0-00037320 

0-00037763 


0-00054535 

0-00055614 

0-00054444 

0-00056001 

0-00055246 

0-00054570 

0-00053129 

0-00053958 

0-00053828 

0-00054543 

0-00053091 

0-00053302 

0-00051330 

0-00052770 

0-00052305 


Corrected 
Logarithm  of 

„ . Earnshaw 

Rate  —7; 

Shelton 

0-00063697 

0-00063715 

0-00063397 

0-00063514 

0-00063027 

0-00062861 

0-00062576 

0-00062269 

0-00041120 

0-00039486 

0-00038698 

0-00038267 

0-00037493 

0-00055075 

0-00054711 

0-00053879 

0-00053523 

0-00052620 

0-00051615 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


313 


Section  III. — General  System  of  observing  the  Pendulums  and  of  reducing  the 

Observations. 

29.  Before  describing  the  obsei-vations,  &c.,  I will  remai-k  that  the  pendulums 
above  and  below  wei’e  mounted  in  exactl}’^  the  same  manner.  Each  angle  of  the 
iron  stand,  in  each  station,  rested  on  a single  brick  ; and  gi-eat  cai’e  was  taken  by 
Mr.  Dunkin  that  the  bearing  of  these  bricks  should  he  perfectly  solid.  It  was  also 
a subject  of  Mr.  Dunkin’s  special  attention  to  make  the  supplementary  hexagonal 
iron  fi’ame  (which  I have  described  in  article  15)  quite  firm  ; and,  above  all,  to  fix 
firmly  at  the  beginning  of  each  series  and  to  examine  cai-efully  at  the  end  of  each 
series  the  frame  carrying  the  agate-planes.  In  every  instance  these  were  found  per- 
fectly firm  in  their  attachment.  At  every  interchange  of  pendulums,  Mr.  Dunkin 
carefully  oiled  and  wiped  the  knife-edges  and  their  agate-planes.  At  the  beginning 
of  every  swing,  the  observer  raised  the  knife-edge  from  contact  with  the  agate-plane, 
by  the  screw-lifting  apparatus,  and  then  lowered  it  gently  to  a definite  line  of  bearing. 

30.  The  pendulum  being  observed  in  Rater’s  manner,  by  using  the  concealment 
of  the  bright  disk  on  the  clock-pendulum-bob  behind  the  tail  of  the  detached  pen- 
dulum, when  passing  the  aperture  through  which  alone  the  disk  can  be  seen,  as  indica- 
tion of  the  Coincidence  of  the  two  pendulums  in  the  times  of  passing  their  respective 
quiescent  points;  and  supposing  that  there  are  trifling  errors  in  the  adjustments 
of  position  ; it  is  seen  in  practice,  or  is  shown  by  a very  simple  investigation,  that  the 
disk  will  first  disappear  in  passing  from  one  side  (suppose  the  right  side)  towards 
the  centre,  then  will  disappear  in  passing  from  the  left  side  (after  which,  if  the  errors 
of  adjustment  are  in  the  proper  direction,  it  will  be  invisible  during  several  vibra- 
tions), then  it  will  reappear  on  the  left  side,  and  will  finally  reappear  on  the  right 
side.  Either  the  mean  of  the  times  of  the  first  and  fourth  phenomenon,  or  the  mean 
of  the  second  and  third,  or  the  mean  of  all  four,  may  be  used  as  the  true  time  of 
Coincidence;  and  it  was  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  observers  to  adopt  which  they 
preferred.  They  chose,  in  every  case,  to  observe  the  first  and  fourth  only.  This 
amounts  in  fact  to  using  only  one  side  of  the  aperture. 

It  is  necessary  for  the  success  of  this  observation  that  the  arc  of  the  detached 
pendulum  be  less  than  that  of  the  clock  pendulum  ; in  fact  it  was  always  much  less. 
It  is  indifferent  whether  the  detached  pendulum  vibrate  quicker  or  slower  than  the 
clock  pendulum  ; in  fact  it  always  vibrated  slower. 

31.  Several  Coincidences  were  always  observed  at  the  beginning-  of  a Swing,  and 
several  at  the  end.  These  gave  the  Interval  of  Coincidences  nearly  enough  to  enable 
me  to  fix  upon  the  number  of  intervening  Coincidences.  In  general,  some  of  the 
observed  Coincidences  were  rejected,  so  that  from  two  to  five  Coincidences  were 
retained  at  the  beginning,  and  a number  at  the  end  so  corresponding  that  the  differ- 
ence of  their  means  would  represent  an  integral  number  of  Intervals  (thus  there 
might  be  3 at  the  beginning  and  5 at  the  end,  or  4 at  the  beginning  and  2 at  the 

2 T 


MDCCCLVI. 


314 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


end).  The  mean  of  the  first  retained  and  the  last  retained  being  taken,  the  difference 
of  means  divided  by  the  number  of  Intervals  gave  a very  exact  value  of  Mean 
Interval. 

In  the  Interval,  the  detached  pendulum  lost  two  vibrations  on  the  clock  pendulum. 
If  then  the  times  of  the  first  and  last  mean  be  taken  from  the  cloch-face,  and  if  n be 
the  number  of  seconds,  referred  to  the  clock,  in  the  Mean  Interval,  the  rate  of  the 

detached  pendulum  on  the  clock  pendulum  will  be  The  following  Tables  con- 

7t  2 

tain  all  the  values  of  log  which  are  required  here.  For  estimating  the  effect  of 

any  error  in  the  Interval,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  logarithm  of  orof 

a rate  of  one  second  daily,  is  500  in  the  last  figures  of  8-figure  logarithms,  nearly. 


w. 

-r  n— 2 

Log 

n 

n. 

T n — 2 

Log • 

n 

n. 

T n — 2 

Log 

n 

T n — 2 

Log • 

n 

w. 

r n—2 

Log 

n 

293-0 

9-99702537 

300-0 

9-99709501 

376-0 

9-99768376 

392-0 

9-99777854 

405-0 

9-99785003 

•1 

2639 

-1 

9598 

•1 

8438 

•1 

7911 

-1 

6056 

•2 

2740 

•2 

9695 

•2 

8499 

-2 

7967 

-2 

5109 

•3 

2842 

-3 

9792 

•3 

8561 

•3 

8024 

-3 

5162 

•4 

2943 

-4 

9889 

•4 

8622 

•4 

8080 

-4 

5215 

•5 

3045 

•5 

9-99709986 

•5 

8684 

-5 

8137 

-5 

5268 

•6 

3146 

•6 

9-99710083 

•6 

8746 

•6 

8194 

-6 

5321 

•7 

3248 

•7 

0179 

-7 

8807 

•7 

8251 

•7 

5374 

•8 

3349 

-8 

0276 

•8 

8869 

•8 

8307 

-8 

5428 

•9 

3451 

•9 

0372 

•9 

8930 

-9 

8364 

•9 

5481 

294-0 

3552 

301-0 

0469 

377-0 

8992 

393-0 

8421 

406-0 

5534 

•1 

3653 

-1 

0565 

-1 

8477 

-1 

5587 

-2 

3754 

*2 

0662 

389-0 

9-99776137 

-2 

8534 

-2 

5639 

•3 

3856 

-3 

0758 

•1 

6194 

•3 

8590 

-3 

5692 

•4 

3957 

-4 

0855 

•2 

6252 

-4 

8647 

-4 

5744 

-5 

4058 

•5 

0951 

-3 

6309 

-5 

8703 

-5 

5797 

•6 

4158 

-6 

1047 

•4 

6367 

-6 

8759 

-6 

5850 

•7 

4259 

•7 

1143 

•5 

6424 

■7 

8816 

•7 

5903 

•8 

4359 

•8 

1239 

-6 

6482 

•8 

8872 

-8 

5955 

•9 

4460 

•9 

1335 

•7 

6539 

•9 

8929 

•9 

6008 

295-0 

4560 

302-0 

1431 

•8 

6597 

394-0 

8985 

407-0 

6061 

-9 

6654 

-1 

6114 

298-0 

9-99707545 

374-0 

9-99767134 

390-0 

6712 

403-0 

9-99783932 

-2 

6166 

•1 

7643 

-1 

7196 

'1 

6769 

•1 

3986 

-3 

6219 

-2 

7741 

•2 

7258 

•2 

6827 

-2 

4040 

-4 

6271 

•3 

7840 

-3 

7321 

•3 

6884 

-3 

4094 

-5 

6324 

-4 

7938 

-4 

7383 

-4 

6942 

•4 

4148 

-6 

6377 

-5 

8036 

•5 

7445 

•5 

6999 

-5 

4202 

•7 

6429 

-6 

8134 

-6 

7507 

•6 

7056 

-6 

4255 

-8 

6482 

•7 

8232 

•7 

7569 

•7 

7113 

•7 

4308 

•9 

6534 

•8 

8330 

•8 

7632 

•8 

7170 

•8 

4362 

408-0 

6587 

•9 

8428 

-9 

7694 

•9 

7227 

•9 

4415 

-1 

6639 

299-0 

8526 

375-0 

7756 

391-0 

7284 

404-0 

4468 

-2 

6692 

-1 

8624 

-1 

7818 

•1 

7341 

•1 

4522 

-3 

6744 

-2 

8722 

•2 

7880 

-2 

7398 

•2 

4575 

-4 

6797 

-3 

8819 

•3 

7942 

•3 

7456 

•3 

4629 

-5 

6849 

-4 

8917 

•4 

8004 

•4 

7513 

•4 

4682 

-6 

6901 

-5 

9015 

•5 

8066 

•5 

7570 

•5 

4736 

•7 

6953 

-6 

9112 

-6 

8128 

•6 

7627 

•6 

4789 

-8 

7006 

•7 

9209 

•7 

8I9O 

•7 

7684 

•7 

4843 

-9 

7058 

-8 

9307 

-8 

8252 

•8 

7740 

•8 

4896 

409-0 

7110 

-9 

9404 

•9 

8314 

'9 

7797 

•9 

4950 

FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


115 


Table  (continued). 


n. 

T n — 2 

Log . 

n 

n. 

T n—2 

Log 

n 

n. 

T n—2 

Log 

n 

w. 

r n—2 

Log 

n 

n. 

T n—2 

Log 

n 

488-0 

9*99821645 

489*3 

9-99822120 

490-6 

9*99822591 

491-9 

9-99823062 

493-2 

9-99823529 

•1 

1682 

•4 

2156 

*7 

2628 

492-0 

3098 

-3 

3565 

•2 

1718 

•5 

2193 

-8 

2664 

•1 

3134 

•4 

3601 

•3 

1755 

•6 

2229 

•9 

2701 

•2 

3170 

•5 

3637 

•4 

1791 

*7 

2265 

491-0 

2737 

-3 

3206 

-6 

3673 

•5 

1828 

•8 

2302 

•1 

2773 

-4 

3242 

*7 

3708 

•6 

1864 

*9 

2338 

•2 

2809 

•5 

3278 

-8 

3744 

•7 

1901 

490-0 

2374 

•3 

2845 

•6 

3314 

*9 

3779 

•8 

1937 

•1 

2410 

•4 

2881 

•7 

3350 

494-0 

3815 

•9 

1974 

•2 

2446 

-5 

2917 

-8 

3385 

489*0 

2010 

-3 

2483 

-6 

2953 

*9 

3421 

•1 

2047 

-4 

2519 

*7 

2989 

493-0 

3457 

•2 

2083 

•5 

2555 

•8 

3026 

-1 

3493 

1 

32.  The  number  given  by  this  table  is  the  logarithm  of  the  mean  Rate  of  the  De- 
tached Pendulum  upon  the  Clock  Pendulum  under  the  actual  circumstances  of  observa- 
tion. It  is  next  required  to  investigate  the  correction  to  this  logarithm  depending  on 
the  extent  of  the  arc  of  vibration ; one  of  the  conditions  of  the  data  of  the  problem 
being,  that  the  arc  is  observed  only  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  Swing. 

In  the  first  place,  to  compute  the  correction  to  the  logarithm,  supposing  the  arc  of 
vibration  constant.  Let  the  whole  arc  of  vibration,  as  seen  upon  the  scale  of  inches, 
be  I.  For  the  pendulum  1821,  suppose  the  scale  to  be  placed  1 inch  behind  the 
pendulum  ; and  for  the  pendulum  8,  r8  inch  behind  the  pendulum.  And  suppose 
the  distance  of  the  object-glass  of  the  observing  telescope  to  be  100  inches.  Then 

the  real  whole  arc  of  vibration  is  Ix  for  pendulum  1821  and  Ix  fof  pen- 
dulum 8.  The  lengths  of  the  two  pendulums,  from  the  knife-edge  to  the  indicating 
point  of  the  tail,  are  respectively  60'7  and  60*2  inches.  Hence  the  proportion  of  the 

real  whole  arc  of  vibration  to  the  length  of  the  pendulum  is  Ix  fb/x  60-7 
dulum  1821  and  Ix  ioi-8^66-2  pendulum  8 ; in  which  expressions  the  factors  of 
I are  sensibly  the  same.  Call  this  proportion  C.  Then  the  number  of  vibrations 

observed  is  to  be  multiplied  by  1+  ^ or  l + Px^y  ( ibi  x 60-7 ) ' instance 

therefore  we  require  the  logarithm  of  l + PXgy  ( loi  x60-7y  values  of  I not 
exceeding  2’5.  The  following  Table  contains  the  numbers  required,  in  units  of  the 
last  figures  of  8-figure  logarithms. 


I. 

Log. 

I. 

Log. 

I. 

Log. 

I. 

Log. 

I. 

Log. 

0-1 

2 

0-6 

65 

1-1 

218 

1-6 

462 

2*1 

796 

0-2 

7 

0-7 

88 

1-2 

260 

1*7 

522 

2-2 

874 

0-3 

16 

0-8 

116 

1-3 

305 

1-8 

585 

1 2-3 

955 

0-4 

29 

0-9 

146 

1-4 

353 

1*9 

652 

2-4 

1040 

0-5 

45 

1-0 

180 

1-5 

405 

2*0 

722 

1 2-5 

1128 

2 T 2 


316 


MR,  airy’s  account  OF  THE  BARTON  EXPERIMENT 


Next,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  experimentally  the  law,  or  rather  the  numerical 
succession  of  values,  in  the  diminution  of  the  arc  of  vibration.  For  this  purpose, 
observations  were  made  at  Greenwich  on  the  extent  of  the  whole  arc  in  successive 
half-hours.  The  following  Table  contains  (with  sufficient  approximation)  the  range 
of  arc  through  each  half-hour,  the  middle  arc  on  which  the  correction  may  be  sup- 
posed to  depend,  and  the  logarithmic  correction  as  taken  from  the  last  table. 


; Range  of  Arc 
j through  half-hour. 

Middle 

Arc. 

Log. 

Correction. 

Range  of  Arc 
through  half-hour. 

Middle 

Arc. 

Log- 

Correction. 

Range  of  Arc 
through  half-hour. 

Middle 

Arc. 

Log. 

Correction. 

f 2-35— 1-97 

2-14 

831 

0-71— 0-59 

0-64 

81 

0-22— 0*19 

0*20 

7 

' 1-97— 1-64 

1-79 

579 

0-59— 0-49 

0-34 

52 

0-19— 0-16 

0*17 

6 

1-64— ] -38 

1-50 

402 

0*49— 0-41 

0-45 

36 

0-16— 0-13 

0*14 

4 

1-38— M6 

1-26 

287 

0-41— 0-34 

0-37 

26 

0*13— 0-10 

0*11 

3 

M6— 0-98 

1-06 

205 

0-34— 0-29 

0-31 

18 

0-10—0*08 

0*09 

2 

0-98— 0*83 

0-90 

146 

0-29— 0-25 

0*27 

13 

0-83— 0-71 

0-76 

103 

0-25—0^22 

0-23 

10 

Suppose  now  that  we  wished  to  find  the  logarithmic  correction  for  a Swing  whose 
first  arc  was  T97  and  whose  last  arc  was  0‘98.  This  Swing  extends  over  four  equal 
intervals  of  time,  for  which  the  log.  corrections  are  respectively  579,  402,  287,  205. 
The  log.  correction  tlierefore  applicable  to  the  whole  time  will  be  the  mean  of  these 
four  corrections,  or  368.  In  a similar  manner,  we  may  obtain  the  correction  with 
any  other  beginning  and  concluding  arcs  among  those  in  the  table  above,  and  thus 
the  next  table  is  formed. 


Logarithmic  Correction  for  the  whole  Swing. 


Commencing  Arc. 

2*35 

1 

1*97 

1*64 

1*38 

1*16 

00 

OS 

o 

0*83 

0*71 

0*59 

0*49 

0*41 

0*34 

0*29 

0*25 

0*22 

0*19 

0*16 

0*13 

0*10 

'1*97 

831 

1*64 

705 

579 

1*38 

604 

491 

402 

1*16 

525 

423 

345 

287 

0-98 

461 

368 

298 

246 

205 

0*83 

1 408 

324 

260 

213 

176 

146 

c3 

0*71 

365 

287 

229 

185 

131 

125 

103 

0*59 

j 329 

258 

204 

164 

134 

110 

92 

81 

fcc 

0*49 

' 298 

232 

182 

146 

117 

96 

78 

67 

52 

l-h 

0*41 

272 

210 

164 

130 

104 

84 

63 

56 

44 

36 

0-34 

’ 250 

192 

149 

117 

93 

74 

60 

49 

38 

31 

26 

o 

0*29 

^ 231 

176 

136 

106 

83 

66 

53 

43 

33 

27 

22 

18 

o 

Cj 

0*23 

214 

162 

124 

97 

76 

59 

47 

38 

29 

23 

19 

16 

13 

0*22 

i 199 

151 

115 

89 

69 

34 

42 

34 

26 

21 

17 

14 

12 

10 

0*19 

! 186 

140 

107 

82 

63 

49 

38 

30 

23 

18 

15 

12 

10 

9 

7 

0*16 

175 

131 

99 

76 

59 

45 

33 

28 

21 

17 

13 

11 

9 

8 

6 

6 

0*13:  165 

123 

93 

71 

54 

42 

32 

25 

19 

15 

12 

10 

8 

7 

6 

5 

4 

0*10 

!:  156 

116 

87 

66 

51 

38 

30 

23 

17 

14 

11 

9 

7 

6 

5 

4 

4 

3 

1^0*08 

148 

110 

82 

62 

48 

36 

28 

22 

16 

13 

10 

8 

6 

5 

4 

4 

3 

3 

2 

It  was  only  necessaiy  in  fact  to  use  so  much  of  this  table  as  is  included  between 
2'35  and  T38  for  Commencing  Arc,  and  between  0'98  and  0'34  for  Concluding  Arc. 
Between  these  limits,  a skeleton  table  was  prepared  for  every  O'Ol  in  each  argu- 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


317 


TTient,  and  was  filled  up  by  interpolation  as  far  as  was  required,  and  no  further.  It  is 
unnecessary  to  give  it  here,  as  all  the  essentials  are  contained  in  the  table  which  has 
just  been  exhibited. 

The  application  of  this  number  to  the  logarithm  of  the  mean  Rate  of  the  Detached 
Pendulum  upon  the  Clock  Pendulum,  under  the  actual  circumstances,  gave  the  loga- 
rithm of  mean  Rate  of  the  Detached  Pendulum  upon  the  Clock  Pendulum,  supposing 
the  arc  of  vibration  of  the  Detached  Pendulum  to  have  been  indefinitely  small. 

The  Commencing  and  Concluding  Arcs  which  were  used  as  Arguments  for  the 
table  were  those  corresponding  to  the  means  of  the  Coincidences  retained  at  the 
beginning  and  at  the  end  of  the  Swing, 

33.  The  next  correction  is  that  depending  on  the  temperature  of  the  Pendulum. 
On  considering  the  slight  discordance  in  the  coefficients  of  expansion  found  by  dif- 
ferent experimenters,  as  well  as  the  difficulty  of  exactly  identifying  the  quality  of  the 
metal  on  which  they  experimented,  it  appeared  to  me  best  to  adopt  the  result  of 
Colonel  Sabine  (Experiments*,  page  202 — 207),  both  because  the  method  of  experi- 
menting was  precisely  the  same  as  the  method  of  using  the  pendulum  in  these  opera- 
tions, and  because  there  can  scarcely  be  a doubt  that  the  metal  was  similar,  as  nearly 
as  is  possible  in  different  bars.  A small  correction  is  required  to  Colonel  Sabine’s 
results,  because  at  the  time  of  his  drawing  the  conclusion  as  to  the  effect  of  tempera- 
ture, the  ancient  erroneous  computation  for  the  effect  of  buoyancy  was  still  in  use. 
Adopting  his  multiplier  1*655  of  the  correction  computed  for  mere  statical  buoyancy, 
as  applicable  to  pendulums  of  the  same  form  as  those  used  in  these  experiments -f-, 
the  corrections  to  the  numbers  in  the  “Experiments”  are  as  follows: — 

Page  202,  for  6*25  read  10*34  ; which  gives  for  Pendulum  3,  86166*49. 

Page  203,  for  6*2  read  10  26  ; which  gives  for  Pendulum  4,  86174*99. 

Page  205,  for  5*65  read  9*35  ; which  gives  for  Pendulum  3,  86149*61. 

Page  206,  for  5*7  read  9*43  ; which  gives  for  Pendulum  4,  86159*35. 

Page  207,  the  results  for  1°  Fahrenheit  will  be  respectively  0*4318  and  0*4300.  The 
mean  0*4309  corresponds  to  86166  vibrations  in  one  day. 

Hence,  to  reduce  the  vibrations  observed  at  the  temperature  f of  Fahrenheit  to  the 
vibrations  which  would  have  been  observed  in  air  of  the  same  density  at  temperature 

50°,  the  number  of  observed  vibrations  must  be  multiplied  by  4309 

or  by  l-l-(^— 50)  X 0*00000501.  I do  not  at  present  form  the  logarithm  of  this  quan- 
tity, as  there  will  be  another  term  depending  on  temperature,  introduced  by  the  con- 
sideration of  the  buoyancy-correction,  which  will  be  combined  with  this. 

* “ All  Account  of  Experiments  to  determine  the  Figure  of  the  Earth  by  means  of  the  Pendulum  vibrating 
seconds  in  different  Latitudes,  as  well  as  on  various  other  subjects  of  Philosophical  Inquiry.  By  Edwakd 
Sabine,  &c.  London,  1825.” 

t Philosophical  Transactions,  1829. 


318 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


34.  The  next  correction  is  that  for  the  density  of  the  atmosphere.  If  we  adopt 
Sir  George  Shuckburgh’s  elements  (which  are  abundantly  accurate  for  this  pur- 
pose), the  barometer-reading  being  B (expressed  in  English  inches)  at  the  tempera- 
ture f of  Fahrenheit,  its  reading  at  temperature  53°  would  be 

g 

2^  (29-27 -t— 53  X 0-002615)  = B(l  — 53  X 0*0000896). 

The  proportion  of  the  weight  of  air  in  this  state  to  that  of  air  at  barometer-reading 
29‘“'*27,  thermometer  53°  (Sir  George  Shuckburgh’s  standard  elements),  will  be 


X (l  +5|^')  =^,{1  -7=^X0-002173) 

= 2^(1-006519  — 50X0*002173). 

With  the  elements  29'"*27  and  53°,  the  weight  of  air  is  ^ that  of  water;  and,  with 

1 1 

Kater’s  specific  gravity  8*469,  the  weight  of  air  is  X §.409  that  of  the  pendulum  ; 

the  effect  of  this  on  the  vibrations  of  the  pendulum,  adopting  Colonel  Sabine’s  factor 
1*655  of  the  statical  buoyancy,  will  be  to  diminish  them  by  the  part 

Bx  1*655 


1672  X 8*469  X 29*27  ^ ^ 50X0*002173). 

In  the  small  term  multiplied  by  t — 50,  we  may  consider  Then  the  diriii- 


29*27  25* 


nation  of  the  number  of  vibrations  will  be 


B X 1*655  X 1*006519 
1672x8*469x29*27  ‘ 


50 


0*00226  X 1*655 
1672x8*469  ’ 


or  B X 0*00000401 9 — ^ - 50  X 0*00000026. 


In  order  to  correct  the  number  of  vibrations  observed,  so  as  to  produce  the  number 
of  vibrations  which  would  take  place  in  vacuum,  we  must  multiply  the  number 

observed  by  1 -f  B X 0*000004019  - 50  x 0*00000026. 


35.  Combining  this  factor  with  the  factor  depending  on  the  temperature  of  the 
pendulum,  or  l-f-^ — 50x0*00000501,  the  complete  factor  is 

1 -fB  X 0*000004019+^—50x0*00000475, 

or  (1  + B X 0*00000401 9)  X (1+^— 50  X 0*00000475). 

The  logarithms  of  these  factors  are  B X 0*000001 7453  and  50x0*000002063.  The 
following  Tables  will  suffice  for  the  examination  of  the  corrections  in  the  succeeding 
Section. 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


319 


Thermo- 

meter. 

Correction  to 
Log.  Rate. 

Thermo- 

meter. 

Correction  to 
Log.  Rate. 

50-0 

0-00000000 

66*0 

0-00002063 

•5 

103 

•5 

2166 

51-0 

207 

61-0 

2269 

•5 

310 

•5 

2372 

52-0 

413 

62-0 

2475 

•5 

516 

•5 

2578 

53-0 

619 

63-0 

2681 

•5 

722 

•5 

2784 

54-0 

825 

64-0 

2887 

•5 

928 

•5 

2990 

55-0 

1032 

65-0 

3094 

•5 

1135 

•5 

3197 

56-0 

1238 

66-0 

3300 

•5 

1341 

•5 

3403 

A7-0 

1444 

67-0 

3506 

•5 

1547 

•5 

3609 

58-0 

1650 

68-0 

3712 

•5 

1753 

•5 

3815 

59-0 

1856 

69-0 

3918 

•5 

I960 

•5 

4022 

60-0 

2063 

70-0 

4125 

Barometer. 

Correction  to 
Log.  Rate. 

iu. 

29-0 

0-00005061 

-2 

5096 

-4 

5131 

-6 

5166 

•8 

5201 

30-0 

5236 

•2 

5271 

-4 

5306 

-6 

5340 

•8 

5375 

31-0 

5410 

-2 

5445 

-4 

5480 

-6 

5514 

-8 

5549 

32-0 

5584 

The  ‘‘Corrected  Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  upon  Clock,”  or  Log.  Rate  supposing  that 
the  temperature  of  the  Pendulum  is  50°,  and  that  it  vibrates  in  vacuum,  in  an  inde- 

^ ^ mmm  ^ 

finitely  small  arc,  is  found  by  adding  together  the  logarithm  of  the  correction 

for  arc,  the  correction  for  thermometer,  and  the  correction  for  barometer,  all  taken 
from  the  tables  above. 


Section  IV. — Abstract  of  the  Pendulum  Observations  at  the  Upper  Station. 

36.  The  remarks  in  the  preceding  Sections  explain  all  the  essential  points  in  the 
following  Table.  It  is  only  necessary  to  add,  that  the  temperature  of  the  Barometer 
(which  was  suspended  in  the  Anteroom,  very  near  to  the  Stove)  was  higher  than  that 
of  the  Pendulum  ; and  a small  correction,  never  exceeding  — 0'075,  has  been  applied 
to  its  reading. 


320 


MR.  airy’s  account  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


First  Series.  Pendulum  1821  above. 


No.  of 
Swing. 

Number  of 
Coincidences. 

Number  of 
Intervals. 

Mean 

Interval. 

Arc  of  Vibration. 

Mean  of 
Thermo- 
meter 
Readings. 

Mean  of 
Barometer 
Readings. 

Corrected 

Log.  Rates  of 
Pendulum  on 
Shelton. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Beginning. 

End. 

1 

3 

3 

22 

s 

493-182 

1-91 

0-58 

5^81 

in. 

29-930 

9-99830603 

2 

3 

3 

21 

492-341 

1-75 

0-60 

58-78 

29-856 

466 

3 

3 

3 

28 

491-923 

1-90 

0-44 

58-81 

29-729 

284 

4 

3 

2 

23 

491-399 

1-85 

0-59 

59-38 

29-537 

209 

3 

3 

2 

17 

491-711 

1-79 

0-67 

58-84 

29-503 

211 

6 

3 

3 

22 

492-470 

1-88 

0-63 

58-30 

29-658 

409 

7 

3 

3 

22 

492-553 

1-71 

0-59 

58-26 

29-763 

410 

8 

3 

3 

22 

492-932 

1-64 

0-50 

57-54 

29-834 

379 

9 

2 

2 

27 

493-352 

1-77 

0-42 

56-88 

29-896 

406 

10 

3 

3 

20 

493-450 

1-83 

0-66 

56-79 

29-895 

488 

11 

3 

3 

24 

493-167 

1-98 

0-55 

57-64 

29-861 

556 

12 

3 

2 

24 

492-719 

2-13 

0-60 

57-00 

29-813 

295 

13 

3 

3 

22 

493-235 

1-92 

0-61 

56-98 

29-700 

421 

14 

3 

3 

23 

492-391 

2-09 

0-55 

57-44 

29-553 

201 

15 

3 

3 

20 

492-759 

1-88 

0-62 

57-89 

29-488 

394 

16 

3 

3 

22 

492-507 

1-99 

0-61 

58-25 

29-395 

379 

17 

3 

3 

22 

492-371 

1-88 

0-59 

58-61 

29-298 

363 

18 

3 

3 

21 

492- 126 

1-91 

0-71 

58-55 

29-218 

282 

19 

3 

3 

20 

492-625 

1-88 

0-65 

58-78 

29-243 

495 

20 

3 

3 

23 

493-189 

1-85 

0-58 

58-10 

29-272 

541 

21 

3 

3 

23 

493-217 

1-87 

0-63 

57-94 

29-318 

542 

22 

4 

3 

20 

493-775 

1-70 

0-57 

57-55 

29-366 

628 

23 

3 

3 

21 

493-722 

1-91 

0-58 

57-13 

29-438 

569 

24 

3 

3 

24 

493-882 

2-02 

0-56 

56-55 

29-537 

539 

25 

3 

3 

22 

493-879 

1-95 

0-63 

56-41 

29-622 

529 

26 

3 

3 

24 

493-764 

2-03 

0-56 

56-44 

29-702 

504 

Second  Series.  Pendulu 

m 8 above. 

27 

4 

4 

27 

376-519 

1-96 

0-60 

54-18 

29-699 

9-99775000 

28 

4 

4 

29 

376-082 

1-97 

0-66 

55-71 

29-725 

5069 

29 

4 

4 

33 

375-803 

2-03 

0-54 

56-13 

29-770 

4974 

30 

4 

4 

28 

375-647 

1-85 

0-62 

56-58 

29-820 

4965 

31 

3 

3 

31 

375-650 

2-00 

0-62 

56-53 

29-864 

4990 

32 

4 

4 

33 

375-534 

2-03 

0-52 

56-45 

29-892 

4887 

33 

3 

3 

29 

375-511 

1-93 

0-61 

58-05 

29-916 

5211 

34 

3 

2 

31 

375-191 

2-00 

0-63 

59-26 

29-908 

5279 

35 

3 

3 

32 

375-162 

1-77 

0-51 

59-84 

29-869 

5306 

1 36 

4 

4 

28 

374-938 

1-82 

0-61 

60-01 

29-808 

5223 

1 37 

4 

4 

29 

375-172 

2-00 

0-62 

59-48 

29-878 

5303 

38 

4 

4 

33 

375-424 

1-90 

0-64 

57-95 

30-024 

5157 

39 

4 

4 

29 

375-397 

1-98 

0-68 

57-68 

30-134 

5127 

40 

4 

4 

31 

375-665 

1-93 

0-60 

57-76 

30-235 

5299 

41 

•3 

2 

35 

375-8O7 

2-03 

0-54 

57-04 

30-358 

5262 

42 

3 

3 

30 

376-428 

1-90 

0-51 

56-43 

30-445 

5505 

43 

4 

4 

30 

376-692 

1-81 

0-54 

55-36 

30-518 

5454 

44 

4 

4 

32 

376-902 

1-95 

0-53 

55-23 

30-.567 

5583 

45 

3 

3 

27 

376-729 

2-07 

0-73 

55-30 

30-561 

5566 

46 

4 

4 

30 

376-458 

1-98 

0-63 

55-84 

30-557 

5466 

47 

4 

4 

34 

376-507 

1-99 

0-57 

55-95 

30-535 

5502 

48 

4 

4 

30 

376-425 

1-84 

0-57 

56-56 

30-493 

5545 

i 49 

4 

4 

30 

376-308 

1-96 

0-62 

56-61 

30-430 

5504 

50 

4 

4 

34 

376-158 

2-03 

0-55 

56-78 

30-399 

5437 

i 51 

1 4 

4 

28 

376-304 

1-88 

0-64 

56-86 

30-368 

5533 

52 

i 2 

1 

3 

33 

376-126 

1-91 

0-52 

57-38 

30-343 

5503 

FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


321 


Third  Series.  Pendulum  1821  above. 


No.  of 

Number  of 
Coincidences. 

Number  of 

Mean 

Arc  of  Vibration. 

Mean  of 
Thermo- 

Mean  of 
Barometer 

Corrected 

Log.  Rates  of 

Swing. 

Intervals. 

Interval. 

meter 

Readings. 

Pendulum  on 
Shelton. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Readings. 

53 

3 

3 

19 

s 

489-000 

1*99 

0*71 

53*05 

in. 

29*916 

9*99828152 

54 

3 

3 

23 

488*775 

2*00 

0*60 

53*30 

29*811 

8078 

55 

3 

0 

*J 

24 

488*805 

1*91 

0*53 

53*59 

29*721 

8100 

56 

3 

3 

26 

489*397 

1*76 

0*46 

53*51 

29*638 

8244 

57 

3 

3 

21 

489*222 

1*91 

0*62 

53*39 

29*556 

8204 

58 

3 

3 

25 

489*480 

2*00 

0*53 

52*84 

29*542 

8I75 

59 

3 

3 

22 

489*311 

1*81 

0*60 

52*75 

29*529 

8080 

60 

3 

3 

23 

488*848 

1*98 

0*59 

53*18 

29*499 

8020 

61 

3 

3 

23 

488*717 

2*05 

0*65 

52*99 

29*454 

7954 

62 

3 

3 

22 

489*038 

1*72 

0*60 

53*26 

29*493 

8063 

63 

3 

3 

22 

489*303 

1*94 

0*59 

53*10 

29*544 

8I71 

64 

3 

3 

27 

489*568 

2*00 

0*48 

52*75 

29*599 

8186 

65 

3 

3 

22 

489*409 

1*97 

0*67 

52*73 

29*633 

8172 

66 

3 

3 

25 

489*553 

2*03 

0*58 

52*59 

29*649 

8188 

67 

3 

3 

25 

489*826 

1*81 

0*54 

51*85 

29*662 

8O9O 

Fourth  Series.  Pendulum  8 above. 

68 

5 

5 

29 

375*879 

2*00 

0*61 

51*53 

29*662 

9*99774063 

69 

5 

5 

29 

376*117 

1*81 

0*58 

51*25 

29*608 

4102 

70 

5 

5 

29 

375*855 

1*80 

0*60 

51*65 

29*481 

4004 

71 

5 

5 

29 

375*517 

1*88 

0*63 

52*11 

29*333 

3885 

72 

5 

5 

28 

375*804 

1*74 

0*57 

53*28 

29*279 

4258 

73 

5 

5 

29 

375*700 

1*71 

0*56 

53*28 

29*250 

4179 

74 

3 

3 

34 

375*480 

1*87 

0*53 

53*03 

29*245 

4010 

75 

5 

5 

26 

375*208 

1*75 

0*68 

53*43 

29*250 

3938 

76 

5 

5 

28 

374*893 

2*02 

0*74 

53*46 

29*294 

3824 

77 

4 

4 

32 

374*953 

1*91 

0*59 

53*39 

29*381 

3802 

78 

5 

5 

26 

375*273 

1*90 

0*74 

52*95 

29*447 

3956 

79 

5 

5 

28 

375*332 

1*98 

0*72 

52*65 

29*502 

3950 

80 

4 

4 

33 

375*493 

1*91 

0*50 

52*56 

29*561 

3976 

81 

5 

5 

28 

375*236 

1*92 

0*68 

53*66 

29*559 

4089 

82 

5 

5 

30 

375*213 

1*85 

0*59 

54*08 

29*538 

4122 

Section  V. — Abstract  of  the  Pendulum  Observations  at  the  Lower  Station. 

37.  No  correction  was  applied  to  the  immediate  readings  of  the  instruments,  except 
that  the  Barometer-reading  was  increased  by  0*"  ‘016,  which  was  required  to  make  its 
indications  correspond  to  those  of  the  upper  Barometer. 


2 u 


MDCCCLVI 


3-22 


MR.  AIRYS  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


First  Series.  Penduluni  8 belovr. 


No.  of 
Swing. 

Number  of 
Coincidences. 

Number  of 
Intervals. 

Mean 

Arc  of  Vibration. 

Mean  of 
Thermo- 
meter 
Readings. 

Mean  of 
Barometer 
Headings. 

Corrected 

Log.  Rates  of 
Pendulum  on 
Earnshaw. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Beginning. 

End. 

1 

3 

5 

31 

s 

293-542 

2*01 

0*73 

63*55 

ip. 

31*356 

9*99711658 

2 

5 

5 

34 

293*600 

2*03 

0*67 

63*71 

31*261 

718 

3 

4 

2 

64 

293*891 

1*97 

0*36 

63*70 

31*155 

902 

4 

4 

5 

24 

293*369 

1*96 

0*97 

63*61 

30*900 

475 

5 

5 

4 

30 

293*434 

1*78 

0*67 

63*60 

30*897 

420 

6 

4 

4 

35 

293*314 

2*00 

0*68 

63*90 

31*079 

433 

7 

4 

4 

35 

293*375 

1*55 

0*51 

63-92 

31*205 

409 

8 

4 

4 

36 

293*125 

1*93 

0*84 

64*16 

31*274 

361 

9 

4 

3 

46 

293*266 

1*92 

0-49 

63*94 

31*337 

374 

10 

5 

3 

33 

293*276 

1*77 

0*73 

63-55 

31*372 

344 

11 

4 

4 

40 

293*281 

1*74 

0*53 

63*50 

31*327 

280 

12 

3 

3 

39 

293*385 

1*82 

0*58 

63*43 

31*234 

379 

13 

5 

5 

36 

293*261 

1*76 

0-61 

63*44 

31*068 

222 

14 

5 

5 

38 

293*253 

1*82 

0*59 

63*33 

30*940 

176 

15 

5 

3 

39 

293*275 

1-85 

0*63 

63*45 

30*880 

227 

16 

4 

4 

37 

293*216 

2-00 

0*73 

63*44 

30*807 

202 

17 

4 

4 

39 

293*250 

1*98 

0*69 

63*46 

30*701 

209 

18 

4 

4 

36 

293*337 

1*96 

0*72 

63*39 

30*628 

273 

19 

3 

3 

39  . 

293*350 

1*93 

0*66 

63-49 

30*627 

288 

20 

4 

4 

39 

293*324 

1*78 

0*58 

63*43 

30*663 

211 

21 

4 

4 

38 

293*349 

1*90 

0*52 

63*05 

30*713 

172 

22 

5 

3 

38 

293-283 

1*89 

0*63 

63*31 

30*752 

191 

23 

5 

5 

37 

293*376 

1*90 

0*60 

63*48 

30*824 

328 

24 

5 

3 

42 

293*502 

1*83 

0*49 

63*64 

30*938 

470 

25 

4 

4 

39 

293*474 

2*00 

0*60 

63*20 

31*022 

419 

26 

5 

5 

40 

293-425 

1*93 

0*61 

63*16 

31*132 

370 

Second 

Series.  Pendiihim 

1821  below. 

27 

4 

4 

26 

389*510 

1*95 

0*69 

62*91 

31*118 

9*99784802 

28 

4 

4 

29 

389*452 

2*15 

0*65 

63*14 

31*139 

4849 

29 

3 

3 

32 

389*370 

2*17 

0*65 

63*44 

31*212 

4879 

30 

4 

4 

27 

389*509 

1*95 

0*70 

63*25 

31*260 

4898 

31 

4 

4 

27 

389*644 

1*94 

0-74 

63*06 

31*283 

4951 

32 

4 

4 

32 

389*992 

1*80 

0*51 

63*13 

31*313 

5091 

33 

4 

4 

31 

390*012 

1*97 

0*59 

63*31 

31*310 

5186 

34 

4 

4 

28 

390*210 

1*87 

0*64 

63*31 

31*288 

5291 

35 

4 

4 

30 

390*333 

1*88 

0*56 

63-51 

31*255 

5380 

36 

4 

4 

29 

390-314 

1-99 

0-67 

63*66 

31*195 

5434 

37 

4 

4 

28 

390-602 

1*81 

0*59 

63*64 

31*261 

5557 

38 

3 

3 

33 

390*692 

2*01 

0*51 

63*60 

31*454 

5647 

39 

3 

3 

29 

390*885 

1-97 

0-65 

63*53 

31*571 

5790 

40 

3 

3 

32 

391*172 

1*82 

0*55 

63*50 

31*694 

5921 

41 

4 

4 

34 

391*397 

1*91 

0*54 

63*48 

31*799 

6076 

42 

4 

4 

26 

391*615 

1*76 

0-69 

63-31 

31*902 

6194 

43 

4 

4 

1 30 

391*800 

1*84 

0*63 

63*28 

31*966 

6302 

44 

3 

1 ^ 

' 34 

392*069 

1*99 

0*56 

63*16 

32*019 

6449 

45 

4 

4 

i 25 

392*125 

2*01 

0*76 

63*54 

32*014 

6615 

46 

4 

4 

29 

392-422 

1*88 

0*59 

63*30 

31*992 

6660 

47 

3 

3 

31 

392*554 

2*07 

0*64 

63*29 

31*983 

6778 

48 

4 

4 

28 

392*705 

1*96 

0*75 

62*84 

31*943 

6774 

49 

4 

4 

29 

392*927 

2*03 

0*75 

62*70 

31*894 

6877 

50 

4 

3 

33 

393*396 

1*77 

0*48 

63*15 

31*831 

7109 

51 

4 

4 

26 

393*755 

1*71 

0*59 

63*63 

31*794 

7421 

52 

4 

4 

29 

394  013 

1*64 

0*59 

63*43 

31*763 

7509 

FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


323 


Third  Series.  Pendulum  8 below. 


No.  of 

Number  of 
Coincidences. 

Number  of 

Mean 

Arc  of  Vibration. 

Mean  of 
Thermo- 

Mean  of 
Barometer 

Corrected 

Log.  Rates  of 

Swing. 

Intervals. 

Intervals. 

meter 

Pendulum  on 

Readings. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Readings. 

Earnshaw. 

53 

5 

5 

28 

s 

298*521 

1-96 

0-90 

62-05 

in. 

31*335 

9-99716353 

54 

5 

5 

37 

298-819 

1-89 

0-67 

61-85 

31-229 

6506 

55 

4 

4 

42 

298-929 

2-05 

0-63 

61-84 

31-135 

6615 

56 

4 

4 

45 

299-144 

1-92 

0-54 

61-68 

31-049 

6732 

57 

4 

5 

34 

299-342 

1-83 

0-68 

61-61 

30-987 

6919 

58 

3 

3 

40 

299-479 

2-05 

0-67 

61-81 

30-971 

7129 

59 

5 

5 

38 

299-661 

1-89 

0-66 

61-75 

30-953 

7259 

60 

5 

5 

38 

299-832 

1-98 

0-67 

61-65 

30-922 

7416 

61 

4 

4 

40 

299-950 

2-08 

0-65 

61-71 

30-883 

7553 

62 

5 

5 

36 

300-150 

1-92 

0-65 

62-04 

30-907 

7788 

63 

5 

5 

36 

300-300 

1-89 

0-65 

62-08 

30-970 

7946 

64 

4 

4 

43 

300-468 

1-97 

0-59 

62-30 

31-021 

8162 

65 

5 

5 

35 

300-723 

1-84 

0-68 

62-53 

31-050 

8472 

66 

5 

5 

37 

301-449 

1-91 

0-67 

62-80 

31-084 

9234 

67 

3 

3 

42 

301-730 

2-11 

0-61 

62-64 

31-108 

9497 

Fourth  Series.  Pendulum 

1821  below. 

68 

4 

4 

29 

403-647 

1-98 

0-63 

61-55 

31-119 

9-99792364 

69 

5 

5 

25 

403-892 

2-08 

0-79 

61-73 

31-045 

2585 

70 

4 

4 

27 

404-338 

1-89 

0-59 

61-81 

30-893 

2722 

71 

3 

3 

30 

404-817 

1-95 

0-57 

61-64 

30-746 

2922 

72 

5 

5 

25 

405-256 

1-68 

0-63 

61-66 

30-680 

3117 

73 

5 

5 

27 

405-578 

1-79 

0-64 

61-65 

30-652 

3300 

74 

4 

4 

31 

405-984 

1-80 

0-52 

61-75 

30-651 

3512 

75 

4 

2 

28 

406-281 

1-81 

0-58 

61-88 

30-661 

3712 

76 

4 

4 

29 

406-677 

1-81 

0-54 

61-96 

30-703 

3937 

77 

3 

3 

32 

407-141 

1-91 

0-49 

62-00 

30-796 

4208 

78 

5 

5 

25 

407-372 

1-85 

0-67 

62-19 

30-868 

4414 

79 

5 

5 

26 

407-835 

1-80 

0-60 

62-20 

30-916 

4645 

80 

3 

3 

30 

408-133 

2-13 

0-64 

62-28 

30-982 

4897 

81 

5 

5 

27 

408-511 

1-91 

0-64 

62-73 

30-969 

5146 

82 

4 

4 

31 

409-032 

2-07 

0-59 

62-31 

30-909 

5338 

Section  VI. — Computation  of  hogarithmic  Rate  of  Lower  Pendulum  upon  Upper 
Pendulum;  combination  of  individual  results ; and  conclusion  on  the  proportion  of 
gravity  at  the  Lower  Station  to  gravity  at  the  Upper  Station. 


38.  The  quantity  now  to  be  found  is  Log. 


Rate  of  Lower  Pendulum 
Rate  of  Upper  Pendulum’ 


This  is 


= Log. 


Rate  of  Lower  Pendulum 
Rate  of  Earnshaw 


+ Log-. 


Rate  of  Earnshaw 
Rate  of  Shelton 


Log-. 


Rate  of  Upper  Pendulum. 
Rate  of  Shelton 


The  first  of  these  quantities  is  given,  for  every  Swing,  in  Section  V. ; the  second  in 
Section  II.;  and  the  third  in  Section  IV.  Thus  the  following-  numbers  are  formed. 


2 u 2 


324 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


Fii'St  Series.  Log-.  Rate  of  Pendulum  8 below  on  Pendulum  1821  above. 


No.  of 
Swing. 

Log. 

Lower  Pendulum 

No.  of 
Swing. 

Log. 

Rite  Pendulum 

No.  of 
Swung. 

Log. 

Lower  Pendulum 

No.  of 
Swing. 

Log. 

Lower  Pendulum 

Upper  Pendulum 

Upper  Pendulum 

Upper  Pendulum 

Upper  Pendulum 

1 

9-99928067 

8 

9*99928485 

15 

9*99929623 

22 

9*99927705 

2 

9045 

9 

7284 

16 

8478 

23 

7793 

3 

9005 

10 

8116 

17 

8501 

24 

9783 

4 

8261 

11 

8683 

18 

8381 

25 

8385 

f) 

9458 

12 

8278 

19 

7723 

26 

8582 

6 

9014 

13 

9524 

20 

8724 

7 

8281 

14 

8135 

21 

9083 

1 

Second  Series.  Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  1821  below  on  Pendul 

um  8 above. 

27 

0*00073466 

34 

0*00074088 

41 

0*00073841 

48 

0*00073718 

28 

4199 

35 

3471 

42 

3720 

49 

3371 

29 

3602 

36 

351 1 

43 

3714 

50 

3941 

30 

3684 

37 

3628 

44 

3727 

51 

3518 

31 

3868 

38 

4004 

45 

3382 

52 

3580 

32 

3919 

39 

3903 

46 

3709 

33 

3319 

40 

3232 

47 

3852 

Third  Series.  Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  8 below  on  Pendu 

lum  1821  above. 

53 

9-99928138 

57 

9*99928427 

61 

9*99928297 

65 

9*99928865 

54 

8078 

58 

8440 

62 

9319 

66 

8366 

55 

9635 

59 

8661 

63 

8406 

67 

8900 

56 

7957 

60 

8786 

64 

8243 

Fourth  Series.  Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  1821  below  on  Pendulum  8 above. 

68 

0*00073376 

72 

0*00074105 

76 

0-00073941 

80 

0*00073541 

69 

4097 

73 

3691 

77 

3929 

81 

3827 

70 

3162 

74 

3381 

78 

3549 

82 

2831 

71 

3748 

75 

3732 

79 

3997 

39.  On  tracing  the  irregularities  in  these  numbers  to  their  sources,  it  will  be 
seen  that  they  arise  almost  entirely  from  the  irregularities  in  the  comparisons  of 
the  clocks.  The  rate  of  each  pendulum  upon  its  clock  is  either  so  constant,  or 
changes  by  such  uniform  degrees  in  the  same  direction,  that  there  is  every  reason 
to  presume  on  the  extreme  steadiness  both  of  the  detached  pendulums  and  of  the 
clocks. 

Remarking  then  that,  when  a large  variable  error  is  combined  with  a small 
variable  error,  the  magnitude  of  the  probable  error  in  the  combination  is  scarcely 
affected  by  the  small  error,  we  may  treat  these  irregularities  of  result  as  if  they 
were  entirely  due  to  irregularities  of  comparison;  and  we  have  now  to  investigate 
the  rule  to  be  followed  in  combining  the  special  results,  supposed  to  be  erroneous 
from  that  cause  only,  in  order  to  obtain  a final  result  whose  probable  error  shall  be 
the  smallest  possible.  It  is  evident  that  we  are  not  to  give  equal  weights  to  the 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


325 


different  results,  for  we  should  thus  neglect  all  comparisons  except  the  first  and 
the  last. 

40.  Let  the  comparisons  be  numbered 

0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  n—\,  n, 

and  let  the  swings  be  numbered 

1,  2,  3,  4,  n. 

Let  the  errors  of  comparison,  estimated  by  their  effect  on  a four-hours’  rate,  in 

units  of  the  last  figure  of  8-figure  logarithms,  be 

Eo5  Ei,  Eg,  Eg,  E4,  E„_i,  E„, 

(where  E,g  is  supposed  to  be  taken  as  if  the  comparison,  which  was  really  omitted, 
agreed  with  that  produced  by  interpolation  between  the  two  neighbouring  compari- 
sons,) and  let  the  probable  errors  of  comparison  be 

^15  ^25  ^3  3 ^4  3 ^»-13  ^«3 

and  let  the  weights  for  the  results  of  the  separate  Swings  be 

^13  ^23  ^33  ^45  • ^n’ 

Then  the  errors  in  the  results  of  the  separate  Swings,  produced  by  the  errors  of 
comparisons,  are 

(E, — Eg),  (E2 — El),  (E3 — E2),  (E„ — E„_i) ; 

and,  combining  these  with  the  weights 

^c,3  w.,,  

the  actual  error  of  the  final  result  will  be 

^l(Ei — — Ei)+W3(E3  — Eg)-f- -\-Wn{^n  — E„_i) 

W,  +W^  +W^  + +Wn 

{w■^  — W^'Fn  + — + — +Wn^n 

W]  +W^  +W3  -f +Wn 

Hence,  by  the  well-known  rules  of  the  Calculus  of  Probabilities,  the  square  of  the 
probable  error  of  the  final  result  will  be 

K’^0+K-^2)"-^H(^2-^^3)'^l+K-^4)'^l+ +<‘<_ 

{Wi  + W2  + W3  + +WnY 

And  if,  for  simplicity,  we  suppose  all  the  comparisons  equally  good,  so  that  for  e^,  Cj, 
63,  &c.  we  may  put  e,  the  expression  for  the  square  of  the  probable  error  of  the  final 


result  becomes 

g2^.^^HK-^2)'+(^2-^3)'+ +<. 

{Wi  -f  W2  +.W3  + 


and  we  have  now  to  determine  values  of  tc,,  &c.,  which  will  make  this  square  of 
the  final  probable  error  a minimum. 


326 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BARTON  EXPERIMENT 


N 

For  convenience,  call  tiiis  fraction  x 

Differentiate  with  respect  to  ic,,  and  make  the  differential  coefficient  =0  ; 

N 

Sx  (2'iCi— ?tJ2)~N=0,  or 

Differentiate  with  respect  to  and  make  the  differential  coefficient  =0 ; 

N 

Sx  (2ic2— tCg)— N=0,  or 

N 

Similarly 


N 


N 

2w„_,  — zc„_2— ic„=-g 

« N 

2w^—w^_,  =g- 

Let  ^=26,  the  value  of  h being  at  present  unknown  or  perhaps  arbitrary.  Then 

= Wi  = Wi 

W2  =2Wi  — 2b  —2iv^ — 2b 

Ws  =2?V2 — Wi  — 2b=3iv^ — 6b 
=2ic3— iCa — 2b  — Aw^ — 126 


{n — \)w^  — (n — \){n  — 2)b 
iv„  = nw^  — n{n—\)b. 

Substituting’  the  two  last  in  the  equation  2ic„ — ^c„_,  = 2^,  we  obtain 

w^=nb, 

and,  substituting'  this  in  tlie  other  expressions, 

W2—{2n—  2)b 
Ws={3n—  6)b 
w^={An — 12)6 

w^=(bn—20)b 

&c. 

of  which  the  law  is  evident.  The  second  difference  is  constant,  and  =—26. 
Substituting  these  in  the  expressions  for  N and  S,  we  find  (after  all  reductions) 


N=—  .w  .M+  1 . w+2 


S .w+2. 


N 


and  the  equation  g=26  becomes  identical.  Therefore  b is  arbitrary.  For  conve- 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


327 


nience,  make  h=\.  Then  the  weights  for  the  results  of  the  successive  Swings  are, 
n,  2n  — 2,  3w  — 6,  4w— 12,  &c. 

N 

The  square  of  the  probable  error  of  the  final  result  was  found  =e*x^2-  Substi- 


12 

tuting,  this  becomes  e^X — ^ ; 

° n.n  + l.n  + 2 


or  the  probable  error  =ex 


12 

n .n-\-  I . re  + 2 


41.  It  will  be  instructive  to  contrast  this  result  with  the  result  obtained  on  two 
other  suppositions. 

First:  suppose  that  the  Swings  had  been  continuous,  but  that  there  had  been  no 
intermediate  comparisons  of  clocks.  The  probable  error  of  the  first  comparison 
being  e,  and  that  of  the  last  comparison  being  also  e,  the  probable  error  in  their 
combination  by  subtraction  will  be  es/'2  ; and  as  this  applies  to  n Swings,  the  pro- 


bable error  on  the  mean  =^e\/2=ey/^.  Comparing  this  with  the  probable  error 
found  above,  it  appears  that  the  intermediate  comparisons  have  diminished  the  pro- 
bable error  in  the  proportion  expressed  by  the  fraction  Wh  en  w = 26. 


this  fraction  is 


or  the  weight  of  the  result  is  increased  nearly  five-fold  by  the 


intermediate  comparisons.  When  w=15,  the  fraction  is  \/  ot-  the  weight  is 
increased  three-fold. 

Second  : suppose  that  the  Swings  had  been  discontinuous.  The  probable  error  in 
each  Swing,  found  by  combining  its  first  and  last  comparison,  would  have  been  es/2  ; 
and,  as  the  different  Swings  are  strictly  independent,  the  probable  error  on  the  mean 

of  all  would  have  been  Comparing  this  with  our  probable  error  above,  it 


appears  that  our  system  has  diminished  the  probable  error  in  the  proportion 
\/  ^ When  w = 26,  this  fraction  is  a / or  the  weight  of  the  result  is 

increased  126-fold  by  our  system.  When  w=15,  the  fraction  is  weight 


in  increased  45-fold. 

These  contrasts  will  suffice  to  show  the  great  advantage  of  a system  of  continuous 
Swings  with  intermediate  comparisons  such  as  has  been  employed  in  this  experiment. 
I cannot  quit  this  subject  without  repeating  that  my  first  impression  on  the  advan- 
tage of  such  a system  was  derived  from  the  representations  of  Mr.  Sheepshanks*, 
on  occasion  of  the  experiments  of  1828. 

42.  In  the  First  and  Second  Series,  w=26,  and  the  successiv^e  weights  are  26,  50, 

72,  92,  no,  126,  140,  152,  162,  170,  176,  180,  182,  182,  180,  50,  26.  In  the 

Third  and  Fourth  Series,  w=15,  and  the  successive  weights  are  15,  28,  39,  48,  55, 


* Since  I commenced  drawing  up  this  paper,  my  valued  friend  has  been  snatched  away  by  death ; a victim, 
1 believe,  to  his  labours  gratuitously  undertaken  for  the  formation  of  the  National  Standard  of  Length. 


328 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


60,  63,  64,  63, 15.  Combining  the  separate  results  by  these  weights,  we  obtain 

the  following  mean  results  : — 

First  Series. 

Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  8 below  upon  Pendulum  1821  above 

= 9-99928536. 

Second  Series. 

Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  1821  below  upon  Pendulum  8 above 

=0-00073691. 

Third  Series. 

Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  8 below  upon  Pendulum  1821  above 

= 9-99928584. 

Fourth  Series. 

Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  1821  below  upon  Pendulum  8 above 

=0-00073715. 

43.  For  ascertaining  the  probable  error  e I have  used  the  following  process. 

Let  Eo,  El,  Eg,  &c.,  as  before,  be  the  actual  errors  of  comparison,  estimated  by  the 
effect  which  they  produce  on  a 4-hours’  rate,  in  the  8th  decimal  place  of  logarithms ; 
let  Ri,  Rg,  &c.  be  the  successive  individual  results  for  the  rate  of  the  lower  pendulum 
on  the  upper  pendulum  ; and  let  A be  the  adopted  value  of  that  rate.  Now  if  A 
were  rigorously  correct,  we  should  have  the  following  equations : — 

Eo=  Eo 

Ei  = Eo+Ri — A=Eo-|-  R]  — A 

Eg=Ei-)-Rg — A=Eo-l-(Ri-|-Rg)  — 2A 

E3=Eg-)-R3 — A=Eo-l“(R, -I-R2-I-R3) — 3 A 
&c. 

and,  adding  all  for  the  First  Series,  which  terminates  with  Rge  and  Ege, 

26‘25 

Eo+Ei-)-  &c.  -l-Eg6=27Eo-l-26Ri-l-25Rg-l-  &c.  -I-R26 2 

Eo  is  yet  undetermined.  Now  the  Theory  of  Probabilities  which  we  have  used 
requires  that  the  chances  of  positive  and  negative  errors  be  equal,  and  therefore  that 
(subject  to  the  irregularities  of  chance)  Eo+Ei-p  &c.  +E2e=0.  This  gives 

ofi-qpi  1 

Eo=  2-27  ^ ^ (26Ri+25Rg-l-  &c.  4-R26) ; 
and,  substituting  this  for  Ej  in  the  different  expressions  above,  Ej,  Eg,  &c.  will  be 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


329 


formed.  Squaring-  each,  forming  -^y-th  part  of  the  sum  of  squares,  and  multiplying 
its  square  root  by  0'6745,  the  probable  error  is  obtained. 

The  quantity  thus  obtained  is  however  a little  too  great.  For,  the  number  which 

26-25 

we  have  found  for  E„  contains  A or  12A  nearly;  and  as  the  probable  error  of  A 
1 3 

is  about  ^e,  the  probable  error  of  12A  is  about  and  therefore  we  have  on  the 

right  side  of  the  equation  an  aggregate  of  terms  whose  probable  error  is  \/ 

or  nearly.  The  same  is  true  for  Eje  and  those  near  it.  But  for  E13  the  factor 

of  A IS  0.  Thus  it  will  easily  be  seen  that  the  quantity  which  we  obtain  is  really 

nearly.  The  correction  scarcely  deserves  notice. 

44.  In  this  manner  the  following  (uncorrectedj  values  of  Eo,  Ej,  &c.  are  found; 
arranged  with  reference  to  the  Swings  to  which  they  relate.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  the  number  300  represents  an  error  of  0®’!  in  absolute  time,  very  nearly. 


First  Series. 

Second  Series. 

Third  Series. 

Fourth  Series. 

No.  of 
Swing. 

Error  of 
Comparison. 

No.  of 
Swing. 

Error  of 
Comparison. 

No.  of 
Swing. 

Error  of 
Comparison. 

No.  of 
Swing. 

Error  of 
Comparison. 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

454 

923 

414 

276 

501 

476 

30 

211 

1 . 

27... 

53 

68 

128 

28 

54  . 

476 

69... 

254 

3... 

55 

29... 

7 

82 

89 

55 

575 

70... 

299 

266 

4... 

220 

30 

56 

52 

209 

353 

276 

74 

361 

71... 

5... 

702 

1180 

925 

874 

31 

88 

316 

57... 

72... 

124 

100 

6... 

32 

58... 

73... 

7... 

33 

56 

59... 

74... 

234 

217 

8... 

34- 

341 

121 

60 

75... 

9... 

378 

798 

651 

909 

322 

35 

61 

76... 

10... 

36 

59 

122 

62 

374 

196 

77... 

9 

223 

57 

339 

165 

277 

11... 

37... 

63 

78... 

12... 

38 

191 

403 

64 

145 

82 

79... 

13... 
14  .. 

79 

39... 

40 

56 

65 

66 

136 

80... 

81 

16... 

765 

707 

672 

517 

41 

94 

123 

146 

182 

67... 

234 

82... 

607 

16 

17.. . 

18.. . 
19... 

296 

108 

392 

1135 

39 

42.. . 

43.. . 

44.. . 

45 

127 

109 

20... 

46 

21... 

22... 

439 

47... 

48 

52 

79 

23.. 

49... 

241 

164 

275 

24... 

25 

112 

60... 

51 

9 

26... 

7 

52... 

! 

From  these  are  found  the  values  of  the  probable  error  of  a single  comparison,  treating 
the  four  series  separately: 

2 X 


MDCCC'LVI. 


330 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BARTON  EXPERIMENT 


In  Series  1,  e=+  420. 

In  Series  2,  e=+  135. 

In  Series  3,  e=+  203. 

In  Series  4,  e=+  173. 

And  hence  the  probable  errors  and  weights  of  the  mean  results  are 

93 

For  First  Series,  probable  error  =+  10*4,  weight  = p^^^* 

899 

For  Second  Series,  probable  error  =+  3*3,  weight  = Jq^^* 


82 

For  Third  Series,  probable  error  =+  ITO,  weight  = Ibbbb' 

114 

For  Fourth  Series,  probable  error  =+  9*4,  weight  = Yobbo' 

45.  Combining  the  results  of  the  First  and  Third  Series,  with  the  weights  just 
found,  and  still  adopting  as  unit,  in  the  probable  error,  the  unity  of  the  8th  decimal 
of  logarithms. 


Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  8 below  upon  Pendulum  1821  above 
=:9*99928558  + 7'5. 

Combining  the  results  of  the  Second  and  Fourth  Series, 

Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  1821  below  upon  Pendulum  8 above 
= 0*00073694  + 3*1. 

And,  remarking  that  Log.  below  these  logarithms,  we  have  finally 


Gravity  above 
Gravity  below 

Gravity  above 
Gravity  below 


Log.  gS^|^=0-00002252±8.2. 


or  — ^-i =1*00005185+0*00000019: 

Gravity  above  — 


or  we  may  otherwise  express  it. 

Gravity  below  is  greater  than  Gravity  above  by  pboye  uncertainty  of 

5^  part  of  the  excess. 

The  acceleration  of  a seconds’  pendulum  below  is  2®*24  per  day,  with  an  uncertainty 
of  less  than  0®*01. 

46.  But  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  this  estimate  of  the  amount  of  uncertainty  is 
obtained  from  the  amount  of  uncertainty  in  each  mean  as  deduced  separately  from 
the  discordances  of  the  individual  results  in  the  group  contributing  to  that  mean.  In 
comparing  the  means,  we  shall  see  reason  to  suppose  that  the  ultimate  uncertainty  is 
greater.  Thus,  though  the  probable  errors  of  the  means  of  Series  1 and  3 are  10*4 
and  iro,  tlie  dilference  of  the  means  is  48:  though  the  probable  errors  of  the  means 
of  Series  2 and  4 are  3*3  and  9*4,  the  difference  of  the  mean  is  24.  It  is  likely  there- 
fore that  some  cause  of  irregularity  has  occurred,  special  to  each  series.  The  most 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


331 


probable  cause  is  some  trifling  error  or  unsteadiness  in  the  manner  of  fixing  the 
agate-plane-frames  upon  the  iron  stands.  It  is  not  a change  in  either  of  the  pendulums 
after  the  Second  Series,  inasmuch  as  the  value  of  the  mean  is  altered  the  same  way 
under  the  alternation  of  position  of  the  pendulums.  Whatever  the  cause  may  have 
been,  the  effect  is  extremely  small.  There  appears  to  be  no  reason  for  altering  the 
concluded  ratio  of  Gravity  below  to  Gravity  above.  The  probable  error  stated  in 
the  last  paragraph  may  be  doubled,  but  I think  that  there  is  no  sufficient  ground  for 
trebling  it.  Hie  amount  of  the  uncertainty,  so  increased,  is  insignificant  for  the 
purposes  of  this  experiment. 

47.  There  remains,  however,  a serious  question  whether  there  may  have  been  any 
difference  in  the  circumstances  of  the  upper  and  lower  pendulums,  not  included  in 
the  corrections  applied,  which  can  produce  an  effect  similar  to  that  of  a change  of 
gravity.  The  first  point  to  be  considered  is,  the  instability  of  the  mountings.  The 
importance  of  a very  firm  foundation  was  perfectly  understood  by  the  able  practical 
men  by  whom  the  ground-work  was  arranged,  and  particularly  by  Mr.  Arkley  ; and 
I conceive  all  was  done  which  it  was  possible  to  do,  to  make  the  floors  solid.  The 
form  of  the  iron  stands  is  particularly  well  adapted  to  firmness.  Any  tendency  to 
lateral  or  other  movement  is  counteracted  by  the  endwise  resistance  of  strong  straight 
iron  bars.  I had  at  first  intended  to  interchange  the  iron  stands  in  the  middle  of 
the  operation,  but  upon  contemplating  the  mechanical  firmness  ensured  by  the  plan 
of  their  construction,  and  the  exact  similarity  of  the  two  stands  in  every  respect,  I 
gave  up  this  design ; being  fully  convinced  that  there  might  be  risk  of  instability  in 
a change,  but  that  there  could  scarcely  be  any  sensible  absolute  instability  and  (as  I 
believe)  no  sensible  relative  instability,  in  the  stands  as  they  were  planted.  The 
stands  were  supported  in  the  same  manner  at  both  stations. 

The  mere  determination  of  the  relative  rates  of  the  detached  pendulum  and  the 
clock  pendulum,  by  the  method  of  coincidences,  is  accurate  almost  beyond  conception. 
I do  not  see  how  it  is  possible  that  an  error  of  0®‘01  per  day  can  enter  from  this 
cause. 

The  observers  were  so  evenly  interchanged  in  the  upper  and  lower  stations,  that 
no  personal  peculiarity  in  the  method  of  reading  the  thermometers  or  of  taking  any 
other  observations  can  have  produced  a sensible  effect.  The  following  Table  shows 
the  aggregate  number  of  turns  taken  by  each  : — 

Initials  of  observer’s  name  C D E P R S. 

Number  of  turns  above  5 5 4 4 5 5. 

Number  of  turns  below  5 2 5 6 5 5. 

48.  I will  now  point  out  the  only  cause  from  which,  in  iny  judgment,  any  percep- 
tible error  can  arise.  It  was  my  intention  that  the  temperature  of  the  upper  station 
should  be  brought,  as  near  as  could  practically  be  done,  to  that  of  the  lower  station. 
In  the  first  week,  however,  Mr.  Dunkin  was  seized  with  a sudden  and  severe  illness, 

2x2 


332 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BARTON  EXPERIMENT 


and  the  transmission  of  the  detailed  observations  to  me  was  in  consequence  delayed. 
An  inequality  of  temperature,  which  began  accidentally,  was  thus  allowed  to  exist 
too  long  to  admit  of  correction.  On  comparing  the  mean  of  all  the  upper  tempe- 
ratures with  the  mean  of  all  below,  I find  that  the  lower  station  was  warmer  than 
the  upper  by  7°' 13  Fahr.  (the  upper  and  lower  means  being  55°‘75  and  62°'88). 
Therefore,  if  the  adopted  coefficient  of  thermal  correction  is  erroneous,  the  result  of 
these  experiments  will  be  erroneous  by  the  amount  of  that  error  on  a range  of  tem- 
perature of  7°‘13.  There  may  yet  be  opportunity  of  verifying  the  coefficient  of  tem- 
perature-correction. 


Section  VII. — Measure  of  the  difference  of  level  of  the  two  P endulum- Stations ; sur- 
vey of  the  neighbouring  country ; and  cornputation  of  the  difference  of  attraction 
of  the  Eartlis  shell  on  the  two  pendulums,  upon  an  assumed  value  of  density. 

49,  For  measuring  the  depth  of  the  mine,  Mr.  Simms  furnished  an  iron  wire  100 
feet  long,  with  an  attached  scale  at  each  end.  After  the  operation,  this  wire  was 
returned  to  Mr.  Simms,  and  was  found  to  have  preserved  its  length  sensibly  unal- 
tered. It  was  used  by  Mr.  Arkley  to  measure  the  depth,  in  the  following  manner. 
Mr.  Arkley  placed  himself  on  the  top  of  the  “Cage”  in  which  the  coal-trams  ai’e 
conveyed  from  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  to  the  top,  and,  when  it  was  lowered  100  feet, 
an  assistant  attached  himself  to  the  strong  wire-rope  on  which  the  Cage  is  suspended. 
The  assistant  carried  the  upper  end  of  the  measuring- wire,  and  in  the  first  instance 
held  it  level  with  the  top  of  the  shaft  (the  steam-engine  used  for  raising  or  lowering 
the  Cage  being  stopped)  ; Mr.  Arkley  noted  the  position  of  the  lower  end  of  the 
wire  (to  which  a small  stretching  weight  was  attached),  and  fixed  a small  nail  in 
the  brattice  opposite  to  that  lower  end.  Then  the  Cage  was  lowered  100  feet;  the 
assistant  held  the  top  of  the  wire  to  the  nail  so  fixed,  and  Mr.  Arkley  drove  a second 
nail  in  the  brattice,  opposite  the  lower  end;  and  so  on  to  the  bottom  ; the  last  frac- 
tion of  100  feet  being  measured  with  a measuring  tape.  After  this,  the  levels  of  the 
pendulum-stations  were  referred  to  the  top  and  bottom  of  the  shaft  by  the  ordinary 
surveyors’  levelling  operations. 

The  following  is  an  abstract  of  the  result ; — 

ft.  in. 

Depth  of  the  shaft 1263  6 


Rise  of  the  floor  of  the  mine  from  the  point  of  measurement  at  the  bottom 
of  the  shaft  to  the  floor  of  the  lower  pendulum-station  . . . . . 

Fall  of  the  surface  from  the  point  of  measurement  at  the  top  of  the  shaft 
to  the  floor  of  the  upper  pendulum-station  ......... 

Distance  between  the  floors  of  the  upper  and  lower  pendulum-stations  . 


03 


2 7i 


1256  1 

50.  For  computing  the  attractions  which  determine  the  difference  of  gravity  at  the 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


333 


upper  and  lower  stations  ; if  we  refer  to  the  simple  investigation  in  article  2,  it  will 
appear  desirable  to  conduct  the  calculation  which  is  to  apply  to  the  earth’s  irregular 
form  in  such  a manner  as  to  preserve  the  characteristics  of  that  simpler  investigation 
as  closely  as  possible.  These  characteristics  are, — 

1.  That  a shell  may  be  traced,  whose  inner  surface  passes  through  the  lower 

station,  and  whose  attraction  at  that  lower  station  is  =0. 

2.  That  the  attraction  of  the  same  shell  at  the  upper  station  is  the  same  as  if  its 

matter  were  collected  at  the  centre  of  the  earth. 

3.  That  the  attraction  of  the  inclosed  nucleus  follows  the  same  law,  in  reference 

to  the  difference  at  the  upper  and  lower  stations,  as  if  all  its  matter  were 

collected  at  the  centre  of  the  earth. 

And  we  are  to  find  how  nearly  we  can  approach  to  these  circumstances  on  the  sup- 
position that  the  earth’s  constitution  is  irregular,  both  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Har- 
ton  and  in  distant  regions. 

51.  Now  if  there  are  sensible  irregularities  near  the  upper  station,  it  will  be  impos- 
sible to  satisfy  the  first  and  second  conditions  at  the  same  time.  For,  the  demon- 
stration of  the  evanescence  of  shell-attraction  at  the  lower  station  rests  upon  this ; 
that  if  chords  be  drawn  through  the  point  L,  Plate  XL  fig.  1,  included  within  the 
solid  angle  a\J},  as  cLFC,  the  portion  FC  must  be  equal  to  Lc ; and  therefore,  if  in 
the  surface  ab  (which  may  be  a very  minute  field)  there  be  an  elevation  or  depres- 
sion, there  must  be  a corresponding  elevation  or  depression  over  the  whole  AB  (which 
will  be,  in  extent,  a large  continent) ; and  this  will  disturb  the  second  condition.  It 
will  be  better,  therefore,  in  the  first  instance,  to  give  no  attention  to  the  local  irregu- 
larities near  the  upper  station  ; to  assume  that  the  sui-face  there  is  spherical ; to  find 
with  this  assumption  how  we  can  satisfy  the  three  conditions  ; and  afterwards  to 
make  allowance  for  the  effect  of  the  irregularities  near  the  upper  station. 

52.  In  fig.  2,  then,  conceive  that  for  some  distance  on  each  side  of  L (say  twenty 
or  thirty  times  the  depth  of  L)  the  external  surface  is  sensibly  spherical ; and  con- 
ceive that  at  A,  B,  C,  &c.  there  are  local  irregularities,  perhaps  large  in  extent  as 
compared  with  the  depth  of  L,  but  very  small  as  compared  with  AB  in  fig.  1.  Trace 
the  inner  surface  DEF  by  making  KD=ha,  BE=L6,  CF=Lc,  &c.  These  lines, 
however,  are  to  be  made  geometrically  equal  only  when  the  density  of  the  matter  is 
the  same  as  that  above  L ; if  the  density  about  A is  less  than  that  above  L,  take  the 
geometrical  length  AD  greater  than  La  in  the  same  proportion.  Then  the  attraction 
of  the  shell  on  the  point  L will  be  strictly  equal  to  0.  Moreover,  its  attraction  on 
the  point  U will  be  sensibly  the  same  as  if  its  form  were  free  from  irregularities.  For, 
the  attractions  on  U are  all  added  together;  the  irregularities  are  local  and  nume- 
rous, and  are  partly  additive  and  partly  subtractive ; and  by  hypothesis  we  have 
excluded  all  the  irregularities  near  L or  U,  which,  individually,  can  be  important. 
And  it  may  be  accepted  as  a universal  principle,  that  when  a result  is  produced  by 
the  addition  of  a great  number  of  small  components  vtdnch  are  liahle  individually  to 


334 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


small  irregularities  + oi'  ~ affecting  the  ratio  or  multiplier  of  each,  the  sum  of  all 
the  components  will  be  sensibly  free  from  the  effects  of  these  irregularities. 

53.  In  like  manner,  if  we  divide  the  nucleus  by  planes  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  L 
or  U,  as  shown  by  the  dotted  lines  in  fig.  2 (or  indeed  in  any  other  way),  the  attrac- 
tions of  the  slices  thus  formed  are  additive,  both  in  their  effect  on  L and  in  their 
effect  on  U.  Therefore,  for  the  nucleus  generally,  by  the  same  reasoning  as  that 
above,  the  effect  of  irregularities  in  the  outline  (and  therefore  the  effect  of  the  irre- 
gularities in  the  outline  of  the  earth,  on  which  these  depend)  will  be,  as  I conceive, 
sensibly  evanescent.  But  this  does  not  apply  to  irregularities  in  the  geological  con- 
stitution of  the  earth  at  a small  distance  below  L;  because  these  irregularities,  or 
rather  that  one  irregularity,  may  be  sensible  in  proportion  to  the  whole  change  of 
attraction  between  U and  L.  This  is  a source  of  uncertainty  from  which  no  expe- 
riments made  on  the  earth  itself  can  be  perfectly  free.  We  must  trust  in  a great 
measure  to  the  general  regularity  of  stratification,  &c.  of  the  district,  for  supporting 
us  in  the  confidence  that  there  is  no  great  disturbance  in  the  law  of  attractions  of 
the  nucleus  upon  the  points  U and  L. 

54.  To  illustrate  in  some  degree  the  difference  in  the  attractions  and  changes  of 
attraction  depending  on  different  slices  of  a sphere,  I have  supposed  a homogeneous 
sphere  divided  into  twenty  slices  by  equidistant  planes  parallel  to  the  tangent  at  L, 
and  have  computed  (by  formulm  easily  investigated)  the  attraction  of  each  slice  upon 
the  point  L at  the  surface,  and  upon  a point  raised  above  the  surface  by^th  part  of 
the  radius.  Omitting  the  factor  •r,  the  results  are  as  follows ; — ■ 


No.  of  slice. 

Attraction  on  point 
at  the  surface. 

Attraction  on  point 
elevated  Jg-  radius. 

Decrease 

by  the  elevation  of 
the  point. 

1 

•17019 

•10401 

•06618 

2 

•14548 

•11404 

•03144 

3 

•12941 

•10644 

•02297 

4 

•11640 

•09811 

•01829 

5 

•10519* 

•09002 

•01517 

6 

•09515 

•08231 

•01284 

7 

•08600 

•07501 

•01099 

8 

•07756 

•06808 

•00948 

9 

•06963 

•06144 

•00819 

10 

•06217 

•05509 

•OO7O8 

11 

•05512 

•04901 

•00611 

12 

•04833 

•04315 

•00518 

13 

•04191 

•03745 

•00446 

14 

•03568 

•03207 

•00361 

15 

•02973 

•02666 

•00307 

16 

•02391 

•02161 

•00230 

17 

•01836 

•01655 

•00181 

18 

•01295 

•01165 

•00130 

19 

•00766 

•00693 

•00073 

20 

•00249 

•00232 

•00017 

* I uas  not  aware  till  I made  this  calculation  that  the  plane  which  bisects  the  radius  drawn  to  L divides  the 
sphere  into  two  segments  whose  attractions  on  L are  equal. 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


335 


These  different  slices,  it  may  be  remarked,  correspond  to  equal  surfaces  on  the  sphere; 
and  upon  these  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  irregularities  may  mainly  depend. 

55.  In  much  of  the  preceding  reasoning,  it  will  be  remarked,  1 have  tacitly 
assumed  that  large  continental  elevations  or  large  marine  depressions,  as  we  find 
them  on  the  earth,  do  not  interfere  materially  with  the  general  law  of  attraction  based 
on  the  spherical  distribution  of  matter.  For  the  reasons  wliich  seem  to  sustain  this 
assumption,  I would  refer  to  a paper  by  me  (printed  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions, 
1855)  on  the  Attractions  of  Mountain  Masses.  It  will  also  be  remarked  that  I have 
not  introduced  the  consideration  of  the  earth’s  rotation.  I conceive  its  effects  to  be 
extremely  insignificant;  but  the  formulse  applying  to  it  are  so  unmanageable,  that  I 
have  not  pursued  it  to  details. 

Considering  now  that  it  is  sufficiently  shown  that,  on  the  supposition  that  the 
surface  in  the  neighbourhood  of  U is  truly  spherical,  we  may  use  the  method  of 
article  2,  with  no  other  uncertainty  than  that  explained  in  article  53  : I shall  pro- 
ceed with  the  corrections  for  the  inequalities  of  the  surface  near  U. 

56.  First,  I shall  investigate  the  attraction  of  the  matter  included  between  two 
horizontal  planes,  figure  3,  upon  points  U and  L in  these  planes,  whose  distance  or 
the  separation  of  the  planes  is  equal  to  the  distance  UL  in  figure  2. 

Divide  the  whole  of  the  matter  into  cylindrical  rings,  of  which  UL  is  the  axis  : let 
the  internal  and  external  radii  of  one  of  these  rings  be  ^ and  + Call  the  azimuth 
of  any  part  of  the  ring  the  end-surface  of  the  prism  included  between  d and 
is  Let  be  the  vertical  ordinate  measured  upwards  from  the  lower  plane;  the 

solid  content  of  the  part  of  the  prism  included  between  z and  is  : its 


. , . -r  ....  17*  d.plp.M.'^Z  , , , , 

attraction  on  the  point  L,  supposing  its  density  to  be  a,  is  — / a — ; and  the  resolved 

part  of  this,  in  the  vertical  direction,  is  Integrating  with  respect  to 

between  the  limits  «=0  and  ^ = c=UL,  we  have  — rV  Integrating 

^ ^ \?  ip^  + c^J  ^ ® 


Inte- 


with  respect  to  6 for  the  whole  circumference,  we  have  2^.(1.  (ip _ 

grating  with  respect  to  g,  we  have  27r This  is  the  attraction 
upwards  on  the  point  L.  The  attraction  downwards  on  the  point  U will  be  the 
same  ; and  thus  the  difference  of  attractions  on  U and  L,  estimated  in  the  downwards 


direction,  will  be  A'tt . 

If  the  planes  be  continued  without  limit,  or  be  infinite,  this  expression  becomes 
Arc.d.  Now  the  attraction  of  a shell  whose  thickness  is  c,  computed  as  in  article  2, 
is  0 for  the  point  at  the  inner  surface  of  the  shell,  and  Azc.d  for  the  point  at  the  outer 
surface,  and  therefore  the  difference  is  A^rcd.  Hence  it  is  indifferent  whether  we 
consider  the  difference  of  attractions  at  the  upper  and  lower  stations  (independent  of 
the  change  in  the  attraction  of  the  nucleus  caused  by  the  change  of  distance  from  it), 


336 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BARTON  EXPERIMENT 


as  produced  by  a shell  of  matter,  or  as  produced  by  the  matter  between  two  parallel 
planes  of  unlimited  extent. 

If  the  extent  of  the  planes  be  limited,  their  form  being  circular,  let  f>=wc; 
then  the  difference  of  attractions  is  4'rc.<Z.|w+ 1 — &c.^  j = 47rc.c?.|l— 

nearly.  If  (as  in  the  Harton  experiment)  mile,  ^=3  miles  =12c  nearly,  this 


23 


= 4^0. 1 — ^ nearly.  Thus  it  appears  that  ^ of  the  effect  is  produced  by  the 


24 


matter  within  three  miles  of  the  pendulum-stations.  It  is  evident  therefore  that  it  is 
not  necessary  to  give  attention  to  the  small  inequalities  of  the  ground  at  any  great 
distance  from  the  pendulum-stations. 

5/.  The  inequalities  which  we  have  to  consider  are  entirely  at  the  surface,  and  do 
not  in  any  case  exceed  in  vertical  measure  one-tenth  of  the  depth  of  the  mine.  They 
may  therefore  be  considered  as  being  actually  at  the  surface;  and,  if  their  horizontal 
extent  is  not  very  great,  each  may  be  considered  as  collected  at  its  centre  of  gravity. 
Its  effect  on  the  upper  station  will  be  0 ; its  effect  on  the  lower  station  will  be 


jXdx  volume;  where  § is  the  horizontal  distance  of  the  centre  of  gravitv. 

{p^  + cy 

An  eminence  will  increase  the  attraction  upwards,  and  a depression  will  diminish  it. 
But  as  our  only  object  is  to  find  the  difference  of  attractions  on  the  two  stations,  we 
may  estimate  the  whole,  with  changed  sign,  as  an  effect  on  the  upper  station  ; then 
an  eminence  will  increase  the  attraction  downwards,  and  a depression  will  dimi- 
nish it. 

There  is  however  one  depression  which  it  is  desii’able  to  consider  in  a different 
way,  namely  that  of  the  sea.  The  depth  of  the  sea  itself  is  less  important  than  the 
depression  below  the  table-land,  which  continues  with  little  change  of  level  to  the 
edge  of  the  cliffs  ; and  a sufficiently  accurate  estimate  may  be  formed  of  the  measure 
of  depression  (including  the  effect  of  the  attraction  of  the  water)  considered  as  uni- 
form. The  line  of  cliff  may  be  considered  as  straight.  Let  a be  the  distance  from 
the  pendulum-station  to  the  straight  line  of  cliff,  measured  perpendicularly  to  that 
line  ; h the  depth  of  tlie  depression  ; let  x be  parallel  to  a,  and  ^ parallel  to  the  line 
of  cliff.  The  matter  dx^xx^^xh  is  at  the  distance  fi‘o™  upper  station, 


and  therefore  its  vertical  attraction  on  the  lower  station  is 


d.b.c.lx.h)  d.b.c.lx 

or 1 

[x^  -\-y^  + c^)  “ [x'^  ■+•  y'^)  “ 


nearly. 


Integrating  first  with 


tl)  tC  • 

respect  to  y,  from  — > oo  to  have  — — ■ 


Integrating  then  with  respect  to  x,  from  a to  oo,  we  have 


2d.b,c 


a 


These  formulae  will  suffice  for  our  purpose.  It  is  only  necessary  further  to  remark, 
that,  as  the  unit  of  measure  is  absolutely  arbitrary,  and  as  the  numerical  and  gra- 
phical operations  are  a little  facilitated  by  using  for  unit  the  “depth  of  the  mine,”  I 
have,  in  all  the  subsequent  calculations,  adopted  that  quantity  (1256  feet)  as  unit 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


337 


of  measure.  In  all  the  preceding  formulae,  c must  now  be  made  =1.  The  earth’s 
radius  corresponding  to  Harton  is  then  1662T7,  its  attraction  at  the  lower  station 

47r  f SttI 

is  y X 1662T7xD,  or  69625  xD,  and  at  the  upper  station  j 69625— y^xD.  The 

attraction  of  the  shell  upon  the  upper  station,  or  the  difference  of  attractions  of  the 
indefinite  horizontal  stratum  upon  the  upper  and  lower  stations,  is  47rxd.  The  for- 

25 

mula  applicable  to  the  depression  of  the  sea  will  be  —xd;  and  that  applicable  to  any 

other  elevation  or  depression  will  be  ^ ^ . ^here  all  linear  measures  are  to  be 

referred  to  the  mine-depth  as  unit. 

58.  On  my  making  known  that  information  on  the  inequalities  of  the  ground  would 
be  required  for  the  final  calculations,  the  Mayor  and  Corporation  of  South  Shields 
directed  that  the  necessary  surveys  should  be  made,  and  the  execution  of  this  work 
was  entrusted  to  Christopher  Thompson,  Esq.,  Surveyor  for  the  Corporation.  This 
gentleman  entered  fully  into  ray  views,  and,  after  the  proper  surveys  for  elevation, 
furnished  me  with  a map  extending  about  three  miles  in  all  directions  round  Harton, 
with  the  elevations  above  high  water  in  feet  marked  at  numerous  points.  I found  that 
a line  might  be  drawn,  nearly  ten  depths  distant  from  the  upper  station,  touching  the 
cliffs  of  Tynemouth  and  the  cliffs  south-east  of  Harton,  and  ranging  for  some  distance 
along  the  coast  of  Durham.  I therefore  drew  a line  parallel  to  this  at  ten  depths 
distance  from  the  upper  station,  and  divided  the  whole  country  into  squares  (with 
sides  of  one  depth  each)  whose  sides  were  parallel  and  perpendicular  to  this.  These 
squares  I grouped  as  appeared  most  convenient,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  Map,  Plate  XII. 
fig.  4 (the  principal  object  being  to  secure  a proper  representation  of  Jarrow  Slake 
and  the  Valley  of  the  Tyne),  and  adopted  for  each  group  the  elevation  in  feet  above 
high  water  which  Mr.  Thompson’s  elevations  of  special  points  suggested.  The 
elevation  of  the  upper  pendulum-station  was  74  feet.  Consequently,  the  vertical 
measure  which  was  to  be  used  for  computing  the  ^‘volume”  in  the  formula  above 


was 


Elevation  — 74 
1256  ‘ 


Of  this  formula,  a small  table  was  prepared.  The  quantity  g was 

measured  graphically  from  the  map,  and  \/ f-\-\  was  formed  graphically  from  it. 

59.  Adopting  for  the  sea,  so  far  as  its  effects  are  principally  sensible  (and  con- 
ceiving the  water  replaced  by  an  equivalent  quantity  of  ground  with  surface  lower 
than  the  sea),  the  elevation  — 15  feet,  to  which  corresponds 


“1256“  07087, 


1256 


the  factor  of  d applicable  to  the  depression  of  the  sea  beyond  the  straight  line  at 
distance  10  is 

-2  X -07087 


10 


= —•014174. 


2 Y 


MDCCCLVI. 


338 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


The  elements  for  computing  the  effect  of  the  other  inequalities,  and  the  factors  of  d, 
are  as  follows  ; that  for  19*  being  inserted  by  estimation  : — 


No. 

Elevation  in 
feet  above 
high  water. 

Surface. 

p- 

Attraction. 

No. 

Elevation  in 
feet  above 
high  water. 

Surface. 

P- 

Attraction. 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

1 

- 15 

•014174 

23 

15 

3 

2-6 

•006421 

2 

0 

9 

10-7 

•000427 

24 

60 

4 

1*7 

•005920 

3 

0 

8 

9*5 

•000541 

25 

55 

4 

1-7 

•008021 

4 

5 

7 

10-0 

•000379 

26 

80 

4 

1*7 

•002537 

5 

5 

6 

9*8 

•000346 

27 

74 

4 

1*7 

•000000 

6 

30 

6 

8-3 

•000361 

28 

90 

8 

3-0 

•003292 

7 

70 

12 

7-0 

•000108 

29 

90 

12 

5-5 

•000866 

8 

80 

7 

6-9 

•000099 

30 

90 

12 

8-5 

•000244 

9 

130 

12 

7*8 

•001102 

31 

0 

6 

16-4 

•000080 

10 

125 

10 

9*7 

•000438 

32 

0 

4 

15-3 

•000065 

11 

0 

4 

7-5 

•000543 

33 

0 

12 

11-0 

•000524 

12 

15 

4 

5-8 

•000925 

34 

— 5 

5 

7-0 

•000890 

13 

5 

2 

5-2 

•000743 

35 

30 

4 

9*7 

•000151 

14 

50 

6 

3’9 

•001739 

36 

40 

20 

6-8 

•001669 

15 

80 

6 

3-7 

•000514 

37 

20 

2 

4-0 

•001229 

16 

100 

16 

4-5 

•003381 

i 

38 

74 

25 

4-4 

•000000 

17 

120 

12 

7*0 

•001244 

39 

105 

16 

6*5 

•001387 

18 

120 

24 

10-5 

•000748 

40 

90 

21 

8-5 

•000426 

19 

— 15 

50 

18-0 

•000605 

41 

140 

16 

9*3 

•001029 

19* 

'000600 

42 

100 

24 

10-4 

•000435 

20 

15 

2 

7*9 

•000186 

43 

125 

16 

12-0 

•000372 

21 

0 

2 

6-6 

•000395 

44 

120 

10 

11-0 

•000272 

22 

- 10 

9 

4-5 

•006143 

The  sum  of  all  the  factors  for  the  effects  of  inequality  is  —•044799. 

As  the  attraction  of  the  shell  is  12*566368  X c?,  and  as  the  effects  of  inequality 
amount  to  — *044799  Xc?,  the  complete  effect  of  the  ground  above  the  lower  station 
is  12*521569  X 

60.  We  are  now  in  a position  to  obtain  a result  requiring  only  for  its  complete 
numerical  exhibition  a knowledge  of  the  specific  gravities  of  the  mine-rocks.  The 
formula  for  gravity  at  the  lower  station  has  been  found  to  be 

69625  X D, 

and  that  at  the  upper  station 

(69625  — 8*3776)  X D + 1 2*52 1 6 X c?. 

Hence  ^s|^  = 1+0'00012032-0-00017984X5- 

But  the  experiments  gave  (see  article  45) 


Hence 

or 


Gravity  below 
Gravity  above 


= 1 *00005 1 85  + *000000 1 9. 


0*00006847±*00000019=0*00017984X5; 


D 


^ = 2*6266+*0073, 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


339 


where  (as  has  been  explained  in  article  46)  the  last  term  ought  probably  to  be 
doubled^  to  give  the  uncertainty  depending  on  the  pendulum-experiments  only. 


Section  VIII. — Estimation  of  the  Mean  Specific  Gravity  of  the  Surface  Rocks ; and 
final  conclusion  on  the  Mean  Density  of  the  Earth,  as  determined  from  the  Pen- 
dulum Experiments. 

61.  By  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Arkley,  I was  furnished  with  a complete  account  of 
the  strata  passed  through  in  sinking  the  Harton  shaft,  and  with  specimens  of  a great 
number  of  the  rocks.  These  were  submitted  to  Professor  W.  H.  Miller,  who  with 
great  labour  determined  their  specific  gravities.  I place  below  the  entire  catalogue 
and  measure  of  the  strata,  and  the  results  at  which  Professor  Miller  arrived.  Pro- 
fessor Miller  remarks  that  there  is  inevitable  uncertainty  in  the  estimation  of  the 
weight  of  those  specimens  which  were  drawn  from  beds  described  as  containing 
water. 


No. 

Description  of  Rock. 

Thickness. 

Specific 

Gravity. 

Tempera- 
ture of 
water, 
Centigrade. 

1 

ft. 

1 

in. 

0 

0 

2 

Yellow  Clay 

6 

4i 

3 

Blue  laminated  Clay  

7 

o“ 

4 

Gravelly  Clay 

69 

2 

5 

Red  Clay  (resting  on  the  Stone  Head) 

10 

0 

6 

Soft  blue  Shale,  and  a little  Water  

7 

0 

7 

Coal ’ 

3 

8 

Dark  Grey  Shale  

7 

6 

2*5698 

15*9 

9 

Coal " 

3 

10 

Dark  Grey  Shale  

12 

3 

2*5273 

16*4 

11 

Coal  and  a little  Water  

4 

12 

13 

Stronff  dark  Grev  Shale  mixed  with  Sandstone  

9 

2 

Strong  Grey  Sandstone  and  Water  

7 

10 

2*5341 

8*8 

14 

Grey  Shale  

18 

0 

2*6170 

9-2 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 
22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

Bituminous  Shale  

5 

Coal ’ 

1 

0 

Thill  or  Grey  Shale 

4 

2 

Sandstone  Girdle.  

10 

Grey  Shale,  Sandstone  Girdles,  and  Water 

14 

2 

White  Sandstone  Girdle  and  Water  

1 

2 

Grey  Shale  

1 

6 

White  Sandstone  Girdle  and  Water  

3 

5 

Bituminous  Shale  

2 

9 

Coal 

4 

Thill  or  Grey  Shale  

10 

0 

2*5325 

9*7 

Grey  Sandstone  

3 

2 

2*6325 

9-5 

Grey  Shale  

2 

6 

Grey  Sandstone  with  partings  of  Bituminous  Shale 

2 

8 

Blue  Shale  

5 

8 

1 

2 

Dark  Grey  Shale  

4 

6 

32 

33 

Grey  Shale  

10 

0 

1 

2 

34 

Band  of  Grev  Shale  

4 

35 

Coal 

6 

36 

Sandstone  with  very  hard  Girdles  

7 

0 

2*8072 

17*25 

2 Y 2 


340 


MR.  airy’s  account  OF  THE  BARTON  EXPERIMENT 


Table  (continued). 


No. 

Description  of  Rock. 

Thickness. 

Specific 

Gravity. 

Tempera- 
ture of 
water, 
Centigrade. 

37 

Grov  Shale  and  Water  

ft. 

3 

in. 

4 

0 

38 

Coal 

6 

39 

40 

Bituminous  Shale 

3 

Coal 

3 

41 

Orev  Shalft  with  Sandstone  frirdies  

8 

4 

42 

Coal 

3 

43 

44 

Grey  Shale  

Coal 

5 

2 

2 

45 

Grey  Shale  with  thin  Sandstone  Girdles  and  Water  

23 

7 

2-5525 

15-8 

46 

Coal.  Brassev  Rand,  and  Coal  

2 

10 

1-3117 

16-1 

47 

48 

49 

50 

Grev  Slialft  

4 

0 

2-5736 

10-0 

Grey  Shale,  Sandstone  Girdles,  and  Water  

Sandstone,  and  Water 

15 

45 

1 

0 

2-5687 

2-6695 

10-3 

8-8 

Dark  Grey  Shale 
Coal 

12 

0 

2-5962 

9-9 

51 

1 

8 

1-3474 

7-7 

52 

Grey  Shale  or  Thill  

4 

0 

53 

Grey  Sandstone  and  Water  

5 

2 

54 

White  Sandstone  with  Shale  nartinp’s  and  Water 

116 

8 

2-8016 

16-0 

55 

Dark  Grey  Shale 
Coal 

l6 

3 

2-6132 

16-4 

56 

8 

37 

58 

Dark  Grey  Shale 
Coal 

16 

3 

2-6233 

4-8 

5 

59 

60 

Brown  Shale  

6 

Grey  Sandstone  w'i 
Hvdroo'en  Gas.. 

th  Shale  partings  and  salt  water,  emitting  Carburetted 

7 

31 

2-5410 

16-9 

61 

Red  and  White  Sandstone,  porous  and  wet  

53 

8i 

2-8163 

8-4 

62 

Coal  mixed  with  hard  Bituminous  Shale  

3 

1-7010 

8-4 

63 

Soft  Grev  Shale  .. 

7 

0 

2-5184 

9-5 

64 

Strong  Rituminons  Shale  mixed  with  Nodules  of  Clav  Ironstone  

1 

5 

2-2587 

9-5 

65 

Coal 

2i 

66 

Strong  light-coloured  Grey  Sandstone  with  Shale  partings  and  very  hard 
Girdles 

10 

0 

2-6595 

9-1 

67 

68 

Dark  Grey  Shale 

Coal 

Bituminous  Band 
Coal 

10 

7 

2-5734 

17-5 

1 

8 

1-4839 

17-5 

69 

70 

71 

n 

73 

74 

75 

76 

77 

78 

79 

80 

Bituminous  Band 

Coal 

Hard  Grey  Shale 
Dark  Grey  Shale 
Foul  Coal 

with  very  hard  Sandstone  Girdles  

27 

4 

2-6223 

7.7 

with  Girdles  of  Clay  Ironstone 

15 

10 

2-5416 

8-9 

5 

Dark  Grey  Shale 
Hard  dark  Grev  S 

2 

6 

2-7073 

18-5 

)hale  with  Sandstone  Girdles  

12 

0 

2-2660 

9-5 

Coal ", 

5 

Grey  Shale  

1 

8 

White  Sandstone  with  very  hard  Girdles  and  Water  

24 

11 

2-5334 

9-0 

Cnal  0 ft.  4 in..  Slatv  Cnal"!  ft.  1 in.  — 1 ft.  5 in 

1 

5 

tirev  Shale  

2 

7 

Coal . 

6 

Dark  Grey  Shale 
White  Sandstone 

with  Sandstone  Girdles  and  Water  

14 

1 

2-6434 

9-3 

81 

with  Shale  partings  

13 

111 

2-5613 

7-8 

82 

Grev  .Shale  

1 

4" 

83 

Coal,  .stfonff  and  (mod 

2 

6 

84 

Snliiit  Coal  

6 

85 

Grey  Shale  

1 

6 

86 

iStronp-  Whitp  SanrUtorip.  verv  hnrd  in  olaces.  and  water  

43 

81 

2-4969 

15-5 

87 

Bituminous  Shale 

31 

FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


341 


Table  (continued). 


No. 


Description  of  Rock. 


Thickness. 


Specific 

Gravity. 


Tempera- 
ture of 
water, 
Centigrade. 


88 

89 

90 

91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99 
100 
101 
102 

103 

104 

105 

106 

107 

108 
109 

no 

111 

112 

113 

114 

115 

116 

117 

118 

119 

120 
121 
122 

123 

124 

125 

126 

127 

128 

129 

130 

131 

132 

133 

134 

135 

136 

137 

138 

139 

140 

141 

142 


Black  Slaty  Coal 

Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  Girdles  

Bituminous  Shale  with  Clay  Ironstone  Girdles. 
Coal 


Dark  Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  Girdles 

Hard  White  Sandstone  with  frequently  hard  Shale  and  small  Ironstone 

Nodules  very  coarse,  and  a little  Water  

Dark  Blue  Shale  with  Nodules  and  Ironstone  Girdles 

Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  Girdles  

Bituminous  Shale  

Coal,  strong  and  good 

Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  Girdles  

White  Sandstone  with  a little  Water 

Grey  Shale  with  Ironstone  Girdles  

Coal 


Bituminous  Shale  

Coal 

Bituminous  Shale  

Bituminous  Shale  mixed  with  Coal  pipes  

Grey  Shale  

Hard  Shale  

Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  Girdles  

Strong  Grey  Sandstone  with  Shale  partings,  and  very  hard  Sandstone 

Girdles  with  a little  Water 

Blue  Shale  Girdle  

White  Sandstone  Girdle  with  Shale  partings  

Coal 


Grey  Shale  with  Ironstone  Nodules  

Strong  Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  Girdles  

Strong  dark  Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  Girdles 

Splint  Coal  

Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  Girdles  

Strong  White  Sandstone  with  very  hard  Girdles 

Very  hard  Sandstone  

Hard  Grey  Shale  with  Sandstone  and  Ironstone  Girdles. 

Black  Slaty  Bituminous  Shale  

Coal ‘. 


Bituminous  Shale  

Shale  

Hard  Grey  Shale  with  verv  hard  Sandstone  Girdles 
Coal “ 


Hard  Grey  Shale  with  mild  and  also  very  hard  Sandstone  Girdles 

Coal 

Bituminous  Shale  

Coal 


Shale  

Bituminous  Shale  

Splinty  Coal  

Grey  Shale  

Dark  Grey  Shale  with  Ironstone  Girdles  

Grey  Shale  with  Ironstone  Girdles  

Grey  Sliale  with  Shale  partings  and  very  hard  Sandstone  Girdles 

Dark  Grey  Shale  with  Ironstone  Girdles  

White  Sandstone  with  very  hard  Girdles  

Grey  Sandstone  with  Shale  partings  and  very  hard  Girdles  

Bituminous  Shale  

Top  Coal ^ 

Splint  ...  VBensham  Coal  Seam. 

Bottom  Coal  ...  J 


ft.  in. 
1 5i 
15  8 

3 0 

H 

1 


16 


64  7 
6 11 
6 0 

7 5 
6 

21  0 
19  0 
6 0 
1 2 
1 

3 0 

6 

5 6 

21  0 
27  0 

40  5 

2 Oi 
2 3 

1 10 

4 0 

10  0 
14  0 

5 

10  0 
12  0 

8 0 


33 

1 


4 

7 

25 


1 
6 
11 
15  0 
8 0 


1 

0 

9 

3 

0 

9 

3 

3 

H 

2 

3^ 

2 

H 

2 

2 

3 


5 

21 


2-5483 

2-5178 

2-5209 

1- 2956 

2- 3250 


2-3942 

2-6000 


2-6066 

2-6641 

2-6146 


2-6481 

2-6763 

2-6021 


2-8178 


2-5591 


6 0 


2-6146 


1-2869 


8- 5 

9- 5 

17- 1 

18- 1 


4-8 

9-1 


9-6 

7-3 

9-6 


15-2 

7-7 

7-4 


5-3 


16-8 


8-3 


8-7 


342 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT. 


62.  Without  pretending  to  extreme  accuracy,  we  may  consider  the  thickness  and 
specific  gravity  of  the  beds  as  represented,  with  sufficient  accuracy  for  the  present 
purpose,  by  the  following  numbers  : — 

1211  feet  of  rocky  and  shaly  beds  . . specific  gravity  2*56 

30  feet  of  coaly  beds specific  gravity  1-43 

15  feet  completely  worked  out  . . specific  gravity  O’OO 

From  these  the  mean  specific  gravity  is  found  to  be  2’50. 

63.  Substituting  this  for  d in  the  expression  at  the  end  of  the  last  Section,  we  get 
for  the  mean  density  of  the  Earth,  as  determined  from  these  experiments, 

6-566+-0182, 

where  the  last  term  (expressing  the  probable  error)  ought  to  be  at  least  doubled. 

64.  The  value  thus  obtained  is  much  larger  than  that  obtained  from  the  Schehal- 
lien  experiment,  and  considerably  larger  than  the  mean  found  by  Baily  from  the 
torsion-rod  experiments.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  assign  with  precision  the  causes 
or  the  measures  of  the  errors  of  any  of  these  determinations  ; and  I shall  content 
myself  with  expressing  my  opinion,  that  the  value  now  presented  is  entitled  to  com- 
pete with  the  others,  on,  at  least,  equal  terms. 


[ 343  ] 


XV.  Supplement  to  the  “ Account  of  Pendulum  Experiments  undertaken  in  the  Harton 
Colliery being  an  Account  of  Experiments  undertaken  to  determine  the  Correction 
for  the  Temperature  of  the  Pendulum.  By  G.  B.  Airy,  Esq.^  Astronomer  Royal. 


Received  February  13, — Read  March  6,  1856. 

Section  IX. — Introductory  and  Historical. 

65.  In  order  to  remove,  as  far  as  possible,  the  slight  uncertainty  in  the  result  of 
the  Harton  Experiment  depending  on  the  mean  difference  of  temperature  of  the 
Pendulums,  I again  borrowed  the  two  Pendulums  and  the  Clock  Shelton  from  the 
Royal  Society,  and  prepared  them  for  use  in  the  following  manner.  Two  rooms 
were  selected  at  the  Royal  Observatory,  which  appeared  well  adapted  for  a series  of 
pendulum  experiments.  One  is  the  Laundry  of  the  Dwelling  House  ; a room  on  the 
basement  story,  almost  entirely  sunk  below  the  level  of  the  Lawn  and  Front  Court, 
but  bordered  on  two  sides  by  a dry  area ; with  stone  floor  laid  immediately  upon 
the  solid  ground.  The  chimney-opening  and  other  crevices  were  carefully  stopped 
up,  and  a hot-air-stove  with  funnel  leading  into  the  chimney  was  planted  in  the 
room  ; by  means  of  this  stove  the  temperature  of  the  room  could  be  maintained  with 
reasonable  steadiness  nearly  to  90°  Fahr.  The  Pendulum  8 with  Clock  Earnshaw 
were  mounted  in  the  usual  way  in  this  room.  A screen  was  placed  between  the 
stove  and  the  pendulum,  which  effectually  prevented  the  pendulum  and  its  thermo- 
meters from  receiving  any  sensible  heat  by  radiation.  The  other  room  is  the  Lower 
Record  Room,  a room  with  stone  floor  laid  (except  at  its  centre)  upon  the  solid 
ground,  warmed  by  a heating  apparatus  below  the  centre  of  the  floor.  The  Pen- 
dulum 1821  with  Clock  Shelton  were  mounted  in  one  side  of  this  room.  As  a hot- 
air-pipe rises  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  this  pipe  also  was  screened  to  prevent  unfair 
radiation  on  the  pendulum,  &c. ; although  here  the  necessity  for  such  caution  was 
far  less  pressing  than  in  the  Laundry. 

66.  The  plan  proposed  for  operations  was ; to  compare  the  clocks,  by  carrying  a 
Solar  Chronometer  from  one  to  the  other,  and  observing  their  readings  at  the  time 
of  coincidence  of  beats  (a  method  which  admits  of  extreme  accuracy  when  the  clocks 
are  so  near  together  that  the  chronometer  can  be  carried  without  risk  of  disturbance) ; 
to  divide  the  operations  into  Four  Series,  numbered  in  sequence  Fifth,  Sixth,  Seventh, 
Eighth  ; to  make  no  alteration  whatever  in  the  pendulums,  nor  even  to  dismount 
them,  between  one  series  and  another;  but  to  make  Pendulum  1821  hot  and  8 cool 
in  the  Fifth  and  Seventh  Series,  and  Pendulum  8 hot  and  1821  cool  in  the  Sixth  and 
Eighth  Series ; and  through  the  extent  of  each  Series  to  keep  up  the  Swings  in 


344 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


- incessant  sequence,  as  in  the  observations  at  Harton.  The  uncontrolled  conduct  of 
the  experiments  was  entrusted  to  Messrs.  Dunkin  and  Ellis  ; and  I am  confident  it 
will  be  found  that  they  are  inferior  to  none  that  have  ever  been  made. 

In  all  cases,  the  fires  for  warming  the  rooms  were  lighted  nearly  twenty-four  hours 
before  the  observations  began. 

67.  When  the  pendulum-boxes  were  opened  at  Greenwich,  two  of  the  four  thermo- 
meters which  had  been  used  at  Harton  were  missing,  and  all  attempts  to  trace  them 
have  hitherto  failed.  Two  thermometers  belonging  to  the  Royal  Observatory  (one 
by  Thomas  Jones  and  one  by  Troughton  and  Simms)  were  substituted  for  them.  It 
would  have  been  desirable  to  use  the  very  same  thermometers  which  were  used  in  the 
Harton  experiment ; but  it  is  probable  that,  with  the  considerable  range  of  tempe- 
rature used  in  these  experiments,  the  accidental  differences  between  two  thermometers 
made  by  makers  of  repute  will  not  produee  any  sensible  effect  on  the  result. 

68.  The  following  is  the  journal  of  operations  : — 

Fifth  Series.  Pendulum  1821  in  heat. 

Observations  commenced  a little  before  noon.  Mr.  Dunkin  observed 
Pendulum  1821  from  the  beginning  of  Swing  83  to  the  beginning 
of  Swing  85.  Mr.  Ellis  observed  Pendulum  8 from  the  beginning 
of  Swing  83,  and  1821  from  the  end  of  Swing  85,  to  the  beginning 
of  Swing  87. 

Mr.  Dunkin  observed  8 from  the  end  of  Swing  87  to  the  beginning  of 
Swing  89 ; Mr.  Ellis  observed  8 from  the  end  of  Swing  89  to  the 
beginning  of  Swing  91  ; and  Mr.  Ellis  observed  it  from  the  end 
of  Swing  91  to  the  end  of  Swing  92.  Mr.  Dunkin  observed  1821 
from  the  end  of  Swing  87  to  the  end  of  Swing  92,  nearly  two  hours 
after  midnight.  This  closed  the  Fifth  Series. 

Sixth  Series.  Pendulum  8 in  heat. 

Jan.  4. — Commencing  about  1^  hour  before  noon.  Mr.  Dunkin  observed  1821 
from  the  beginning  of  Swing  93  to  the  beginning  of  Swing  97. 
Mr.  Ellis  observed  8 from  the  beginning  of  93  to  the  beginning  of 
95  ; Mr.  Dunkin  from  the  end  of  95  to  the  beginning  of  97. 

Jan.  5. — Mr.  Ellis  observed  1821  from  the  end  of  97  to  the  beginning  of  99; 

Mr.  Dunkin  from  the  end  of  99  to  the  beginning  of  102 ; Mr.  Ellis 
at  the  end  of  102.  Mr.  Ellis  observed  8 from  the  end  of  97  to  the 
end  of  102,  about  1^  hour  after  midnight.  This  closed  the  Sixth 
Series. 


1856.  Jan.  1.— 


Jan.  2. — 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


345 


Seventh  Series.  Pendulum  1821  in  heat. 

1856.  Jan.  8. — Commencing  about  2 hours  before  noon.  Mr.  Dunkin  observed  1821 
from  the  beginning  of  103  to  the  beginning  of  105  ; and  Mr.  Ellis 
from  the  end  of  105  to  the  beginning  of  107-  Mr.  Ellis  observed 
8 from  the  beginning  of  103  to  the  beginning  of  107. 

Jan.  9. — Mr.  Dunkin  observed  1821  from  the  end  of  107  to  the  end  of  112. 

Mr.  Dunkin  observed  8 from  the  end  of  107  to  the  beginning  of 
109 ; Mr.  Ellis  from  the  end  of  109  to  the  beginning  of  111  ; and 
Mr.  Dunkin  from  the  end  of  111  to  the  end  of  112,  about  1^  hour 
after  midnight.  This  closed  the  Seventh  Series. 

Eighth  Series.  Pendulum  8 in  heat. 

Jan.  ] 1. — Mr.  Dunkin  observed  1821  from  the  beginning  of  113  to  the  begin- 
ning  of  117.  Mr.  Ellis  observed  8 from  the  beginning  of  113  to 
the  beginning  of  115;  Mr.  Dunkin  from  the  end  of  115  to  the 
beginning  of  117. 

Jan.  12. — Mr.  Ellis  observed  1821  from  the  end  of  117  to  the  end  of  118; 

Mr.  Dunkin  from  the  beginning  of  119  to  the  beginning  of  121  ; 
and  Mr.  Ellis  from  the  end  of  121  to  the  end  of  122.  Mr.  Ellis 
observed  8 from  the  end  of  117  to  the  end  of  122,  about  2 hours 
after  midnight.  This  terminated  the  Eighth  Series,  and  the  whole 
operation. 

Section  X. — Comparisons  of  Clocks, 

69.  The  clocks  were  compared  by  means  of  a Solar  Chronometer,  sometimes  three 
times  and  sometimes  four  times  at  each  interruption  of  Swings.  When  there  are 
three  comparisons,  all  are  made  by  one  observer;  when  there  are  four,  they  are 
usually  (but  not  in  every  case)  made  by  two  observers.  The  discordance  of  the 
different  comparisons  in  each  group  does  not  exceed  0®'01  or  0®’02. 

The  following  Table  contains  the  Mean  of  each  group  of  comparisons,  and  the 
computation  of  the  Log.  Rate  of  Shelton  upon  Earnshaw. 


2 z 


mdccclvi. 


346 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


Interval 
by  Shelton. 

Interval 

by  Earnshaw. 

Rate  Shelton  _ 
Earnshaw 

Log. 

R.tP_  Shelton 

Earnshaw 

h 

m 

S 

h 

m* 

S 

11 

48-25 

3 

11 

29-47 

1-0016345 

0-00070928 

7 

39-50 

4 

7 

15-52 

1-0016164 

0-00070142 

30 

40-92 

4 

30 

14-58 

1-0016245 

0-00070495 

24 

11-66 

4 

23 

46-18 

1-0016100 

0-00069865 

••3 

32 

26-34 

3 

32 

5-72 

1-0016203 

0-00070312 

58 

44-00 

3 

58 

20-91 

1-0016146 

0-00070065 

42 

9-58 

3 

41 

48-11 

1-0016133 

O-OOO7OOO8 

58 

2-00 

3 

57 

39-00 

1-0016130 

O-OOO69995 

••4 

22 

3-42 

4 

21 

38-06 

1-0016155 

0-00070104 

36 

56-83 

3 

36 

35-90 

1-0016105 

0-00069887 

••3 

21 

39-00 

3 

21 

19-75 

1-0015936 

0-00069154 

"4 

13 

24-75 

4 

13 

0-56 

1-0015935 

0-00069150 

••4 

0 

22-92 

3 

59 

59-83 

1-0016035 

0-00069584 

••3 

53 

35-00 

3 

53 

12-42 

1-0016138 

0-00070030 

••4 

40 

26-33 

4 

39 

59-23 

1-0016131 

0-00069999 

••3 

45 

54-67 

3 

45 

32-73 

1-0016212 

0-00070351 

••3 

37 

2-83 

3 

36 

41-77 

1-0016198 

0-00070291 

-4 

4 

8-50 

4 

3 

44-81 

1-0016191 

O-OOO7026O 

••4 

9 

8-00 

4 

8 

43-81 

1-0016209 

0-00070338 

••4 

12 

17-75 

4 

11 

53-26 

1-0016205 

0-00070321 

37 

41-00 

3 

37 

19-62 

1-0016396 

0-00071149 

19 

3-25 

4 

18 

37-71 

1-0016458 

0-00071418 

••4 

44 

9-25 

4 

43 

41-31 

1-0016415 

0-00071231 

39 

8-33 

3 

38 

46-78 

1-0016417 

0-00071239 

••4 

12 

2-34 

4 

11 

37-53 

1-0016433 

0-00071309 

43 

52-66 

3 

43 

30-66 

1-0016405 

O-OOO71I88 

•3 

38 

56-17 

3 

38 

34-69 

1-0016378 

0-00071071 

••4 

9 

18-00 

4 

8 

53-52 

1-0016393 

0 00071136 

••4 

1 

12-17 

4 

0 

48-49 

1-0016390 

0-00071123 

.•4 

7 

8-08 

4 

6 

43-89 

1-0016341 

0-00070910 

••3 

58 

47-00 

3 

58 

23-91 

1-0016143 

0-00070052 

••4 

6 

8-00 

4 

5 

44-14 

1-0016183 

0-00070225 

••4 

4 

32-17 

4 

4 

8-39 

1-0016234 

0-00070446 

••3 

40 

25-00 

3 

40 

3-57 

1-0016230 

0-00070429 

••5 

1 

35-00 

5 

1 

5-65 

1-0016247 

0-00070503 

••3 

52 

38-00 

3 

52 

15-35 

1-0016254 

0-00070533 

••3 

15 

40-08 

3 

15 

21-02 

1-0016262 

0-00070568 

••4 

14 

49-25 

4 

14 

24-41 

1-0016273 

O-OOO70616 

.■4 

55 

24-00 

4 

54 

55-10 

1-0016322 

0-00070828 

•3 

46 

3-00 

3 

45 

40-97 

1-0016270 

0-00070603 

83- 

84- 

85- 

86- 

87- 

88- 

89- 

90- 

91- 

92- 


93- 

94- 

95- 

96- 

97- 

98- 

99- 
100- 
101- 
102- 


103- 

104- 

105- 

106- 

107- 

108- 

109- 

110- 
111- 
112- 


113- 

114- 

115- 

116- 

117- 

118- 

119- 

120- 
121- 
122- 


Approximate 
Time  of 
Comparison. 


1856. 


Number 
of  Com- 
parisons. 


Mean  of  Times 
by  Shelton. 


Jan. 

h 

h 

m 

s 

h 

m 

s 

0. 

23 

4 

6 

5 

14-00 

21 

46 

41-87 

1. 

2 

4 

9 

17 

2-25 

0 

58 

11-34 

1. 

6 

4 

13 

24 

41-75 

5 

5 

26-86 

1. 

10 

3 

17 

55 

22-67 

9 

35 

41-44 

1. 

15 

3 

22 

19 

34-33 

13 

59 

27-62 

.1. 

18 

3 

1 

52 

0-67 

17 

31 

33-32 

1. 

22 

3 

5 

50 

44-67 

21 

29 

54-23 

2. 

2 

4 

9 

32 

54-25 

1 

11 

42-34 

2. 

6 

4 

13 

30 

56-25 

5 

9 

21-34 

2. 

10 

3 

17 

52 

59-67 

9 

30 

59-40 

2. 

14 

4 

21 

29 

56-50 

13 

7 

35-30 

3. 

22 

4 

6 

5 

12-00 

21 

39 

43-29 

4. 

2 

4 

9 

26 

51-00 

1 

1 

3-04 

4. 

6 

4 

13 

40 

15-75 

5 

14 

3-60' 

4. 

10 

3 

17 

40 

38-67 

9 

14 

3-43’ 

4. 

14 

3 

21 

34 

13-67 

13 

7 

15-85 

4. 

18 

3 

2 

14 

40-00 

17 

47 

15-08' 

4. 

22 

3 

6 

0 

34-67 

21 

32 

47-81' 

5. 

2 

4 

9 

37 

37-50 

1 

9 

29-58 

5. 

6 

4 

13 

41 

46-00 

5 

13 

14-39 

5. 

10 

4 

17 

50 

54-00 

9 

21 

58-20' 

5. 

14 

4 

22 

3 

11-75 

13 

33 

51-46' 

7. 

22 

4 

5 

48 

34-50 

21 

18 

12-38 

8. 

2 

4 

9 

26 

15-50 

0 

55 

32-00 

8. 

6 

4 

13 

45 

18-75 

5 

14 

9-71 

8. 

10 

3 

18 

29 

28-00 

9 

57 

51-02 

8. 

14 

3 

22 

8 

36-33 

13 

36 

37-80 

8. 

18 

3 

0 

20 

38-67 

17 

48 

15-33 

8. 

22 

3 

6 

4 

31-33 

21 

31 

45-99 

9. 

2 

4 

9 

43 

27-50 

1 

10 

20-68 

9. 

6 

4 

13 

52 

45-50 

5 

19 

14-20 

9. 

10 

3 

17 

53 

57-67 

9 

20 

2-69 

9. 

14 

4 

22 

1 

5-75 

13 

26 

46-58 

10. 

22 

4 

5 

56 

22-50 

21 

18 

57-71 

11. 

2 

4 

9 

55 

9-50 

1 

17 

21-62 

11. 

6 

4 

14 

1 

17-50 

5 

23 

5-76 

11. 

10 

3 

18 

5 

49-67 

9 

27 

14-15 

11. 

14 

3 

21 

46 

14-67 

13 

7 

17-72 

11. 

18 

3 

2 

47 

49-67 

18 

8 

23-37 

11. 

22 

3 

6 

40 

27-67 

22 

0 

38-72 

12. 

2 

4 

9 

56 

7 75 

1 

15 

59-74 

12. 

6 

4 

14 

10 

57-00 

5 

30 

24-15 

12. 

11 

3 

19 

6 

21-00 

10 

25 

19-25 

12. 

15 

4 

22 

52 

24-00 

14 

11 

0-22 

Mean  of  Times 
by  Earnshaw. 


Section  XI. — Auxiliary  Tables  for  the  reduction  of  the  observations  of  Coincidences. 
70.  The  rang-e  of  the  Intervals  of  Coincidences  in  these  experiments  is  not  included 

7t  2 

in  the  tables  given  in  Section  III.  The  table  of  log  which  is  placed  below 

includes  all  that  are  required  here.  The  method  of  using  it  is  the  same  as  in  the 
preceding  Series. 

The  tables  used  before  for  the  Correction  for  Arc  were  sufficient  for  the  present 
experiments. 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


347 


The  range  of  temperature  in  the  experiments  now  made  greatly  exceeded  that  for 
the  experiments  in  the  mine.  In  extending  a table,  so  as  to  include  an  increased 
range  of  physical  conditions,  there  will  always  be  some  doubt  as  to  the  propriety  of 
selection  of  that  mathematical  function  which  is  assumed  to  increase  proportionally 
with  the  indications  of  the  physical  measurer.  I have  here  assumed  that  the  changes 
of  the  logarithms  of  the  temperature-correction  are  simply  proportional  to  the  changes 
of  thermometer-reading.  The  table  below,  therefore,  is  formed  from  the  table  in 
Section  III.  by  simple  addition  and  subtraction  of  a constant  number. 

The  table  used  for  barometrical  correction  is  the  same  which  was  used  before. 


n. 

T ra— 2 

Log 

n 

n. 

T n — 2 

Log 

n 

T n — 2 

Log 

n 

1 

n. 

f n — 2 

n 

n. 

T n—2 

Log.  . 

n 

269-5 

9-99676502 

271-5 

9-99678894 

273-5 

9-99681250 

277-8 

9-99686202 

279-8 

9-99688454 

•6 

6622 

•6 

9012 

278-9 

6315 

280-9 

8566 

•7 

6742 

-7 

9130 

276-0 

9-99684148 

-0 

6429 

-0 

8677 

•8 

6863 

•8 

9249 

-1 

4263 

-1 

6542 

-1 

8788 

•9 

6983 

-9 

9367 

-2 

4377 

-2 

6655 

-2 

8899 

270-0 

7103 

272-0 

9486 

-3 

4492 

-3 

6768 

-3 

9011 

•1 

7222 

•1 

9604 

-4 

4606 

-4 

6881 

-4 

9122 

•2 

7342 

-2 

9722 

-5 

4721 

-5 

6994 

-5 

9233 

•3 

7462 

•3 

9840 

-6 

4835 

-6 

7107 

-6 

9344 

•4 

7582 

•4 

9-99679958 

-7 

4949 

-7 

7219 

-7 

9455 

•5 

7702 

•5 

9-99680076 

-8 

5064 

-8 

7332 

-8 

9566 

•6 

7821 

•6 

0194 

-9 

5178 

•9 

7444 

-9 

9677 

-7 

7940 

-7 

0311 

277-0 

5293 

279-0 

7557 

281-0 

9788 

-8 

8060 

•8 

0429 

•1 

5407 

-1 

7669 

-1 

9-99689899 

-9 

8179 

-9 

0546 

-2 

5521 

-2 

7781 

-2 

9-99690009 

271-0 

8299 

273-0 

0664 

-3 

5635 

-3 

7893 

•3 

0119 

•1 

8418 

•1 

0781 

•4 

5748 

-4 

8006 

•4 

0230 

•2 

8537 

-2 

0898 

-5 

5862 

-5 

8118 

-5 

0341 

•3 

8656 

•3 

1016 

-6 

5975 

-6 

8230 

-6 

0451 

•4 

8775 

-4 

1133 

-7 

6088 

-7 

8342 

-7 

0562 

Thermometer. 

Correction  to 

Log.  Rate. 

Thermometer. 

Correction  to 
liOg.  Rate. 

Thermometer. 

Correction  to 

Log.  Rate. 

40-0 

9-99997937 

50-5 

0-00000104 

88-0 

0-00007840 

-5 

8040 

51-0 

0207 

•5 

7943 

41-0 

8144 

•5 

0310 

89-0 

8046 

•5 

8247 

52-0 

0413 

•5 

8149 

42-0 

8350 

*5 

0516 

90-0 

8252 

-5 

8453 

53-0 

0619 

•5 

8355 

43-0 

8556 

•5 

0722 

91-0 

8458 

-5 

8659 

54-0 

0825 

•5 

8561 

44-0 

8762 

•5 

0928 

92-0 

8664 

•5 

8865 

550 

1032 

-5 

8767 

45-0 

8968 

93-0 

8870 

-5 

9071 

83-0 

0-00006808 

•5 

8973 

46-0 

9175 

-5 

6912 

94-0 

9076 

-5 

9278 

84-0 

7015 

-5 

9179 

47-0 

9381 

-5 

7118 

95-0 

9282 

-5 

9484 

85-0 

7221 

•5 

9385 

48-0 

9587 

-5 

7324 

96-0 

9488 

•5 

9690 

86-0 

7428 

-5 

9591 

49-0 

9793 

-5 

7531 

97-0 

9694 

-5 

9-99999897 

87-0 

7634 

•5 

9797 

50-0 

0-00000000 

•5 

7737 

98-0 

9900 

2 z 2 


348 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BARTON  EXPERIMENT 


By  the  application  of  the  numbers  from  these  two  tables,  together  with  those  for 
Arc  and  Barometer,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  Harton  Experiments,  there  is 
obtained  the  “ Corrected  Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  upon  Clock”  referred  to  Barometer 
O’OOO  and  Thermometer  50° ; but  affected  by  the  full  amount  of  the  errors  of  the 
table  for  corrections  depending  on  the  Thermometer. 

Section  XII. — Abstract  of  the  Computations  of  the  Rate  of  each  detached  Pendulum 

upon  its  Clock. 

71.  The  whole  of  the  reductions,  for  both  stations,  are  included  in  the  following 
tables. 


Pendulum  1821.  Fifth  Series. 


Number  of 

Mean  of 

Mean  of 

Corrected 

No.  of 

Coincidences. 

Number  of 

Mean 

Arc  of  Vibration. 

Thermo- 

Log.  Rate  of 

Swing. 

Intervals. 

Interval. 

meter 

Readings. 

Readings. 

Pendulum  1821 
upon  Shelton. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Beginning. 

End. 

83 

3 

3 

31 

s 

272-39 

1-67 

0-71 

81-36 

in. 

29-775 

9-99692466 

84 

3 

3 

46 

272-81 

1-92 

0-54 

85-03 

29-750 

3098 

85 

3 

3 

48 

273-05 

2-08 

0-54 

83-95 

29-705 

3178 

86 

3 

3 

45 

273-10 

2-09 

0-59 

84-49 

29-645 

3351 

87 

3 

3 

32 

273-01 

1-85 

0-77 

85-26 

29-605 

3401 

88 

3 

3 

38 

273-24 

2-12 

0-75 

85-78 

29-585 

3818 

89 

3 

3 

34 

273-23 

1-97 

0-77 

84-71 

29-525 

3553 

90 

3 

3 

44 

273-44 

2-06 

0-61 

83-31 

29-460 

3474 

91 

3 

3 

48 

273-10 

1-87 

0-51 

84-98 

29-435 

3356 

92 

3 

3 

33 

273-16 

1-75 

0-71 

85-15 

29-430 

3487 

Pendulum  1821.  Sixth  Series. 

1 93 

3 

3 

35 

279-14 

2-01 

0-74 

53-36 

29-570 

9-99693872 

1 94 

3 

3 

47 

278-89 

2-02 

0-54 

54-41 

29-545 

3754 

! 95 

3 

3 

43 

279-04 

1-93 

0-57 

53-38 

29-535 

3701 

96 

3 

3 

37 

279-00 

2-22 

0-78 

53-26 

29-515 

3739 

97 

3 

3 

46 

279-09 

2-05 

0-57 

53-25 

29-465 

3738 

98 

3 

3 

31 

278-96 

2-16 

0-89 

52-91 

29-430 

3635 

99 

3 

3 

32 

278-98 

2-04 

0-82 

52-71 

29-400 

3562 

100 

3 

3 

45 

279-02 

1-94 

0-54 

52-85 

29-370 

3533 

! 101 

3 

3 

44 

279-21 

1-95 

0-58 

52-35 

29-355 

3653 

102 

3 

3 

43 

279-34 

2-11 

0-63 

51-91 

29-310 

3744  1 

Pendulum  1821. 

Seventh  Series. 

1 

103 

3 

3 

41 

272-22 

2-08 

0-71 

89-48 

28-970 

9-99693256 

104 

3 

3 

50 

271-15 

2-22 

0-59 

93-21 

28-985 

2754 

i 105 

3 

3 

54 

270-83 

2-02 

0-46 

95-60 

29-010 

2796 

1 106 

3 

3 

35 

271-54 

1-93 

0-74 

92-00 

29-025 

2959 

' 107 

3 

3 

42 

271-96 

1-93 

0-61 

91-31 

29-050 

3286 

! 108 

3 

3 

38 

271-62 

2-00 

0-72 

93-70 

29-070 

3420 

: 109 

3 

3 

36 

271-30 

1-98 

0-74 

94-09 

29-085 

3124 

no 

3 

3 

48 

271-31 

2-08 

0-58 

94-11 

29-070 

3114 

111 

3 

3 

46 

271-35 

1-99 

0-58 

94-08 

29-080 

3142 

112 

3 

3 

38 

271-05 

1-90 

0-68 

96-49 

29-110 

3382 

FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


349 


Pendulum  1821.  Eighth  Series. 


No.  of 

Number  of 
Coincidences. 

Number  of 

Mean 

Arc  of  Vibration. 

Mean  of 
Thermo- 

Mean  of 
Barometer 

Corrected 

Log.  Rate  of 

Swing. 

Intervals. 

Interval. 

meter 

Pendulum  1821 

Readings. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Readings. 

upon  Shelton. 

113 

3 

3 

44 

s 

28M2 

1-85 

0-57 

43-05 

in. 

29-745 

9-99693913 

114 

3 

3 

46 

280-83 

1-76 

0-53 

43-80 

29-800 

3731 

115 

3 

3 

45 

280-93 

1-95 

0-55 

43-80 

29-880 

3891 

116 

3 

3 

36 

281-16 

1-75 

0-60 

42-26 

29-975 

3824 

117 

3 

3 

50 

281-15 

1-84 

0-48 

41-98 

30-075 

3759 

118 

3 

4 

36 

281-09 

2-08 

0-80 

41-68 

30-190 

3780 

119 

3 

3 

31 

281-31 

1-83 

0-76 

41-46 

30-265 

3928 

120 

3 

3 

46 

281-36 

2-20 

0-60 

40-88 

30-330 

3902 

121 

3 

3 

54 

281-46 

2-14 

0-55 

40-44 

30-380 

3906 

122 

3 

3 

40 

281-65 

1-85 

0-67 

40-54 

30-420 

4123 

Pendulum  8.  Fifth  Series. 


No.  of 

Number  of 
Coincidences. 

Number 

Mean 

Arc  of  Vibration. 

Mean  of 
Thermo- 

Mean  of 
Barometer 

Corrected 

Log.  Rate  of  ! 

Swing. 

of 

Interval. 

meter 

Pendulum  8 uponi 

Intervals. 

Readings. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Readings. 

Earnshaw. 

83 

3 

3 

29 

27^91 

1-70 

0-75 

47-80 

in. 

29-775 

9-99691320 

84 

3 

3 

46 

277-88 

1-96 

0-56 

47-81 

29-750 

1281 

85 

3 

3 

43 

277-91 

1-94 

0-59 

47-80 

29-705 

1310 

86 

3 

3 

44 

277-91 

2-01 

0-60 

47-68 

29-645 

1289 

87 

3 

3 

31 

277-83 

2-11 

0-90 

47-41 

29-605 

1246 

88 

3 

3 

37 

277-91 

1-96 

0-72 

47-28 

29-585 

1216 

89 

3 

3 

40 

277-91 

1-86 

0-60 

48-08 

29-525 

1319  i 

90 

3 

3 

44 

277-86 

2-04 

0-62 

48-18 

29-460 

1314  ! 

91 

3 

3 

43 

277-88 

2-14 

0-67 

48-05 

29-435 

1337  : 

92 

3 

3 

33 

277-97 

1-79 

0-72 

47-96 

29-430 

1368  ; 

Pendulum  8. 

Sixth 

Series. 

93 

3 

3 

37 

269-56 

2-21 

0-71 

89-69 

29-570 

9-99690259 

94 

3 

3 

48 

270-15 

1-97 

0-58 

88-80 

29-545 

0699 

95 

3 

3 

41 

270-38 

2-21 

0-74 

84-45 

29-535 

0168 

96 

3 

3 

38  , 

270-39 

1-99 

0-72 

86-71 

29-515 

0591 

97 

3 

3 

47 

269-77 

2-06 

0-60 

91-09 

29-465 

0722 

98 

3 

3 

32 

270-43 

2-17 

0-89 

90-00 

29-430 

1394 

99 

3 

3 

36 

270-82 

1-90 

0-71 

86-78 

29-400 

1079  ; 

100 

3 

3 

47 

270-39 

2-05 

0-61 

90-14 

29-370 

1255 

101 

3 

3 

45 

270-08 

2-14 

0-68 

89-19 

29-355 

0721  1 

102 

3 

3 

39 

271-21 

2-03 

0-76 

85-26 

29-310 

1253  : 

Pendulum  8. 

Seventh  Series.' 

103 

3 

3 

26 

278-20 

1-94 

0-68 

52-24 

28-970 

9-99692447 

104 

3 

3 

47 

277-73 

1-99 

0-58 

52-45 

28-985 

1945 

105 

3 

3 

48 

277-71 

2-18 

0-67 

51-91 

29-010 

1876 

106 

3 

3 

33 

277-76 

2-15 

0-89 

51-03 

29-025 

1818 

107 

3 

3 

41 

277-94 

1-93 

0-69 

50-79 

29-050 

1870 

108 

3 

3 

37 

277-91 

2-23 

0-86 

50-06 

29-070 

1803 

109 

3 

3 

40 

278-25 

1-93 

0-73 

48-83 

29-085 

1832 

110 

3 

3 

48 

278-32 

2-32 

0-69 

48-61 

29-070 

1930 

111 

4 

3 

40 

278-36 

2-08 

0-76 

48-71 

29-080 

1967 

112 

3 

3 

36 

278-53 

1-94 

0-80 

48-23 

29-110 

2052 

\ 

350 


MR.  airy’s  account  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


Pendulum  8.  Eighth  Series. 


No.  of 
Swing. 

Number  of 
Coincidences. 

Number 

of 

Mean 

Interval. 

Arc  of  Vibration. 

Mean  of 
Thermo- 
meter 
Readings. 

Mean  of 
Barometer 

CoiTccted 
Log.  Rate  of 
Pendulum  8 upon 
Earnshaw. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Intervals. 

Beginning. 

End. 

Readings. 

113 

3 * 

3 

45 

s 

270-14 

2-20 

0-68 

94-28 

in. 

29-745 

9-99691921 

114 

3 

3 

47 

270-57 

2-02 

0-61 

92-44 

29-800 

2012 

115 

3 

3 

42 

270-21 

2-08 

0-72 

93-11 

29-880 

1775 

116 

3 

3 

37 

270-51 

1-92 

0-74 

94-44 

29-975 

2399 

117 

3 

3 

53 

271-08 

1-98 

0-50 

91-29 

30-075 

2397 

118 

3 

3 

• 36 

270-93 

2-10 

0-83 

93-39 

30-190 

2787 

119 

3 

3 

35 

269-97 

2-10 

0-82 

95-80 

30-265 

2146 

120 

3 

3 

49 

269-78 

2-11 

0-58 

98-00 

30-330 

2313 

121 

3 

3 

52 

270-78 

2-07 

0-55 

95-78 

30-380 

3047 

122 

3 

3 

42 

270-90 

1-95 

0-66 

94-39 

30-420 

2917 

Section  XIII. — Computation  of  Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  1821  on  Pendulum  8;  com- 
bination of  individual  results ; and  conclusion  on  the  amount  of  temperature  correc- 
tion, and  on  the  result  of  the  Harton  Experiment. 

„ T Rate  of  Pendulum  1821  . „ , ...  . . 

72.  The  quantity  Log.  -R^e'orPenduIunTs  ~ foi’wied,  as  a similar  quantity  is 


formed  in  Section  VI.,  by  combining  together 


_ Rate  of  Pendulum  1821 
Rate  of  Shelton 


Lo 


Rate  of  Shelton 

O'  

Rate  of  Earn  SHAW 


Log. 


Rate  of  Pendulum  8 
Rate  of  Earnshaw* 


Results  for  the  Log.  Rate  of  Pendulum  1821  upon  Pendulum  8. 


Fifth  Series. 

Sixth  Series. 

Seventh  Series. 

Eighth  Series. 

No.  of  1 

Swing. 

f ^ Rate  Pendulum  1821 

No.  of 
Swing. 

, Rate  Pendulum  1821 

No.  of 
Swing. 

T Rate  Pendulum  1821 

No.  of 
Swing. 

f Rate  Pendulum  1821 

^ ® Rate  Pendulum  8 

Rate  Pendulum  8 

° Rate  Pendulum  8 

Rate  Pendulum  8 

83 

0-00072074 

93 

0-00072767 

103 

0-00071958 

113 

0-00072044 

84 

71959 

94 

72205 

104 

72227 

114 

71944 

85 

72363 

95 

73117 

105 

72151 

115 

72562 

86 

71927 

96 

73178 

106 

72380 

116 

71854 

87 

72467 

97 

73015 

107 

72725 

117 

71865 

88 

72667 

98 

72592 

108 

72805 

118 

71526 

89 

72242 

99 

72774 

109 

72363 

119 

72350 

90 

72155 

100 

72538 

no 

72320 

120 

72205 

91 

72123 

101 

73270 

111 

72298 

121 

71687 

92 

72006 

102 

72812 

112 

72240 

122 

7I8O9 

73.  We  have  now  to  consider  how  the  individual  results  of  each  Series  are  to  be 
combined.  And  here  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  principal  cause  of  error  is  not,  in 
these  experiments,  the  uncertainty  of  comparisons  of  clocks  (which  was  almost  the 
only  source  of  error  in  the  experiments  at  the  mine).  It  is  probable  that  the  amount 
of  uncertainty  from  this  cause  is  here  nearly  unappreciable.  The  principal  sources 
of  error  will  lie  in  the  circumstances  of  the  pendulum-observations;  chiefly,  perhaps. 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


351 


in  the  insecurity  of  the  indications  of  the  temperature  of  the  pendulums,  as  inferred 
from  the  readings  of  the  neighbouring  thermometers.  After  consideration  of  these 
points,  I have  thought  it  best  to  give  equal  weights  to  the  results.  And  for  compa- 
rison with  the  simple  mean  of  these,  I have  taken  the  simple  mean  of  the  thermo- 
meter-readings. Thus  I obtain, — 


j Rate  Pendulum  1821 

Loo:, 

Rate  Pendulum  8 

Temperature  of 
1821. 

Temperature  of 

8. 

Fifth  Series  

0-00072198 

81-71 

4^80 

Sixth  Series  

0-00072827 

53-04 

88-21 

Seventh  Series  

0-00072347 

93-41 

50-29 

Eighth  Series 

0-00071985 

41-99 

94-29 

The  interpretation  of  these  numbers  is  not  without  difficulty.  From  the  care  taken 
by  the  observers,  it  was  supposed  that  the  material  state  of  the  pendulums  would  be 
sensibly  the  same  during  the  whole  continuance  of  the  observations,  and  it  was 
expected  tiierefore  that  the  results  of  the  Fifth  and  the  Seventh  Series  would  be  in 
close  accordance,  and  that  the  results  of  tlie  Sixth  and  the  Eighth  Series  would  be 
in  close  accordance.  Now  the  fact  is,  that  the  results  of  the  Fifth  and  Seventh  Series 
agree  pretty  well,  when  regard  is  had  to  the  circumstances  of  forced  temperature 
(the  discordance  0'00000149  corresponds  to  0®'3  per  day  nearly,  or  to  0°‘72  of  tempe- 
rature) ; but  the  discordance  between  the  Sixth  and  Eighth  is  0*00000842  (which 
corresponds  to  1®’68  per  day,  or  to  4°*09  of  temperature).  It  would  therefore  seem, 
at  first  sight,  that  there  is  strong  reason  to  suppose  that  some  change  took  place  in 
one  of  the  pendulums  after  the  Seventh  Series. 

74.  As  there  is  no  reason  whatever  for  supposing  a change  before  the  end  of  the 
Seventh  Series,  let  us  take  the  mean  of  the  Fifth  and  Seventh  Series,  and  compare  it 
(A.)  with  the  Sixth  Series  alone,  (B.)  witli  the  mean  of  the  Sixth  and  Eighth  Series ; 
and  from  these  comparisons  let  us  in  each  case  obtain  a relation  between  the  two 
pendulums  nearly  independent  of  temperature.  Thus  we  shall  have, — 


Comparison  A. 


j-  Rate  Pendulum  1821 

Rate  Pendulum  8 

Temperature  of 
1821. 

Temperature  of 

8. 

Mean  of  Fifth  and  Seventh  Series  

0-00072273 

89-06 

49-04 

Sixth  Series  

0-00072827 

53-04 

88-21 

Mean  of  the  two  lines  

0-00072550 

71-05 

68-62 

Comparison  B. 


Mean  of  Fifth  and  Seventh  Series  

0-00072273 

89-06 

49-04 

Mean  of  Sixth  and  Eighth  Series 

0-00072406 

47-52 

91-25 

Mean  of  the  two  lines  

0-00072340 

68-29 

70-15 

When  it  is  considered  that  corrections  for  temperature  have  already  been  applied, 
founded  on  the  best  materials  to  which  at  present  we  have  access,  it  will  be  per- 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


;i52 


ceived  that  the  two  “ Means  of  the  two  lines”  are  almost  strictly  independent  of  tem- 
perature. Now  we  have,  in  the  Harton  Experiment,  other  means  of  determining  the 
relation  between  the  pendulums.  In  article  45, 


Log. 


Rate  Pendulum  8 below  ^ ro 

Rate  Pendulum  1821 


Log. 


Rate  Pendulum  1821  below 
Rate  Pendulum  8 above 


= 0-00073694. 


Subtracting  the  first  from  the  second,  and  dividing  by  2,  the  effect  of  the  mine  is 
eliminated,  and  that  of  temperature  is  sensibly  eliminated  ; and  we  obtain 


Log. 


Rate  Pendulum  1821 
Rate  Pendulum  8 


0-00072568. 


This  agrees  so  nearly  with  the  result  of  Comparison  A,  as  greatly  to  increase  the  pre- 
sumption that  some  change  took  place  in  one  pendulum  after  the  Seventh  Series. 

75.  Let  then  be  the  increase  (in  units  of  the  8th  decimal  of  the  logarithm)  which 
ought  to  be  made  for  every  degree  of  temperature.  Taking  the  difference  between 
the  two  first  lines  of  Comparison  A, 


554=«x75'19, 
whence  z=7‘37  nearly 

=^  of  the  correction  employed  in  our  tables. 

As  the  mean  excess  of  temperature  at  the  lower  station  in  the  Harton  Experiment 
was  7°' 13,  the  correction  to  be  added  to  the  rate  below  is  53,  or  the  correction  to  the 
gravity  is  106.  Therefore  (see  article  45), 


Log. 


Gravity  below 

Gravity  above 


0-00002358,  or 


Gravity  below 

Gravity  above 


1-00005429. 


Using  this  number  in  the  equation  of  article  60, 


0-00006603  = 0-00017984 


whence  ^=2-7236. 


And  the  Earth’s  mean  density  (article  62)  will  result  6-809. 

76.  If,  however,  we  used  Comparison  B in  the  same  way,  we  should  have 

133=^X83-75, 

whence  2=1-59  nearly, 

or  the  alteration  to  be  made  in  the  Earth’s  mean  density  is  less  than  one-fourth  of 
that  resulting  from  Comparison  A.  This  gives  for  the  Earth’s  mean  density  6*623 
nearly. 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


353 


Addendum. 


On  communicating  with  Professor  Stokes,  in  reference  to  the  effeet  of  the  Earth’s 
rotation  and  ellipticity  in  modifying  the  numerical  results  of  the  Ilarton  Experiment, 
I was  favoured  by  that  gentleman  with  an  investigation,  which,  with  his  permission, 
I subjoin  as  a valuable  addition  to  my  own  paper. 

“I  shall  suppose  the  surface  of  the  Earth  to  be  an  ellipsoid  of  revolution,  and  will 
employ  the  notation  made  use  of  in  my  paper  on  Clairaut’s  Theorem,  published  in 
the  fourth  volume  of  the  Cambridge  and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal.  In  this, 

V is  the  potential  of  the  Earth’s  mass. 

r,  0 are  the  polar  coordinates  of  any  point  in  or  exterior  to  the  Earth’s  surface; 
r being  measured  from  the  centre,  and  0 from  the  axis  of  rotation. 

a is  the  equatorial  radius. 

s the  elliptieity. 

a the  angular  velocity. 

m the  ratio  of  the  centrifugal  force  to  gravity  at  the  equator. 

E the  mass  of  the  Earth. 

V the  angle  between  the  normal  and  radius  vector  at  any  point  of  the  surface. 

In  the  following  investigation,  small  quantities  of  the  second  order  are  neglected, 
£ and  m being  regarded  as  small  quantities  of  the  first  order. 

If  U=V+ ^ sin^ 

the  differential  coefficients 

^ 1.^ 

dr  r dd 


will  give  the  components  of  the  force  along  and  perpendicular  to  the  radius  vector ; 
and,  g being  the  force  of  gravity. 


dU 


d\] 


g=  — cos  V.:-- 4- sin 
° dr  r d^ 


d\] 


which  becomes,  since  v and  are  small  quantities  of  the  first  order. 


d\] 

S=-1F' 

Let  V be  measured  along  the  vertical ; then 

dq  dq  • V dq 

-f=  COSt'*-^—  SinJ'----^3 
dv  dr  f afl 


or,  to  the  first  order. 


d9_^dg__d'^\] 
dv  dr  dr^ 


Let  c be  the  depth  of  the  mine ; then  if  0^  be  neglected,  we  shall  have  for  the 


MDCCCLVI. 


3 A 


354 


MR.  AIRY’S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARTON  EXPERIMENT 


value  of  the  fraction  g^^v-ty  abo^^  (which  I will  call  F),  calculated  on  the  supposition 
that  all  the  attracting  mass  is  internal  to  both  stations, 

F=l  — 

9 dv 

where,  after  differentiation,  r is  to  be  put  equal  to  the  radius  vector  of  the  surface, 
namely  a(l— scos^^).  Now  the  value  of  V (Article  5 of  the  paper  referred  to)  is 


E 


Es  1 
2 


a — COS^^— 


which  is  true,  independently  of  any  particular  hypothesis  respecting  the  distribution 
of  matter  in  the  interior  of  the  Earth  ; so  that 


E /Es  1 
E=— — — 7i^ 


i \ CO 

cos^  d—  ^ sin^  ^ 


and 


S' 


dr 


=72— 3 ^^yV^^^cos"*  &—  —ai^r  sin" 


whence 


dv  dr 


2E  ,^/Es  2*2/1 

12  -5(^cos"  ^-3  j +&»"  Sin"  0. 


Putting  now  r=a(l  — s cos"  d),  we  find 

1+22  cos"  -^(e— f)  (cos"  - ^ ^(  1 —cos"  &) 
Ef  /5m  \ 2 Sot) 

12E/  m\  / _ 1\  , mE.^  „ /.x 

(e-2)(cos=^-3j+-^(l-cos  i) 


dg  2E 


Whence 


=^|l  + (^— 3£)cos’^+26— ij- 


g'  dv  a 


1 + (^— 3£^C0s"^+22  — ^ 
— S^COS"^— £ + 


(bm 

IT 


3m 

T 


=-{l— 2gcos"^+s+^} ; 


F=l+— {1— 2s  cos"^+e+^}* 


and  therefore 


FOR  DETERMINING  THE  MEAN  DENSITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


355 


Now  the  method  adopted  in  the  " Account  of  Experiments/  &c.,  article  57,  gives 

1 dg  2c  2c 

— — =— (1  +2  COS 
g dr  r 


whence 


2c 


F=  1 +“(1  + £ cos*  ^). 


Therefore,  if  R be  the  ratio  of  the  value  of  F — 1 given  above,  to  F—  1 as  ealculated 
by  the  method  of  the  ‘Account  of  Experiments/ 

-P,  1 — 2scos^fl  + e + OT 

R=  1 + j cos^ 9 =1  — 3ecos 

If  / be  the  geocentric  latitude  of  the  place,  we  may  in  the  small  term  replace  ^ 
by  90°—/;  and  since  cos*  sin*/=^(l  — cos  2/),  we  find 

6 3b 

R=l~j-m— 5+- 2 cos  2/. 


Now 


m=.  =0’00346 


■300-8 


:0-00333 


/,  for  Harton,  =54°  48' ; 

R=1  4-0-00346  — 0-00334=  1-00012. 

That  R should  have  been  so  very  nearly  equal  to  unity,  depends  upon  an  accidental 
numerical  relation  between  the  values  of  m,  g,  and  /.  At  the  equator,  R— 1 would 
have  been  as  great  as  0-00679. 

In  article  60  of  the  ‘Account/  F— 1 was  found  =-00012032;  whence 
R.(F— 1)  = -00012033  ; which  only  alters  the  final  value  of  the  mean  density  in 
the  ratio  of  6836  to  6835,  giving  for  result 

6-565. 

At  the  equator,  the  correction  to  the  deduced  value  6-566  would  have  been  — -077-” 


[ 357  ] 


XV,  On  Periodical  Laws  discoverable  in  the  Mean  Effects  of  the  larger 
Magnetic  Disturbances. — No.  III. 

By  Colonel  Edward  Sabine,  R.A.,  D.C.L.,  Treas.  and  V.P.R.S. 

Received  February  6, — Read  February  14,  1856. 

Having  at  length  completed  the  analysis  of  the  larger  disturbances  of  the  hori- 
zontal and  vertical  magnetic  forces  at  Toronto  during  five  years  of  hourly  observa- 
tion, with  a view  to  the  development  of  the  periodical  laws  which  regulate  the  occur- 
rence of  the  occasional  disturbances  of  those  elements,  and  of  their  theoretical  equiva- 
lents, the  Inclination  and  Total  Force,  I now  propose  to  lay  before  the  Royal  Society  a 
condensed  view  of  the  mode  in  which  the  investigation  has  been  made,  and  of  its 
results. 

The  hourly  observations  of  the  Bifilar  and  Vertical  Force  Magnetometers  during 
the  five  years  terminating  June  30,  1848,  were  received  at  Woolwich,  from  Toronto, 
precisely  in  the  state  in  which  they  are  printed  in  the  second  and  third  volumes  of 
the  ‘ Observations  at  the  Toronto  Observatory’ ; namely,  the  readings,  uncorrected  for 
temperature,  at  every  hour  of  Gottingen  time,  arranged  in  Monthly  tables,  accom- 
panied by  corresponding  tables  of  the  temperature  of  the  magnets,  shown  by  thermo- 
meters of  which  the  balls  were  enclosed  in  the  same  case  with  the  magnets,  and 
which  were  read  contemporaneously  with  the  Bifilar  and  Vertical  Force  scales.  The 
Monthly  tables  of  the  scale-readings  and  of  the  temperatures  were  summed  before 
their  transmission  to  Woolwich,  both  in  vertical  and  horizontal  columns,  and  means 
were  taken  of  all  the  days  in  the  month  at  the  different  hours,  and  of  all  the  hours  of 
the  day  on  the  different  days,  forming  hourly  means”  and  “ daily  means.”  In  this 
state  the  observations  were  received  at  Woolwich  and  subsequently  printed ; they 
were,  in  fact,  printed  from  the  original  manuscripts. 

The  first  step  taken  at  the  office  at  Woolwich  was  to  rewrite  the  whole  of  the 
observations  of  the  five  years  in  scale-divisions,  corresponding  to  the  respective 
readings,  but  reduced  to  a uniform  temperature  of  55°,  which  was  taken  as  a conve- 
nient approximate  mean  temperature  : for  this  purpose  each  of  the  observations  had  to 
receive  a correction,  proportioned  to  the  difference  between  the  recorded  contempo- 
raneous reading  of  the  thermometer  and  the  standard  temperature  of  55°,  and  com- 
puted by  a coefficient  representing  the  change  in  the  scale-reading  produced  by  an 
alteration  of  1°  of  the  thermometer.  The  coefficient  was  obtained  directly  from  the 
observations  themselves,  by  ascertaining  the  factor  which  would  best  satisfy  the  differ- 

3 B 


MDCCCLVI. 


358 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  PERIODICAL  LAWS  DISCOVERABLE 


ences  of  the  scale-readings  in  different  natural  temperatures,  when  the  magnetometers 
were  mounted  and  in  use. 

The  formation  of  the  Monthly  tables  of  the  “ scale-readings  reduced  to  a uniform 
temperature  of  55°,’’  from  the  tables  uncorrected  for  temperature,”  was  performed 
by  two  Non-commissioned  Officers  of  the  Royal  Artillery,  working  independently  of 
each  other  ; the  correctness  of  their  work  was  proved  by  the  accordance  of  the  two 
independent  computers;  the  daily  and  hourly  means  were  then  taken  in  the  same 
manner  by  two  independent  computers,  and  were  additionally  checked  by  their  com- 
parisons with  the  daily  and  hourly  uncorrected  means  calculated  at  Toronto;  these 
means  being  also  reduced,  for  the  purpose  of  this  comparison,  to  the  standard  tempera- 
ture of  55°  (excepting  in  a very  few  instances,  in  which  the  observations  on  days  of 
excessive  disturbance  had  been  omitted  in  the  sums  and  means  of  the  uncorrected 
readings  computed  at  Toronto,  but  were  restored  in  the  sums  and  means  of  the  cor- 
rected tables).  The  new  tables  thus  formed,  of  the  scale-readings  reduced  to  55°, 
then  passed  into  my  hands,  when  I satisfied  myself,  by  a careful  examination, 
that  a difference  of  fourteen  scale-divisions  for  the  Bifilar  magnetometer,  and  of  four 
scale-divisions  for  the  Vertical  Force  magnetometer,  above  or  below  what  might  be 
taken  as  a normal  value, — viz.  the  mean  value  at  the  same  hour  during  the  same 
month,  or  for  several  preceding  and  several  succeeding  days, — would  constitute  a con- 
venient minimum  limit  for  the  disturbances  of  largest  amount;  since,  on  the  one 
hand,  it  would  be  a greater  departure  from  the  normal  value  than  could  reasonably  be 
ascribed  to  any  other  cause  than  that  of  a disturbance  in  the  earth’s  magnetism,  whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  number  of  disturbances  that  would  be  thereby  separated,  would 
form  a sufficient  body  to  permit  their  periodical  laws  (if  such  existed)  to  be  investi- 
gated. Having  determined  on  this  limit,  I proceeded  to  mark  provisionally,  with  a 
pencil,  every  observation  which  differed  in  the  Bifilar  fourteen  scale-divisions  or  more, 
and  in  the  Vertical  Force  magnetometer  four  scale-divisions  or  more,  from  their  respect- 
ive normals.  I then  recomputed  the  normals,  omitting  the  observations  provisionally 
marked  as  disturbed,  and  compared  afresh  all  the  observations,  including  the  provi- 
sionally-marked ones,  with  the  new  normals,  altering  the  markings  where  required ; 
and  I continued  this  process  until  the  normal  in  every  case  included  every  observation 
which  differed  in  the  Bifilar  less  than  fourteen,  and  in  the  Vertical  Force  magneto- 
meter less  than  four  scale-divisions  from  itself,  and  excluded  every  observation  which 
differed  in  the  Bifilar  fourteen,  and  in  the  Vertical  Force  magnetometer  four  scale- 
divisions  or  more  from  itself.  The  excluded  observations  were  then  marked,  finally, 
with  a surrounding  ring  in  ink.  In  this  state  the  Tables  were  returned  to  the  Office, 
and  the  correctness  of  the  markings,  and  of  the  normals  excluding  the  larger  disturb- 
ances, was  examined  by  a separate  computer. 

Two  computers,  working  separately,  and  having  their  work  compared,  then  formed 
a table  of  the  marked  disturbances  of  each  element,  during  the  five  years,  arranged 


IN  THE  MEAN  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LARGER  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES.  359 


chronologically,  showing  the  day,  the  hour,  and  the  amount  of  disturbance,  (i.  e.  the 
difference  from  the  normal,)  in  scale-divisions;  and  on  the  receipt  of  this  table  from 
the  Office,  I proceeded  to  distribute  the  disturbances  according  to  the  years,  months, 
and  hours  of  their  occurrence,  separating  them  into  disturbances  increasing,  and 
disturbances  decreasing,  the  respective  forces,  and  forming  annual,  monthly,  and 
hourly  tables ; the  correctness  of  the  distribution  and  of  the  calculations  in  each  of 
the  tables  being  in  every  case  examined  by  a second  person. 

In  course  of  the  process  of  marking  the  disturbances,  it  became  evident  that  there 
were  times,  occasional,  but  by  no  means  frequent,  when  the  change  in  the  mean 
monthly  scale-reading,  i.  e.  the  mean  of  all  the  hours  and  all  the  days  in  the  month, 
from  one  month  to  the  next,  was  so  considerable  as  to  cause  the  regular  hourly 
normals  of  the  month  to  be  inapplicable  to  its  earlier  or  later  portions.  In  such 
cases,  the  difficulty  was  met,  and  more  suitable  normals  obtained  for  the  earlier  or 
later  portions  of  the  month,  by  taking  the  hourly  means  of  the  last  fortnight  of  the 
one  month  and  the  first  fortnight  of  the  next ; or  by  a mean  of  the  normals  of  the  two 
months  combined  ; or,  in  a very  few  instances  in  which  the  departure  from  an 
uniformly  progressive  change  was  greatest,  by  normals  derived  from  periods  of  less 
duration  than  a month. 

The  Tables  showing  the  normal  values  finally  adopted,  the  periods  for  which  they 
were  employed,  and  the  periods  from  which  they  w’ere  derived,  together  with  the 
annual,  monthly,  and  hourly  tables  of  the  aggregate  values  of  the  larger  disturbances 
of  the  horizontal  and  vertical  forces  in  the  several  years,  months  and  hours,  will  be 
found  in  full  detail  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Toronto  Observations,  which  is  now  in 
the  press. 

The  Disturbances  of  the  Inclination,  which  equalled  or  exceeded  l'*0,  and  of  the 
Total  Force  which  equalled  or  exceeded  '0004  of  the  whole  force,  (both  measured  from 
the  respective  normals  at  the  same  hour  and  in  the  same  month,)  were  obtained  from 
the  observed  disturbances  of  the  Horizontal  and  Vertical  Forces  in  the  following 
manner: — Tables  were  formed,  in  the  first  column  of  which  were  placed,  in  chrono- 
logical order,  the  larger  disturbances  of  the  Vertical  Force,  separated  as  already 
described,  and  in  the  second  column  those  of  the  Horizontal  Force,  each  expressed  in 
terms  of  the  respective  forces,  by  the  conversion  of  the  scale-divisions  in  which  the 
disturbances  were  observed  into  parts  of  the  respective  forces  by  means  of  the  scale- 
coefficient.  At  a large  proportion  of  the  hours  of  contemporaneous  observation, 
when  one  of  the  two  components  of  the  force  exhibited  a disturbance  which  by  its 
amount  was  brought  into  the  category  of  the  larger  disturbances,  the  other  compo- 
nent was  also  disturbed.  In  such  cases,  there  were  contemporaneous  entries  in  both 
columns ; but  when  one  of  the  components  only  was  so  affected,  the  entry  in  the 
corresponding  column  of  the  other  component  was  blank.  These  blanks  were  now 
all  filled  up,  by  inserting  for  the  component  which  did  not  exhibit  a disturbance  of 
sufficiently  large  amount  to  have  been  classed  as  a large  disturbance,  and  separated 

3 B 2 


360 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  PERIODICAL  LAWS  DISCOVERABLE 


accordingly,  the  difference,  whatever  that  might  be,  between  the  observation  at  that 
hour  and  its  proper  normal.  These  two  columns  then  exhibited  all  the  larger 
disturbances  of  both  the  Horizontal  and  Vertical  components  whenever  either  com- 
ponent was  disturbed,  with  the  contemporaneous  difference  of  the  other  component 
from  its  mean  or  normal  value  in  the  cases  when  one  only  of  the  two  components 
exhibited  a large  disturbance.  The  entries  in  the  two  columns  had  each  their  proper 
signs  prefixed,  + if  the  disturbance  or  difference  from  the  normal  were  in  augmenta- 
tion of  the  force,  and  — if  in  diminution  of  the  force.  These  two  columns  then 

AY  AX 

expressed  the  values  of for  the  Vertical  Force,  and for  the  Horizontal  Force, 


AY 

for  every  hour  at  which  either  equalled  or  exceeded  four  scale-divisions,  or  *00026 

AX 

parts  of  the  Vertical  Force,  or -y  equalled  or  exceeded  fourteen  scale-divisions,  or 

*0012  parts  of  the  Horizontal  Force.  A third  and  fourth  column  were  then  filled  in, 
the  third  expressing  the  values  of  A^,  or  the  disturbances  of  the  Inclination,  and  the 

fourth  the  values  ^5  or  the  disturbances  of  the  Total  Force  (in  parts  of  <p  the  Total 

Force  at  Toronto)  corresponding  to  the  entries  in  the  first  and  second  columns,  and 
computed  by  the  formulse — 

^ . /AY  AX 

A^=sm  6 cos  0 I -y — 

A®  AX  , . „ ,AY 

-^  = cos  ^ -y-  -[-sm  0 


From  the  third  and  fourth  columns  all  the  disturbances  of  the  Inclination  (A^)  which 

equalled  or  exceeded  l'*0  in  amount,  and  all  the  disturbances  of  the  Total  Force 

equalling  or  exceeding  *0004  in  amount  were  taken,  as  forming  respectively  a suffi- 
cient body  of  the  larger  disturbances  of  each  element  to  permit  their  periodical  laws 
to  be  investigated  and  shown.  These  disturbances  were  then  dealt  with  in  regard  to 
classification  and  tabular  arrangement,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  which  has  been 
already  explained  in  treating  of  disturbances  of  the  horizontal  and  vertical  compo- 
nents of  the  force. 

In  deriving  the  disturbances  of  the  Inclination  and  Total  Force  from  those  of  the 
Horizontal  and  Vertical  Forces,  all  the  calculations  and  arrangements  in  tables  were 
prepared  under  the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Magrath,  Chief  Clerk,  by  the  Non-com- 
missioned-officers of  the  Royal  Artillery  employed  in  the  Woolwich  Office,  every 
part  of  the  process  having  had  the  advantage  of  two  independent  computers. 

To  complete  the  view  of  the  periodical  laws  of  the  magnetic  disturbances  at 
Toronto,  a revision  has  been  made  of  the  analysis  of  the  larger  Disturbances  of  the 
Declination,  the  results  of  which  were  contained  in  a former  paper  presented  to  the 
Royal  Society  in  1852.  These  disturbances  have  now  been  computed  from  normals  on 


IN  THE  MEAN  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LARGER  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES.  361 


which  the  same  labour  has  been  bestowed  as  on  those  of  the  Horizontal  and  Vertical 
Forces^  so  as  to  cause  them  to  include  all  the  observations  which  differ  less,  and  exclude 
all  those  which  differ  more  than  a certain  fixed  value  from  themselves.  In  this  revi- 
sion also  the  fixed  or  standard  measure  of  a large  disturbance  has  been  increased  from 
five  scale-divisions  (3'‘6  of  arc)  to  seven  scale-divisions  (or  5'"0  of  arc)  ; the  experi- 
ence gained  in  the  first  or  experimental  examination  having  led  to  the  belief  that  the 
higher  standard  is  on  the  whole  to  be  preferred. 

General  Conclusions. 

Decenjiial  Period. — -In  a communication  made  to  the  Royal  Society  on  the  18th  of 
March,  1852,  it  was  shown  that  the  larger  disturbances  of  the  Declination,  both  at 
Toronto  and  at  Hobarton,  indicated  by  the  variation  in  their  numbers  and  aggre- 
gate values  in  different  years,  the  existence  of  a periodical  inequality.,  of  which  the 
extreme  and  opposite  phases  were  five  years  distant  from  each  other,  and  the  years 
1843  and  1848  were  respectively  the  epochs  of  minimum  and  maximum.  The 
examination  which  led  to  this  conclusion  comprehended  the  years  from  1841  to  1848 
inclusive,  and  was  definite  in  respect  to  1843  as  the  year  of  minimum,  inasmuch  as 
1841,  1842,  and  1843  showed  a progressive  decrease  in  the  number  and  aggregate 
value  of  the  larger  disturbances  in  each  year,  whilst  from  1843  to  1848  there  was  a 
progressive  increase  of  both  in  successive  years.  It  was  noticed  in  the  same  com- 
munication, that  the  regular  diurnal  variation  of  each  of  the  three  magnetic  obser- 
vation-elements at  Toronto  and  Hobarton,  the  Declination,  the  Horizontal  Force  and 
the  VerticalForce,  and  of  each  of  the  two  derived  elements,  the  Inclination  and  theTotal 
Force,  exhibited  evidences  of  a corresponding  periodical  inequality  in  the  amplitude 
or  extent  of  the  diurnal  variation,  the  years  1843  and  1848  being  also  epochs  re- 
spectively of  minimum  and  maximum.  The  observations  of  one  of  the  elements  (the 
Declination),  extending  uninterruptedly  at  both  stations  over  eleven  entire  years,  or 
from  1841  to  1851  inclusive,  distinctly  pointed  out  1848  as  the  year  of  maximum  as 
well  as  1843  as  the  year  of  minimum. 

This  discovery  of  the  existence  of  a periodical  inequality,  common  to  the  magnetic 
disturbances  of  larger  amount,  and  to  those  more  regular  diurnal  magnetic  variations 
of  which  the  sun  has  been  long  recognized  as  the  primary  cause  (inasmuch  as  they 
conform  systematically  to  laws  depending  on  solar  time),  was  regarded  as  affording 
presumptive  evidence  of  the  subsistence  of  a causal  connexion  common  to  those  two 
classes  of  phenomena,  which  presumption  was  corroborated  by  facts  adduced  in  the 
same  communication,  proving  that  the  disturbances  are  themselves  subject,  on  the 
average,  to  a well-marked  diurnal  period,  which  is  also  regulated  by  solar  time. 

The  periodical  inequality  thus  manifested,  having  its  opposite  phases  of  maximum 
and  minimum  separated  by  an  interval  of  five  years,  and  of  which  the  cycle  might 
therefore  be  conceived  to  include  about  ten  of  our  solar  years,  did  not  appear  to 
connect  itself  with  any  of  those  divisions  of  time  with  which  we  are  conversant  as 


362 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  PERIODICAL  LAWS  DISCOVERABLE 


depending  upon  the  relative  circumstanees  of  the  sun,  and  the  earth  and  her  satel- 
lite. The  cycle  might  or  might  not  be  one  of  regular  and  unfailing  recurrence. 
The  observational  evidence  to  which  we  are  indebted  for  a knowledge  of  its  exist- 
ence, though  sufficiently  decisive  as  far  as  the  period  of  observation  extended,  could 
only  be  viewed,  in  reference  to  a permanently  cyclical  character  of  the  phenomenon, 
as  fragmentary,  and  as  the  commencement  of  an  investigation  which  would  require 
to  be  pursued  in  one  or  more  of  the  permanent  magnetic  observatories  established  in 
our  own  and  other  countries.  Had  no  other  circumstance  presented  itself  to  give  an 
additional  interest  to  an  investigation  which  thus  held  out  a fair  promise  at  least  of 
making  known  laws  of  definite  order  and  sequence  in  phenomena  vdiich  have  excited 
so  much  attention  of  late  years,  but  of  which  so  little  is  even  yet  known; — had  for 
example  the  decennial  j)eriod,  which  appeared  to  prevail  with  precisely  corresponding 
features  in  two  distinct  classes  of  the  magnetic  variations,  connected  itself  with  no 
other  periodical  variation  either  of  a terrestrial  or  cosmical  nature  with  which  we  are 
acquainted, — there  might  have  been  indeed  little  reason  to  apprehend  that  the  inves- 
tigation would  have  been  suffered  to  drop : but  the  interest  and  importance  of  the 
inquiry  have  doubtless  been  greatly  enhanced  by  the  remarkable  coincidence,  which 
it  was  the  object  of  the  paper  communicated  to  the  Royal  Society  in  March  1852  to 
announce,  between  the  above-described  periodical  inequality  by  which  the  magnetic 
variations  referable  to  solar  influence  are  affected,  and  the  periodical  inequality  which 
has  been  discovered  by  M.  Schwabe  to  exist  in  the  frequency  and  magnitude  of  the 
solar  spots.  The  coincidence,  as  far  as  we  are  yet  able  to  discover,  is  absolute ; the 
duration  of  the  period  is  the  same,  and  the  epochs  of  maximum  and  minimum  fall  in 
both  cases  in  the  same  years.  The  regularity  with  which  the  alternations  of  increase 
and  decrease  have  been  traced  by  M.  Schwabe  in  his  observations  of  the  solar  spots, 
which  have  been  now  continued  for  about  thirty  years,  must  be  regarded  as  conferring 
a very  high  degree  of  probability  on  the  systematic  character  of  causes,  which  are  as 
yet  known  to  us  only  by  the  visible  appearances  which  they  produce  on  the  sun’s  disk, 
and  by  the  disturbances  which  they  occasion  in  the  magnetic  direction  and  force  at 
the  surface  of  our  globe.  As  a discovery  which  pi  omises  to  raise  terrestrial  mag- 
netism to  the  dignity  of  a cosmical  science,  we  may  feel  confident,  that,  although  the 
Colonial  Observatories  have  been  brought  to  a close,  the  investigations  which  they 
have  thus  successfully  commenced  will  be  pursued  to  their  proper  accomplishment, 
in  those  national  establishments  which  have  a permanency  suitable  for  such  under- 
takings. 

The  conclusions  which  have  been  drawn,  both  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions, 
and  in  the  introductory  discussions  in  the  Toronto  and  Hobarton  volumes,  regarding 
the  periodical  laws  of  the  disturbances  at  those  stations,  have  been  hitherto  confined 
exclusively  to  the  disturbances  of  a single  element,  the  Declination.  It  was  fully 
recognized  that  each  of  the  other  two  observational  elements,  viz.  the  Horizontal  and 
he  Vertical  Forces,  might  be  expected  to  furnish  concurrent  but  strictly  independent 


IN  THE  MEAN  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LARGER,  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES. 


363 


evidence  of  the  periodical  affections  to  which  the  magnetic  disturbances  were  subject ; 
but  the  work  to  be  accomplished  for  the  elaboration  of  that  evidence  was  consider- 
ably greater  than  in  the  case  of  the  Declination,  from  the  necessity  of  eliminating  the 
influence  of  changes  of  temperature  on  the  magnets  employed  in  measuring  the  vari- 
ations of  the  horizontal  and  vertical  forces,  before  those  disturbances  could  be  sepa- 
rated for  analysis.  The  labour  required  in  the  different  processes  of  reduction  has 
now  been  gone  through  ; and  it  remains  to  bring  together  in  one  view  the  evidence 
which  the  three  observational  and  the  two  derived  elements  furnish  of  the  periodical 
laws,  decennial,  annual  and  diurnal,  which  regulate  the  occurrence  of  the  larger 
disturbances. 

In  respect  to  the  decennial  period,  it  must  be  regarded  as  a fortunate  circumstance, 
that  the  five  years  of  hourly  observation,  which  were  commenced  before  the  exist- 
ence of  any  inequality  of  longer  duration  than  a year  was  suspected,  began  with 

1843,  the  year  of  minimum,  and  closed  with  1848,  the  year  of  maximum  disturbance, 
so  that  the  variation  has  been  followed  through  a complete  phase.  This  has  been 
strictly  the  case  in  the  Declination  and  Horizontal  Forces,  and  with  a single  excep- 
tion in  the  Vertical  Force  also,  the  exception  being  caused  by  the  interruption  of 
the  observations  of  that  element,  for  purposes  explained  elsewhere,  during  the 
months  of  October,  November  and  December  1843,  and  January  and  February 

1844,  These  months  have  been  supplied  in  the  year  ending  June  1844,  from  hourly 
observations  made  with  the  same  apparatus  in  the  preceding  year,  viz.  in  the  months 
of  October,  November  and  December  1842,  and  January  and  February  1843;  thus 
rendering  the  five  years  of  the  Vertical  Force  complete  for  the  investigation  of  the 
annual  and  diurnal  variations,  but  of  course  in  regard  to  the  decennial  period  the 
months  taken  from  a different  year,  even  though  it  be  the  adjacent  one,  are  not  a 
perfect  substitute.  The  effect  of  this  substitution  has  been  in  fact  to  swell  the 
aggregate  value  of  the  disturbances  of  the  Vertical  Force  in  the  year  nominally  ending 
June  30,  1844,  but  really  comprising  five  months  taken  from  a preceding  year,  so  as 
to  make  them  slightly  exceed  the  aggregate  value  in  the  year  ending  June  30,  1845. 
A similar  slight  excess  in  the  aggregate  value  of  the  disturbances  of  the  Horizontal 
Force  in  the  year  ending  June  1 844  over  the  aggregate  value  in  the  year  ending  June 

1845,  is  found  when  the  same  five  months  of  the  preceding  year  are  substituted  for 
its  own  months ; but  when  in  the  case  of  the  Horizontal  Force  (the  observations  of 
which  were  not  suspended  as  were  those  of  the  Vertical  Force)  the  actual  observations 
throughout  the  year  ending  June  1844  are  taken,  the  true  progression  is  restored,  and 
the  apparent  anomaly  disappears. 

The  variations  of  the  three  magnetic  elements  being  measured  by  instruments 
wholly  distinct  and  unconnected  with  each  other,  each  element  affords  an  independent 
evidence  of  the  progressive  increase  in  the  aggregate  values  of  the  larger  disturbances 
during  the  period  under  examination.  The  sum  of  the  aggregate  values  of  each 


364 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  PERIODICAL  LAWS  DISCOVERABLE 


element  in  the  five  years,  divided  by  5,  gives  the  mean  annual  value  of  that  element, 
which  we  may  take  in  each  case,  for  the  purpose  of  comparison  with  the  actual 
aggregate  values  in  the  different  years,  as  equal  to  I'OO;  we  have  then  the  ratios  of 
the  disturbances  of  the  different  elements  in  the  different  years  as  follows  : — 


Year  ending  June  30,  1844 

Table  I. 

Declin. 

0-52 

Hor.  Force. 

0-35 

Vert.  Force. 

0-65* 

Mean. 

0-44 

Year  ending  June  30,  1845 

0-64 

0-47 

0-58 

0*57 

Year  ending  June  30,  1846 

0-82 

0-55 

073 

070 

Year  ending  June  30,  1847 

1-39 

1T4 

1-23 

1-25 

Year  ending  June  30,  1848 

1-63 

2-49 

1-80 

1*97 

The  final  column  has  been  added  to  show  the  mean  ratio  of  disturbance  in  each 
year  as  derived  from  the  three  elements,  measured  by  the  aggregate  value  in  each 
year  and  in  each  element  of  all  the  disturbances  which  exceeded  a certain  definite 
magnitude,  that  magnitude  being  taken  the  same  throughout  the  five  years. 

It  is  seen  by  this  Table,  that  in  the  year  ending  June  1847  the  ratio  of  disturbance 
is  above  twice  as  great,  and  in  the  year  ending  June  1848  nearly  four  times  as  great 
as  in  either  of  the  years  ending  June  1844  or  June  1845.  In  the  year  ending  June 
1848,  which  is  the  year  of  maximum,  the  proportion  is  nearly  five  times  as  great  as 
in  the  year  ending  June  1844,  which  is  the  year  of  minimum.  The  evidence  of  the 
existence  of  a decennial  period  borne  by  the  disturbances  of  the  Declination,  and 
announced  to  the  Royal  Society  in  March  1852,  receives  therefore  the  fullest  confir- 
mation, from  the  variations  in  different  years  of  the  disturbances  of  the  Horizontal 
and  Vertical  forces. 

Fig.  1,  Plate  X • has  been  drawn  in  illustration  of  the  progressive  increase  of  disturb- 
ance in  each  of  the  three  elements  between  the  year  ending  June  1844  and  the  year 
ending  June  1848.  The  broken  horizontal  line  represents  the  mean  or  average  annual 
disturbance  in  each  element,  and  is  the  zero-line,  or  the  unit,  with  which  the  actual 
aggregate  values  of  the  disturbance  of  each  element  in  each  year  are  compared ; the 
Declination  is  represented  by  a dark  continuous  line,  the  Horizontal  Force  by  a light 
continuous  line,  and  the  Vertical  Force  by  a dotted  line.  The  rate  of  increase  of 
disturbance  is  seen  to  be  much  slower  in  the  first  half  than  in  the  second  half  of  the 
five  years. 

Annual  Period. — The  sum  of  the  aggregate  values  of  the  disturbances  of  each 
element  in  the  five  years,  divided  by  12,  gives  the  average  monthly  disturbance-value 

* In  the  deduction  of  this  number,  five  months  of  the  preceding  year  have  been  substituted  for  five  months 
of  the  year  ending  June  1844  ; it  has  not  been  included  therefore  in  the  final  column  showing  the  mean  ratios 
in  each  year. 


IN  THE  MEAN  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LARGER  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES.  365 


for  that  element,  which  being  taken=r00  and  compared  with  the  actual  monthly 
disturbance-values,  gives  the  ratios  in  the  following  Table : — 


Table  II. 


Months. 

Declination. 

Horizontal 

Force. 

Vertical 

Force. 

Mean. 

July  

0-94 

0*61 

0-71 

0-75 

August  

M6 

0-75 

1-08 

0-99 

September 

1-62 

1-71 

1-61 

1-64 

October  

1*31 

1-48 

1*29 

1-36 

November  

0-78 

0-98 

0-75 

0-84 

December  

0-76 

0-58 

0-61 

0-65 

January  

0*57 

0-56 

0-57 

0-57 

February  

0-84 

0-94 

0-74 

0-84 

March  

1-11 

0-94 

1-08 

1-04 

April  

1-42 

1-50 

1-49 

1-47 

May  

0-98 

0-90 

1-12 

1-00 

June  

0-53 

0-36 

0-50 

0-46 

The  evidence  afforded  by  each  of  the  three  observational  elements,  in  regard  to 
annual  variation,  is  to  one  and  the  same  effect,  viz.  January  and  June  are  the  months 
of  minimum  disturbance,  September  and  April  the  months  of  maximum  disturbance. 
The  aggregate  value  of  the  disturbances  in  the  equinoctial  months  is  about  three 
times  as  great  as  in  the  solstitial  months.  Of  the  two  equinoctial  months  the  value  is 
somewhat  higher  in  each  element  in  September  than  in  April ; and  of  the  two  solstitial 
months  December  is  higher  than  June,  also  in  each  of  the  three  elements. 

Fig.  2,  Plate  X.  has  been  drawn  in  illustration  of  the  annual  variation  which  has 
been  thus  described.  The  broken  horizontal  line  is  the  mean  monthly  disturbance  of 
each  element  {i.  e.  the  sum  of  the  disturbances  in  the  12  months  divided  by  12).  The 
dark  continuous  line  for  the  Declination,  the  light  continuous  line  for  the  Horizontal 
Force,  and  the  dotted  line  for  the  Vertical  Force,  show  in  each  case  the  variation  in  the 
proportions  which  the  actual  disturbances  in  each  month  bear  to  the  mean  monthly 
disturbance  in  the  same  element.  The  correspondence  of  the  three  elements  could 
scarcely  be  more  perfect. 

The  annual  variation  which  has  been  thus  deduced  has  reference  exclusively  to  the 
variable  amount  in  the  different  months  of  the  aggregate  values  of  the  disturbances 
of  each  element,  without  distinguishing  apart  or  separating  the  disturbances  which 
cause  easterly  deflections  and  those  which  cause  westerly  deflections  ; or  those  which 
increase  and  those  which  decrease  the  horizontal  and  vertical  forces.  When  this 
separation  is  made,  we  continue  to  find  that  each  of  the  two  portions  into  which  the 
disturbances  of  each  element  are  divided  exhibits  distinctly  and  notably  the  same 
general  features  which  have  been  derived  from  their  conjoint  consideration.  The 
equinoxes  are  in  all  cases  the  epochs  of  maxima  and  the  solstices  of  minima. 

But  when  we  study  more  carefully  the  relative  prevalence  oi  disturbances  of  parti- 
cular character  at  different  periods  of  the  year, — which  we  may  do  by  forming  tables 

3 c 


MDCCCLVI. 


366 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  PERIODICAL  LAWS  DISCOVERABLE 


of  the  relative  proportion  which  the  aggregate  values  in  the  different  months  of  the 
easterly  disturbances  bear  to  the  aggregate  values  in  the  same  months  of  the  westerly 
disturbances,  and  the  aggregate  values  of  the  disturbances  which  decrease  the  force, 
bear  to  the  aggregate  values  of  those  which  increase  it, — we  find  that  indications  pre- 
sent themselves  of  an  annual  variation  of  a different  kind  from  that  which  has  been 
hitherto  discussed,  namely  an  annual  variation  in  the  character  of  the  disturbances  of 
two  at  least  of  the  elements  which  have  been  observed  ; and  although  a greater  length 
of  time  and  a greater  amount  or  continuance  of  observation  may  be  required  for  the 
satisfactory  establishment  of  such  a periodical  variation,  its  present  indication  ought 
not  to  be  overlooked,  since  the  range  of  the  variation  is  of  considerable  magni- 
tude, and  its  systematic  character  as  distinctly  marked  as  could  well  be  expected 
in  an  annual  variation  derived  from  not  more  than  five  years.  The  elements 
in  which  these  phenomena  are  most  distinctly  noticeable,  are  the  Declination  and 
the  Vertical  Force,  and  the  correspondence  between  the  indications  of  these  two 
elements  is  in  many  respects  very  remarkable.  In  both  elements,  when  the  relative 
proportions  are  taken, — in  the  Declination  of  the  aggregate  values  in  the  different 
months  of  easterly  and  westerly  disturbances,  and  in  the  Vertical  Force  of  disturbances 
which  decrease  and  disturbances  which  increase  the  force, — we  find  that  in  both  cases 
the  proportions  vary  from  a minimum  at  the  southern  solstice  to  a maximum  at  the 
northern  solstice,  the  equinoxes  being  intermediate.  At  the  northern  solstice  easterly 
disturbances  are  in  considerable  excess,  as  are  disturbances  which  decrease  the 
Vertical  force  ; at  the  southern  solstice,  the  excess  of  both  is  on  the  other  side ; 
westerly  disturbances  then  predominate,  as  do  the  disturbances  which  increase  the 
Vertical  force.  The  relative  proportion  of  the  aggregate  values  of  easterly  to  westerly 
disturbances  of  the  Declination,  and  of  disturbances  which  decrease  the  Vertical  Force 
to  those  which  increase  it,  varies  from  the  one  solstice  to  the  other  roughly  as  about 
3 to  1 ; and  in  both  elements  nearly  alike. 

In  the  Ilorizontal  Force,  the  disproportion  between  the  values  of  the  disturbances 
which  increase  the  force  and  those  which  decrease  it  is  so  great  (decreasing  disturb- 
ances greatly  preponderating  at  all  periods  of  the  year),  that  a variation  correspond- 
ing to  that  of  the  two  other  elements  is  not  so  simply  arrived  at ; but  it  may  be 
stated  generally  that  the  proportion  of  decreasing  disturbances  is  greater  at  the  epoch 
of  the  southern  solstice  than  at  that  of  the  northern  solstice. 

Diurnal  Variation. — Before  we  proceed  to  examine  the  diurnal  variation  of  the 
Declination,  Inclination  and  Total  force  which  it  is  the  average  effect  of  the  larger 
disturbances  to  produce,  it  may  be  desirable  to  show  the  proportions  in  which  the 
disturbances  of  the  three  observed  elements  occur  at  the  different  hours.  This  is 
expressed  in  the  following  Table  by  the  proportion  which  the  actual  aggregate  values 
in  the  five  years  of  the  disturbances  at  each  particular  hour  bear  to  the  mean  or 
average  disturbance  at  all  the  hours  taken  as  unity. 


IN  THE  MEAN  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LARGER  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES.  367 


Table  III. 


Toronto  Astro- 
nomical Hours. 

Declination. 

Horizontal 

Force. 

Vertical 

Force. 

Toronto  Civil 
Hours. 

18 

1-05 

1-00 

1-21 

6 A.M. 

19 

M7 

1-40 

M5 

7 A.M. 

20 

1-27 

1*20 

0-80 

8 A.M. 

21 

1-11 

1-00 

0-54 

9 a.m. 

22 

0-87 

1-00 

0-36 

10  A.M. 

23 

0-66 

0-90 

0-34 

1 1 A.M. 

0 

0-49 

0*87 

0-46 

Noon. 

1 

0-30 

0-76 

0-63 

1 P.M. 

2 

0-40 

0-66 

0-77 

2 P.M. 

3 

0-40 

0-66 

0-87 

3 P.M. 

4 

0*33 

0-61 

1-04 

4 P.M. 

5 

0-56 

0-66 

1-07 

5 P.M. 

6 

0-84 

0-59 

1-01 

6 P.M. 

7 

0-98 

0-76 

1-05 

7 P.M. 

8 

1-22 

0-75 

0-89 

8 P.M. 

9 

1-82 

0-90 

0-74 

9 P.M. 

10 

1-55 

1-03 

0*85 

10  P.M. 

11 

1-25 

1-14 

0-93 

11  P.M. 

12 

1-35 

1*22 

1*39 

Midnight. 

13 

1-52 

1-58 

1-58 

1 A.M. 

14 

1-21 

1-60 

1-61 

2 A.M. 

15 

1-13 

1-37 

1-73 

3 A.M. 

16 

1-34 

1-14 

1-51 

4 A.M. 

17 

1-05 

1*02 

1-41 

5 A.M. 

From  the  systematic  increase  and  decrease  of  the  ratios  at  the  different  hours, 
it  is  obvious  that  the  disturbances  of  each  element,  when  viewed  on  the  average  of  a 
sufficient  body  of  observations,  are  regulated  by  laws  which  have  a diurnal  period. 
The  diurnal  variation  thus  presented  is  far  however  from  being  alike  in  each  of  the 
three  elements  ; the  maximum  disturbance  takes  place  indeed  in  all  the  elements 
during  the  hours  of  the  night,  and  the  minimum  disturbance  during  the  hours  of  the 
day  ; but  the  particular  hours  of  maximum  and  minimum  are  very  different  in  the 
three  cases.  The  hour  of  maximum  in  the  Declination,  for  example,  is  9 p.m.  when 
the  disturbances  of  the  horizontal  and  vertical  forces  are  both  even  less  than  the 
hourly  average’,  and  the  horizontal  and  vertical  forces  do  not  reach  their  hours  of 
maximum  until,  respectively,  2 and  3 a.m.,  when  the  disturbances  of  the  Declination 
iiave  notably  declined.  So  in  respect  to  the  hour  of  minimum  : that  of  the  Declina- 
tion, 1 P.M.,  is  nearly  midway  between  that  of  the  vertical  force  at  11  a.m.,  and  that 
of  the  horizontal  force  at  4 p.m.  ; the  disturbance  of  the  horizontal  force  being  still 
high  when  that  of  the  vertical  force  is  at  a minimum,  and  the  disturbance  of  the  ver- 
tical force  being  still  high  when  that  of  the  horizontal  force  is  a minimum.  Speaking 
generally,  the  disturbances  of  the  three  elements  are  above  the  average  in  the  hours 
of  the  night  and  early  morning,  and  below  the  average  during  the  hours  of  the  day; 
to  the  latter,  however,  there  is  an  exception  in  the  vertical  force,  which  is  above  the 
average  from  4 to  7 p-m.  In  the  Declination  the  aggregate  value  of  the  disturbances 
at  the  hour  of  maximum  is  about  six  times  as  great  as  at  the  hour  of  minimum;  in 

3 c 2 


368 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  PERIODICAL  LAWS  DISCOVERABLE 


the  horizontal  force  about  2*7  as  great,  and  in  the  vertical  force  about  five  times  as 
great. 

But  in  the  ratios  of  the  Declination-disturbances  at  the  different  hours  shown  in 
the  preceding  Table,  we  have  the  joint  effects  of  two  classes  of  disturbances,  those 
which  produce  easterly  and  those  which  produce  westerly  deflections  ; and  in  the 
ratios  of  the  disturbances  of  the  horizontal  and  vertical  forces  at  the  different  hours, 
we  have  the  further  complication,  that  the  variations  of  the  horizontal  and  vertical 
forces  do  not  bear  a simple  relation  to  those  of  their  theoretical  equivalents  to  which 
they  are  due,  viz.  the  Inclination  and  Total  Force,  but  involve  quantities  dependent  on 
the  resolution  of  forces,  which,  when  the  Inclination  is  great,  as  it  is  at  Toronto,  have 
a tendency  to  mask  the  simplicity  of  the  variations  of  the  Inclination  and  of  the  Total 
Force,  as  they  would  appear  if  they  were  the  subjects  of  direct  observation.  In  the 
following  Table  therefore  are  placed  the  proportions  at  the  different  hours  in  which 
the  six  classes  of  phenomena  respectively  vary,  viz.  the  disturbances  which  produce 
easterly  and  those  which  produce  westerly  deflections,  those  which  increase  and 
those  which  decrease  the  Inclination,  and  those  which  increase  and  those  which 
decrease  the  Total  Force.  * 

Table  IV. 


Toronto 

Astronomical 

Hours. 

Disturbances 

Toronto  Civil 
Hours. 

of  the  Declination  producing 

of  the  Inclination  producing 

of  the  Total  Force  producing 

Easterly 

Deflection. 

Westerly 

Deflection. 

Increase  of 
Inclination. 

Decrease  of 
Inclination. 

Increase  of 
Force. 

Decrease  of 
Force. 

18 

0-45 

1-82 

0-82 

0-83 

0-27 

1-91 

6 A.M. 

19 

0-35 

2-23 

1-29 

0-51 

0-26 

1-91 

7 A.M. 

20 

0-26 

2-58 

M4 

0-62 

0-37 

M2 

8 A.M. 

21 

0-21 

2*25 

1-05 

1-37 

0-22 

0*65 

9 a.m. 

22 

0-28 

1-62 

0-96 

1-47 

0-25 

0-28 

10  A.M. 

23 

0-39 

I'Ol 

0-89 

1-80 

0-39 

0-07 

11  A.M. 

0 

0-24 

0-80 

0-93 

1-75 

0-67 

0-04 

Noon. 

1 

0-21 

0-41 

0-87 

1-70 

1-25 

0-10 

1 P.M. 

2 

0*20 

0-65 

0-65 

1-92 

1-79 

0-08 

2 P.M. 

3 

0-22 

0-62 

0-71 

1-36 

2-21 

0-06 

3 P.M. 

4 

0-32 

0-80 

0-61 

1'46 

2-77 

0-07 

4 P.M, 

5 

0-44 

0-71 

0-79 

1-35 

2-96 

0-07 

5 P.M. 

6 

1-05 

0-57 

1-04 

0-72 

2-39 

0-07 

6 P.M. 

7 

1-44 

0-39 

M4 

1-02 

2-56 

0-09 

7 P.M. 

8 

1-95 

0-28 

1-12 

0-55 

1-99 

0-09 

8 P.M. 

9 

3-09 

0-22 

1-17 

0-58 

1-23 

0-31 

9 P.M. 

10 

2*41 

0-45 

1-18 

1-39 

0*81 

0-83 

10  P.M. 

11 

2-02 

0-27 

M9 

0-84 

0-53 

M9 

11  P.M. 

12 

1-76 

0-82 

MO 

0-85 

0-46 

2-14 

Midnight. 

13 

1-79 

M9 

1-32 

0-70 

0-26 

2-57 

1 A.M. 

14 

1-37 

1-00 

1-33 

0-37 

0-22 

2-70 

2 A.M. 

15 

1-28 

0-94 

1-05 

0-48 

0-28 

2*81 

3 A.M. 

16 

1-48 

1-21 

0*90 

0-48 

0-18 

2*48 

4 A.M. 

17 

0-91 

1-23 

0-76 

0-55 

0-28 

2-24 

5 A.M. 

We  learn  from  this  Table,  that  the  laws  which  regulate  the  occurrence  of  easterly 
and  westerly  disturbances  are  not,  on  the  one  hand,  similar,  nor,  on  the  other  hand. 


IN  THE  MEAN  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LARGER  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES.  369 


are  they  always  complementary  to  each  other.  Thus,  from  1 p.m.  to  5 p.m.  both 
classes  of  the  Declination-disturbances  are  considerably  below  the  average,  and  from 
1 A.M.  to  5 A.M.  both  classes,  with  a slight  exception,  are  above  the  average  ; whilst 
from  6 P.M.  to  1 1 p.m.  easterly  disturbances  greatly  exceed,  and  westerly  fall  greatly 
short  of  the  average  ; and  from  6 a.m.  to  11  a.m.  westerly  exceed,  and  easterly  fall 
short  of  the  average.  In  the  Inclination  and  Total  Force  the  complementary  character 
of  the  opposite  affections  of  each  element  is  more  extensively  manifested  ; thus  the 
disturbances  which  increase  the  Inclination  are  below  the  average  from  about  noon 
and  the  early  hours  after  noon,  when  those  which  decrease  it  are  above  the  average ; 
and  are  below  the  average  from  about  midnight  and  the  early  hours  after  midnight, 
when  those  which  increase  the  same  element  are  above  the  average.  In  the  Total 
Force,  from  1 a.m.  to  8 a.m.  the  disturbances  which  increase  the  force  are  greatly  above, 
as  those  which  decrease  the  force  are  greatly  below  the  average  ; a contrast  which  is 
reversed  from  1 a.m.  to  8 a.m.,  the  disturbances  which  decrease  the  force  being  then 
greatly  above,  whilst  those  which  increase  it  are  greatly  below  the  average.  In 
neither  of  the  two  elements  however  does  the  complementary  character  exclusively 
prevail.  It  may  be  remarked,  that  in  all  the  instances  which  have  been  thus  brought 
into  view,  touching  successively  the  diurnal  variations  of  the  disturbances  of  each  of 
the  three  elements,  the  parallel  cases  which  have  been  cited,  whether  of  identity  or 
of  contrast,  fall  without  exception  on  homonymous  hours;  a circumstance  which 
affords  additional  evidence  of  the  systematic  character  of  the  affections  of  which  we 
are  treating. 

There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  uniform  contemporaneous  connexion  between  the 
prevalence  of  either  easterly  or  westerly  Declination-disturbances  and  of  those  which 
either  increase  or  decrease  the  Inclination  or  the  Total  Force.  Thus,  for  example,  the 
hours  at  which  the  disturbances  which  increase  the  Total  Force  are  most  notably  above 
the  average  are  from  1 p.m.  to  9 p.m.  ; whilst  we  find  that  for  half  that  period,  or  from 
1 P.M.  to  5 P.M.,  the  Declination-disturbances  are  characterized  by  a very  low  propor- 
tion of  easterly  disturbances,  and  for  the  other  half  of  the  period,  or  from  6 p.m.  to 
9 P.M.,  by  a very  high  proportion  of  easterly  disturbances ; and  without  multiplying 
instances  of  dissimilarity,  it  may  be  remarked  generally,  that  the  more  the  six  classes 
of  disturbances  are  examined  and  compared  with  each  other,  the  less  reason  does 
there  appear  to  conclude  that  there  is  any  uniform  interaccompaniment  of  the  varia- 
tions of  different  elements. 

As  the  instrument  by  which  the  variations  of  the  Declination  are  observed  is  more 
simple  in  construction  than  those  required  for  the  variations  of  the  Inclination  and 
Total  Force,  and  the  disturbances  of  the  Declination  are  therefore  more  easily  observed 
and  more  generally  known,  a somewhat  disproportionate  considemtion  has  been  fi’e- 
quently  given  to  them  in  the  discussion  of  these  phenomena,  which  it  may  be 
desirable  briefly  to  remark  upon.  Thus  the  knowledge  of  the  magnetic  disturbances 
having  been  ehiefly  drawn  from  those  of  the  Declination,  it  has  been  very  generally 


370 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  PERIODICAL  LAWS  DISCOVERABLE 


and  very  naturally  imagined  that  the  early  hours  of  the  night,  or  from  8 p.m.  to 
11  P.M.,  are  those  at  which  magnetic  disturbances  principally  take  place;  that 
about  11  P.M,,  or  a little  after,  they  begin  to  subside,  disappearing  almost  wholly 
in  the  day-time,  and  reappearing  again  possibly  the  following  evening  at  the  same 
hour  as  on  the  preceding  evening,  in  supposed  analogy  with  certain  atmospheric 
disturbances  which  manifest  a tendency  to  recur  at  the  same  hours  on  successive 
days.  It  is  in  this  supposed  analogy  that  the  term  of  magnetic  storms  appears  to 
have  originated.  An  examination  of  the  observations  of  the  three  elements  at  but  a 
single  station  (as  Toronto  for  example),  teaches  us  that  this  view  requires  to  be  con- 
siderably modified.  The  disturbances  of  the  Declination  which  reach  a maximum  at 
9 P.M.  have  indeed  already  subsided  considerably  at  11  p.m.  ; but  those  of  the  Inclina- 
tion show  no  abatement  until  about  2 a.m.  ; whilst  those  of  the  Total  Force,  which  are 
much  below  their  average  value  at  9 p.m.,  increase  progressively  to  their  maximum, 
which  is  only  reached  at  3 a.m.,  or  nearly  six  hours  after  the  maximum  of  the  Declina- 
tion-disturbances has  taken  place.  In  like  manner,  the  hours  of  the  afternoon  in 
which  the  Declination  is  but  little  disturbed,  and  which  have  been  supposed  in  con- 
sequence to  be  hours  in  which  an  intermission  of  disturbance  takes  place,  are  seen 
by  the  Table  to  be  precisely  those  hours  at  which  the  disturbances  which  increase  the 
Total  Force  have  their  principal  development,  being  then  in  the  proportion  of  nearly 
ten  to  one  when  compared  with  the  homonymous  hours  after  midnight.  When  these 
remarkable  phenomena  are  more  fully  studied,  the  aspect  they  present  is  that  of  a 
disturbance  continuing  frequently  through  several  successive  days,  changing  from 
one  element  to  another,  and  affecting  each  at  different  hours  and  in  different  modes, 
in  conformity  with  laws,  the  average  operation  of  which  it  has  been  the  object  of  this 
investigation  to  ascertain  ; and  wearing  the  appearance  consequently,  when  only  a 
single  element  is  regarded,  of  a limitation  to  those  hours  when  that  element  in  par- 
ticular is  affected,  but  which  appearance  ceases  when  the  phenomena  are  more 
generally  apprehended.  It  was  the  supposed  analogy  between  magnetical  and  atmo- 
spherical disturbances,  which  led,  in  the  commencement  of  the  British  Colonial 
Observatories,  to  the  simultaneous  observations  and  record  of  these  two  great,  and, 
as  we  have  now  reason  to  believe,  distinct  branches  of  natural  phenomena;  and  as 
the  inquiry  advances,  we  are  continually  becoming  acquainted  with  additional  cir- 
cumstances to  strengthen  the  persuasion,  that  the  causes  of  these  occasional  and 
previously  supposed  “ irregular”  manifestations  of  disturbing  magnetical  influence 
must  be  sought  in  a more  distant  source  than  in  variations  of  the  meteorological 
phenomena. 

There  is  another  misapprehension  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  occasional 
disturbances  which  has  followed  very  naturally  from  the  limitation  of  the  view  to 
the  disturbances  of  a single  element;  an  inference  has  sometimes  been  drawn  in 
favour  of  a local  origin  of  a particular  disturbance  (in  contradistinction  to  the  general 
fact  of  their  simultaneous  occurrence  at  extremely  distant  parts  of  the  globe)  from 


IN  THE  MEAN  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LARGER  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES.  371 


the  circumstance,  that  though  the  disturbance  was  manifested  by  the  Declination  at 
one  station,  no  indication  of  it  was  shown  by  the  contemporaneous  observations  of 
the  Declination  at  another  and  a distant  station.  Now,  simultaneity  at  stations  sepa- 
rated by  considerable  intervals  of  longitude  implies  a difference  in  the  solar  hours; 
and  the  observations  at  Toronto  show  that  a difference  in  the  solar  hour  may  deter- 
mine the  question,  whether  a disturbance,  which  may  nevertheless  be  common  to 
both  stations,  may  or  may  not  be  traceable  at  both  by  simultaneous  observations  of  a 
single  element  only.  Towards  the  attainment  of  a just  conclusion,  therefore,  in 
regard  to  a possible  local  origin,  it  is  indispensable  that  a more  extensive  general- 
ization should  be  made,  and  that  contemporaneous  affections  of  the  three  elements 
should  be  brought  into  the  comparison.  Nor  can  this  condition  of  the  inquiry  be 
dispensed  with  even  in  comparing  the  phenomena  at  stations  under  the  same  meri- 
dian, but  separated  by  large  intervals  of  latitude,  unless  it  be  first  shown  that  the 
same  law  of  solar  hours  prevails  at  both  stations  in  regard  to  the  occurrence  of  the 
disturbances  of  each  particular  element.  It  need  scarcely  be  said  that  the  general 
simultaneity  of  the  disturbances  has  a very  important  bearing  upon  their  theory, 
inasmuch  as  it  militates  decidedly  against  the  supposition  of  their  originating  in 
atmospherical  peculiarities,  and  tends  to  assign  them  with  far  greater  probability  to 
a cosmical  source.  That  some  disturbances  may  have  a local  origin,  is  undoubtedly 
possible,  but  no  such  case  has  yet,  I believe,  been  established  on  adequate  evidence. 

For  the  purpose  of  viewing  in  its  simplest  form  and  expressed  in  numerical  value 
the  influence  which,  on  a daily  average,  the  larger  disturbances  exercise  on  the 
Declination,  Inclination  and  Total  Force,  we  must  revert  to  the  aggregate  values  in 
the  five  years  which  supplied  the  ratios  of  disturbance  at  the  different  hours  in  each 
of  the  six  classes  of  phenomena  contained  in  Table  IV.  From  these  values  we 
obtain  readily  and  immediately  for  each  hour  the  excess  in  the  aggregate  amount  of 
easterly  over  westerly,  or  of  westerly  over  easterly  deflection,  and  of  disturbances 
which  increase  or  decrease  the  Inclination  or  the  Total  Force  over  those  which 
respectively  decrease  or  increase  those  elements.  Flence  we  easily  form  a table  con- 
taining, for  each  of  the  elements  at  every  hour,  the  numerical  excess  in  the  aggregate 
values  of  whichever  kind  of  disturbance  predominates  at  that  hour;  and  by  dividing 
the  excess  by  1550,  which  is  the  number  of  days  of  observation  in  the  five  years,  we 
have  the  mean  daily  effect  corresponding  to  the  values  of  the  larger  disturbances  of 
each  of  the  elements  at  the  different  hours;  or  the  average  diurnal  variation  of  each 
element  due  to  the  larger  disturbances.  This  is  shown  in  Table  V.,  in  which  the 
diurnal  variation  of  the  Declination  and  Inclination  is  expressed  in  decimals  of  a 
minute  of  arc,  and  that  of  the  Total  Force  in  parts  of  the  Total  Force  at  Toronto, 
which  in  absolute  value,  and  employing  British  units,  may  be  taken  with  sufficient 
approximation  at  13'9. 


372 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  PERIODICAL  LAWS  DISCOVERABLE 


Table  V. 


Toronto  Astrono- 

Mean  diurnal  variation  occasioned  by  the  larger  disturbances. 

Toronto  Civil 

inical  Time. 

Declination. 

Inclination. 

Total  Force. 

Time. 

h 

18 

6-29  W. 

-t-6'10 

Parts  of  the  Total 
Force. 

-•000092 

6 A.M. 

19 

0-41  W. 

-1-0-18 

—•000092 

7 A.M. 

20 

0-52  W. 

-I-0-16 

—•000047 

8 A.M. 

21 

0-46  W. 

H-0-13 

—•000032 

9 A.M. 

22 

0-30  W. 

-I-O'IO 

—•000008 

10  A.M. 

23 

0-11  W. 

+ 0-09 

-1--000007 

11  A.M. 

0 

0-11  W. 

-I-0-09 

+ •000015 

Noon. 

1 

0-03  W. 

+ 0-09 

+ •000027 

1 P.M. 

2 

0-09  W. 

+ 0-05 

+ •000042 

2 P.M. 

3 

0*08  W. 

+ 0-07 

+ •000054 

3 P.M. 

4 

0-09  W. 

+ 0-05 

+ •000068 

4 P.M. 

5 

0-04  W. 

-J-0-08 

+ •000073 

5 P.M. 

6 

0-18  E. 

-1-0-14 

+ •000058 

6 P.M. 

7 

0-34  E, 

+ 0*14 

+ •000062 

7 P.M. 

8 

0-52  E. 

+ 0-16 

+ •000047 

8 P.M. 

9 

0-87  E. 

-f  0-16 

+ •000016 

9 P.M. 

10 

0-61  E. 

+ 0*15 

—•000022 

10  P.M. 

11 

0-53  E. 

+ 0-16 

-•000047 

11  P.M. 

12 

0-33  E. 

+ 0-14 

—•000098 

Midnight. 

13 

0-26  E. 

+ 0-18 

— •000125 

1 A.M. 

14 

0-17  E. 

-^0*19 

—•000132 

2 A.M. 

15 

0-16  E. 

-i-0-14 

—•000138 

3 A.M. 

16 

0*15  E. 

H-0-12 

—•000123 

4 A.M. 

17 

0-02  W. 

+ 0*10 

—•000109 

5 A.M. 

From  this  Table  we  find  that  the  range  of  the  diurnal  variation  of  the  different 
elements  is  as  follows:  viz.  of  the  Declination  1'‘39,  being  from  0''52  W.  at  8 a.m. 
to  0'’87  E.  at  9 p.M. ; — of  the  Inclination  0''14,  being  from  a minimum  increase  of 
0'*05  at  2 p.M.  to  a maximum  increase  of  0''19  at  2 p.m.  ; — and  of  the  Total  Force 
•000211  parts  of  the  total  force  at  Toronto,  being  from  a maximum  decrease  of 
•000138  at  3 a.m.  to  a maximum  increase  of  ^000073  at  5 p.m.  As  the  larger  disturb- 
ances of  each  element,  which  have  been  separated  by  the  processes  and  subjected  to  the 
analysis  described  in  this  communication,  can  by  no  means  be  supposed  to  include 
the  whole  of  the  disturbances  of  the  class  to  which  they  belong,  we  can  only  regard 
the  extent  of  the  diurnal  variation,  as  stated  above,  to  be  in  each  case  a minimum 
limit,  which  would  be  certainly  somewhat  exceeded,  if  by  any  mode  of  proceeding 
we  could  succeed  in  separating  the  minor  effects  of  the  same  causes  ; but  we  have 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  epochs  of  maxima  and  minima,  or  the  laws  of  inter- 
mediate progression,  would  sustain  any  material  alteration  thereby.  And  as  the  aggre- 
gate values  of  the  disturbances  are  taken  from  the  five  years  which  include  a com- 
plete quinquennial  or  semi-decennial  period,  the  mean  diurnal  variation  deduced 
from  them  must  be  considered  as  subject  to  a small  quinquennial  variation,  ana- 
logous to  that  which  has  been  found  to  exist  in  the  ordinary  solar  diurnal  variation. 
And  as  the  sum  of  the  variation  values  at  the  different  hours  taken  with  their  proper 


IN  THE  MEAN  EFFECTS  OF  THE  LARGER  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES.  373 


signs  in  no  case  equals  zero,  but  has  a sensible  magnitude  in  each  element,  the 
absolute  values  of  these  elements  must  also  be  affected  with  a very  small  cyclical 
variation  due  to  the  disturbances,  of  which  the  period  will  also  be  quinquennial. 

In  concluding  this  paper,  I may  venture  to  congratulate  the  Royal  Society  on  the 
success  which  has  attended  the  attempt,  commenced  at  its  recommendation  and 
carried  out  under  its  auspices,  to  investigate  the  laws  of  these  remarkable  and 
mysterious  phenomena,  the  Magnetic  Disturbances,  by  the  philosophical  method  of 
extensive  and  systematic  observation  ; and  on  the  proof  which  this  paper  contains  of 
the  sufficiency  for  their  purposes  of  the  instrumental  means  devised  by  the  Com- 
mittee of  Physics  for  observing  the  variations  of  the  Horizontal  and  Vertical  Forces  ; 
and  of  which,  especially  in  regard  to  the  Vertical  Force  magnetometer,  doubts  have 
been  sometimes  expressed,  arising  apparently  in  some  cases  from  the  want  of  sufficient 
skill  in  the  artist  who  attempted  to  construct  the  instrument,  and  in  others  from  the 
absence  of  any  personal  experience  in  those  who  expressed  opinions  as  to  its  probable 
performance.  By  means  of  these  two  instruments,  a full  confirmation  has  now  been 
given  to  the  existence  of  periodical  laws  of  systematic  order  and  regularity  in  pheno- 
mena previously  regarded  as  irregular,  the  periodical  character  of  the  decennial, 
annual  and  diurnal  variations  being  as  clearly  shown  by  the  disturbances  of  the 
Inclination  and  Total  Force  as  by  those  of  the  Declination;  thus  accomplishing  the 
first  important  step  towards  a physical  theory  of  the  Disturbances  by  the  direct 
connexion  which  they  are  now  shown  to  have  with  the  Sun. 

The  conclusions  which  can  be  drawn  from  the  observations  at  a single  station  are 
necessarily  limited  to  the  theory  of  the  phenomena  as  they  present  themselves  at  a 
single  point  on  the  earth’s  surface.  May  it  not  be  hoped,  that  the  fruits  which  have 
recompensed  the  labour  bestowed  on  the  Toronto  observations,  may  encourage  some 
amongst  the  numerous  physicists  in  Europe  and  America,  who  signified  their  desire 
to  cooperate  with  the  Royal  Society  in  this  inquiry,  and  to  adopt  the  methods  and 
processes  of  observation  which  have  been  followed  out  at  Toronto,  to  apply  them- 
selves to  the  deduction  of  fhe  laws  of  the  occasional  disturbances  which,  from  the 
example  of  Toronto,  they  may  expect  to  be  able  to  disentangle  from  the  great  mass 
of  observations  on  which  their  labour  has  been  already  bestowed;  provided  that 
those  observations  have  been  made  with  the  care  and  perseverance  which  have 
distinguished  those  made  by  the  Officers  and  Non-commissioned  Officers  of  the 
Royal  Artillery  at  the  Toronto  Observatory?  Few  may  be  willing  to  face  a heavy 
labour  of  reduction  before  experience  has  shown  that  results  will  follow  from  the 
labour ; but  some  may  be  expected  to  do  so  when  an  example  is  before  them  that 
this  additional  labour  bestowed  on  their  observations  will  not  be  without  its  recom- 
pense : a very  few  stations  at  which  the  investigation  should  be  as  full  and  as  satis- 
factory as  at  Toronto,  might,  if  widely  distant  from  each  other  on  the  earth’s  surface, 
suflSce  to  form  a general  theory  of  the  phenomena  of  the  magnetic  disturbances. 

The  observations  at  the  St.  Helena  and  Hobarton  observatories  are  undergoing  a 

MDCCCLVI.  3 D 


374 


COLONEL  SABINE  ON  THE  LARGER  MAGNETIC  DISTURBANCES. 


similar  reduction  and  analysis,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  the  periodical  laws 
which  regulate  the  occurrence  of  the  larger  disturbances  of  the  three  magnetic 
elements  at  an  equatorial  station,  and  at  one  nearly  antipodal  to  Toronto.  Should 
health  be  continued  to  me,  and  should  no  unforeseen  circumstance  occur  to  interrupt 
the  progress  of  the  investigation,  I shall  hope  to  avail  myself  of  a future  opportunity 
of  submitting  the  results  to  the  Royal  Society. 


TVoolwich,  February  1,  1856. 


[ 375  ] 


XVL  On  the  ultimate  arrangement  of  the  Biliary  Ducts,  and  on  some  other  'points  in 
the  Anatomy  of  the  Liver  of  Vertebrate  Animals.  By  Lionel  S.  Beale,  M.B., 
Professor  of  Physiology  in  King's  College,  London ; Physician  to  King's  College 
Hospital.  Communicated  by  F.  Kiernan,  Esq.,  F.R.S. 

Received  June  14, — Read  June  21,  1855. 


In  his  valuable  paper  published  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1833,  Mr. 
Kiernan  describes  and  figures  the  anastomoses  between  branches  of  the  duct  in  the 
left  triangular  ligament  of  the  human  liver.  He  also  refers  to  communications 
existing  between  the  ducts  in  other  situations,  as  in  the  membranous  bridge  stretch- 
ing over  the  fissure  for  the  umbilical  vein,  and  upon  the  inferior  surface  of  the 
diaphragm.  In  the  same  paper,  this  author  gives  a diagram  of  the  manner  in  which 
he  supposed  the  ducts  to  terminate  in  the  lobules  of  the  liver,  and  subjoins  the  fol- 
lowing remarks  : — No  such  view  of  the  ducts  as  that  represented  in  this  figure  can 
be  obtained  in  the  liver.  The  interlobular  ducts  are  in  the  figure  seen  anastomosing 
with  each  other,  I have  never  seen  these  anastomoses,  but  I have  seen  the  anasto- 
moses of  the  ducts  in  the  left  lateral  ligament,  and  from  the  results  of  experiments 
related  in  this  paper,  I believe  the  interlobular  ducts  anastomose  ; I have  never 
injected  the  lobular  biliary  plexus  to  the  extent  represented  in  this  figure.” 

Since  the  appearance  of  this  important  communication,  the  subject  has  been  much 
investigated  both  in  this' country  and  on  the  continent ; but  as  far  as  I can  ascertain, 
no  observer  has  yet  succeeded  in  demonstrating  the  manner  in  which  the  ducts 
terminate,  or  has  been  able  to  show  conclusively  the  precise  relation  which  the 
hepatic  cells  bear  to  the  biliary  ducts.  Various  hypothetical  views  have  been  offered. 

Muller  considered  that  the  ducts  terminated  in  blind  extremities  ; E,  H.  Weber, 
under  the  name  of  “Vasa  aberrantia,”  described  ducts  which  formed  a network  in 
the  transverse  fissure  of  the  liver,  uniting  the  right  and  left  hepatic  ducts.  In  1850 
the  same  observer  described  ducts  terminating  in  blind  extremities  upon  the  surface 
of  the  external  lobules  of  the  cat’s  liver, 

Krukenberg,  Schroder  van  der  Kolk,  Retzius,Theile,  Backer,  Leidy  and  others, 
have  adopted  the  view  that  the  hepatic  cells  lie  within  a basement  membrane ; but 
with  reference  to  the  arrangement  of  the  cells  within  the  tube,  there  is  much  differ- 
ence of  opinion  among  them, 

Lereboullet,  in  his  memoir  on  the  “Foie  gras,”  published  in  1853,  advocates  a 
similar  view;  but  his  representations  are  very  diagrammatic,  and  for  the  most  part 
taken  from  preparations  examined  by  low  powers, 

Henle,  Gerlach,  Hyrtl  and  Natalis  Guillot  look  upon  the  finest  gall-ducts  as 

3 D 2 


37G 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


communicating  with  spaces  between  the  hepatic  cells  into  which  the  bile  escapes, 
and  is  received  by  the  most  minute  ducts. 

Handfield  Jones  and  Kolliker  describe  the  hepatic  cells  as  forming  a solid  net- 
work composed  of  columns  of  cells,  not  bounded  by  any  basement  membrane,  but 
lying  between  the  meshes  of  the  capillary  network. 

Handfield  Jones  thinks  the  ducts  terminate  by  blind  extremities,  whieh  lie  amongst 
the  cells  at  the  peripheral  parts  of  the  lobule.  The  small  cells  lining  these  ducts  are 
considered  by  him  as  the  chief  agents  concerned  in  the  secretion  of  bile,  and  he 
looks  upon  the  function  of  the  hepatic  cells  as  totally  distinct  from  this.  Busk  and 
Huxley  and  Dr.  Carpenter  concur  in  this  view,  which  places  the  liver  in  the  same 
category  as  the  suprarenal  capsules,  follicles  of  Peyer,  spleen,  &c.  Koluker  offers 
the  supposition  that  the  finest  ducts  impinge  upon  the  columns  of  the  network  of 
hepatic  cells,  and  makes  the  following  remarks  with  reference  to  this  point : — 
“ Often  as  I have  sought  for  a direct  communication  of  the  finest  canals  with  the 
hepatic  networks,  I have  not  directly  observed  it ; v/hich  is  indeed  by  no  means 
surprising,  if  we  consider  the  softness  of  the  parts  with  which  we  have  to  do ; but 
unfortunately  the  result  is  a hiatus  in  the  minute  anatomy  of  the  parts,  which  can 
hardly  be  made  good  by  hypotheses*.” 

The  conflicting  opinions  of  observers  appear  to  have  been  based  upon  inference 
and  hypothesis  rather  than  upon  direct  observation,  and  are  embodied  in  diagram- 
matic figures  ; some  authors,  agreeing  with  Kiernan,  regard  the  liver  as  arranged 
upon  the  type  of  true  glands,  while  the  latest  authorities  have  endeavoured  to 
establish  the  view  that  this  important  organ  is  more  nearly  related  to  the  ductless 
glands. 

My  own  observations  have  been  made  upon  the  livers  of  several  different  animals, 
and  I have  tried  very  numerous  methods  of  preparation,  some  with  considerable 
success.  The  results  of  the  examination  of  injected  specimens  precisely  accord  with 
the  observations  made  some  months  before  upon  uninjected  preparations. 

The  points  which  I hope  to  establish  are  as  follows : — 

1.  That  the  hepatic  cells  lie  within  an  exceedingly  delicate  tubular  network  of 
basement  membrane. 

2.  That  the  smallest  biliary  ducts-f'  are  directly  continuous  with  this  network. 

3.  That  in  favourable  specimens,  injection  forced  in  from  the  duct,  will  pass  into 
every  part  of  the  tubular  network,  even  quite  to  the  centre  of  the  lobule,  and  that 
the  capillary  network  can  be  injected  in  the  same  preparation. 

In  carrying  out  my  investigations  upon  the  anatomy  of  the  ducts,  I have  been  led 

* An  excellent  abstract  of  the  views  upon  the  structure  of  the  liver,  up  to  the  year  1852,  will  be  found  in 
Professor  Kolliker’s  ‘ Mikroskopische  Anatomic.’ 

t In  the  following  pages  the  word  “ duct”  is  used  to  denote  the  tubes  which  carry  olF  the  secretion,  in  con- 
tradistinction to  the  secretory  tubes  or  “ cell- containing  network”  in  which  the  secretion  is  formed. 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


377 


naturally  to  examine  other  points  in  the  minute  anatomy  of  the  liver.  Some  of 
these  observations  accord  with  the  notions  previously  entertained,  while  others  are 
at  variance  with  the  opinions  usually  held.  In  this  communication  I wish  to  restrict 
myself,  as  far  as  possible,  to  the  consideration  of  the  anatomical  arrangement  of  the 
biliary  ducts  and  the  relation  which  these  bear  to  the  secreting  cells  of  the  liver,  and 
shall  therefore  only  allude  to  some  of  the  more  general  points  incidentally.  It  may, 
however,  be  desirable  to  offer  a few  remarks  upon  the  nature  of  the  lobule  as  it 
occurs  in  the  livers  of  different  animals. 

Lobules. — If  by  a lobule  is  understood  a perfectly  circumscribed  portion  of  hepatic 
substance  containing  within  itself  all  the  structural  elements  necessary  for  the 
formation  of  bile,  which  can  be  separated  from  adjacent  portions,  the  only  livers  in 
which  such  lobules  are  to  be  demonstrated,  so  far  as  is  yet  known,  are  those  of  the 
pig,  and  Polar  bear  (according  to  Muller).  In  the  pig  each  lobule  possesses  a 
distinct  capsule  of  its  own,  and  can  be  readily  separated  from  its  neighbours.  The 
capsule  is  perforated  by  branches  of  the  vessels  and  duct  which  are  distributed  in  its 
interior.  This  arrangement  of  separate  lobules  would  permit  a considerable  amount 
of  movement  upon  each  other,  whilst  the  capsule  would  have  the  effect  of  preventing 
undue  engorgement  and  distension  of  each  individual  lobule,  a provision  which 
seems  to  be  especially  needed  in  the  pig. 

There  is  not  this  division  into  distinct  and  separate  lobules  in  the  livers  of  other 
animals  which  I have  examined.  As  numerous  authors  have  described,  there  is  a 
sort  of  mapping  out  of  small  spaces  produced  by  the  arrangement  of  the  smallest 
vessels  and  ducts,  to  be  seen  more  or  less  distinctly  in  the  livers  of  all  vertebrate 
animals  ; but  it  is  impossible  to  separate  these  apparently  isolated  portions  from 
each  other,  without  tearing  the  hepatic  tissue  of  which  they  are  composed,  thereby 
leaving  a rough  and  jagged  surface.  In  fact,  while  the  lobules  of  the  pig’s  liver  are 
provided  each  with  its  separate  capsule,  and  in  many  instances  separated  from  its 
neighbours  by  a certain  quantity  of  areolar  tissue,  and  the  branches  of  the  vessels  and 
duct  for  their  supply,  the  so-called  lobules  of  the  liver  of  man  and  other  animals  are 
only  separated  from  each  other  at  certain  points  by  the  fissures  in  which  the  portal 
vessels  and  duct  lie.  There  is  no  distinct  capsule,  nor  areolar,  nor  fibrous  tissue 
between  them,  and  the  capillaries  and  the  cell-containing  network  of  one  lobule  are 
continuous  at  various  points  with  those  of  its  neighbours. 

Most  writers  seem  to  have  regarded  the  pig’s  liver  as  the  type  of  structure  to 
which  all  others  should  be  referred ; but  it  seems  more  natural  to  look  upon  this 
beautiful  liver  as  exceptional,  and  bearing  the  same  relation  in  structural  peculiarity 
to  the  livers  of  other  animals,  as  the  much-divided  kidney  of  the  porpoise  bears  to 
the  corresponding  solid  organ  of  man  and  most  other  mammalia. 

It  may  be  said  that  in  a physiological  point  of  view  the  livers  of  all  vertebrate 
animals  are  composed  of  lobules,  but  in  a strictly  anatomical  sense  this  term  must  be 
restricted  to  the  livers  of  the  pig  and  Polar  bear. 


378 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


So  also  it  is  only  in  the  liver  of  the  pig  that  a prolongation  of  the  areolar  tissue 
can  be  demonstrated  between  the  ultimate  portions  of  secreting  structure. 

In  the  human  liver  areolar  tissue  is  abundant  in  the  large  portal  canals,  but  it 
gradually  diminishes  in  quantity  as  the  branches  of  the  vessels  become  smaller,  and 
their  most  minute  ramifications  are  entirely  free  from  it,  as  Bowman,  Henle,  and 
Vogel  have  previously  observed.  In  the  liver  of  the  seal  it  is  very  sparing  in  quan- 
tity in  the  portal  canals,  but  in  some  of  the  rodent  animals  it  seems  to  be  reduced  to 
a minimum  (rabbit,  rat,  mouse).  In  the  rabbit  a very  little  areolar  tissue  is  found 
even  in  the  largest  portal  canals. 

In  subjecting  sections  of  uninjected  specimens  to  examination,  the  smallest  branches 
of  the  vessels  are  inevitably  stretched  and  torn  by  manipulation,  and  thus  a striated 
appearance,  closely  resembling  that  of  fibrous  tissue,  is  produced. 

As  is  well  known,  the  vessels  of  the  kidney  and  of  other  glands  at  their  point  of 
entrance,  are  invested  with  a covering  of  areolar  tissue,  which  is  gradually  lost  as 
they  divide  into  smaller  branches  in  the  glands.  A similar  arrangement  occurs  in 
the  case  of  the  liver,  but  from  the  large  size  of  the  gland  this  investment  is  prolonged 
for  a considerable  distance  into  its  interior. 

Method  of  j)reparmg  Specimens. 

In  consequence  of  the  softness  of  the  liver,  I have  been  unable  to  demonstrate  the 
arrangement  of  the  minute  ducts  and  their  connexion  with  the  cell-containing  net- 
woi'k  without  previous  hardening.  This  hardening  may  be  effected  in  several  different 
ways.  By  soaking  small  pieces  of  liver  in  strong  syrup  for  several  weeks,  they  become 
so  firm,  that  very  thin  sections  can  be  readily  obtained.  The  liver  may  also  be  hard- 
ened in  alcohol,  and  afterwards  rendered  transparent  by  soda.  I have  also  succeeded 
in  obtaining  good  sections  from  pieces  which  had  been  soaked  in  the  mixture  of 
alcohol  and  acetic  acid,  recommended  by  Mr.  L.  Clarke  in  investigating  the  struc- 
ture of  the  cord.  The  fluid,  however,  which  has  afforded  the  most  satisfactory 
results,  consists  of  alcohol,  to  which  a few  drops  of  solution  of  soda  have  been  added. 
In  this  mixture  the  liver  becomes  perfectly  firm  and  transparent  at  the  same  time*. 

In  my  investigations  I have  employed  several  other  solutions,  but  the  above  are 
most  worthy  of  notice.  Some  of  the  livers  were  hardened  in  the  state  usually  ob- 
tained from  dead  animals,  others  were  partially  injected  from  the  duct  in  order  to 
force  the  bile  into  the  smaller  ducts  before  they  were  hardened,  and  in  some  instances 
the  bile  duct  was  tied  some  hours  before  the  death  of  the  animal. 

* The  advantage  of  this  solution  seems  to  depend  upon  the  opposite  action  of  the  two  fluids.  The  alcohol 
precipitates  albuminous  compounds,  and  renders  them  hard  and  opake.  The  soda,  on  the  other  hand,  softens 
and  dissolves  them,  rendering  them  transparent.  In  conjunction,  these  operate  in  rendering  the  tissue  quite 
hard  and  transparent  at  the  same  time.  I am  still  prosecuting  experiments  with  this  fluid.  Large  preparations 
have  been  preserved  in  the  alkaline  fluid  with  advantage.  I have  succeeded  in  making  some  most  beautiful 
preparations,  showing  the  ossification  of  the  bones  in  the  embryo  at  different  periods  in  this  manner. 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


379 


Method  of  injecting  the  Ducts  of  the  Liver  and  the  Cell-containing  Networh. 

Although  I felt  certain  of  the  correctness  of  my  observations  upon  various  imin- 
jected  specimens  examined  two  years  since  (in  1853),  it  appeared  to  me  that  it  must 
be  possible  to  inject  both  the  minute  ducts  and  the  hepatic  cell-containing  network, 
if  they  were  really  continuous,  and  for  a long  time  past  I have  been  endeavouring  to 
effect  this  object.  It  w'ould  be  useless  here  to  describe  all  the  different  plans  I have 
resorted  to,  and  I shall  therefore  only  refer  to  the  method  which  succeeded.  After 
failing  many  times  to  drive  the  injection  into  the  smallest  ducts,  it  occurred  to  me 
to  try  to  empty  the  ducts  of  their  bile  before  injecting  them.  This  object  was  at  last 
readily  obtained  by  forcing  water  into  the  portal  vein,  and  causing  the  vessels  to 
become  distended.  In  consequence  of  this  distension,  the  ducts  were  compressed, 
and  the  bile  was  forced  from  the  small  into  the  larger  branches.  After  continuing 
the  injection  of  the  water  for  a short  time,  bile  trickled  from  the  duct  and  the  gall- 
bladder became  filled — soon  bile  ceased  to  escape,  and  almost  pure  water  flowed. 
After  the  liver  had  been  thoroughly  drained,  by  being  placed  in  soft  cloths  for  some 
hours,  the  duct  was  injected  with  Prussian  blue*.  The  injection  passes  readily  with 
slight  force,  and  can  be  seen  entering  the  lobules  upon  the  external  surface  of  the 
liver.  It  does  not  appear  gradually  round  the  circumference  of  the  lobule  as  when 
the  portal  vein  is  injected,  but  it  forms  small  roundish  points,  almost  like  extravasa- 
tions, here  and  there  at  the  outer  part  of  the  lobule,  and  it  spreads  from  thence 
towards  the  centre. 

After  the  duct  has  been  injected  in  this  manner,  it  becomes  necessary  to  distend 
the  capillary  vessels  with  injection,  otherwise  a thin  section  has  a confused  appear- 
ance. For  this  purpose  plain  clear  size  is  the  best.  The  portal  vein  is  injected  with 
it,  and  the  injection  continued  until  the  whole  organ  is  fully  distended.  The  vessels 

* Before  resorting  to  Prussian  blue  I had  tried  numerous  different  substances.  Opake  injections  always 
caused  the  preparation  to  look  confused  under  high  powers,  and  it  was  impossible  completely  to  remove  the 
adhering  particles  of  injection  from  the  section  by  washing.  In  consequence  the  specimen  never  looked  clear. 
Transparent  injections  seemed  likely  to  afford  more  favourable  results,  and  several  were  tried.  Most  of  them 
passed  through  the  walls  of  the  ducts,  colouring  all  the  adjacent  tissues,  and  afforded  no  better  success  than 
opake  injections.  Carefully  prepared  Prussian  blue  combines  the  advantages  of  an  opake  injection  with 
those  of  a coloured  solution.  The  particles  vidll  not  pass  through  basement  membrane,  and  at  the  same  time 
they  are  so  minute,  that  when  suspended  in  fluid,  the  appearance  of  a solution  is  produced.  Injections  of 
Prussian  blue  may  be  examined  by  reflected  or  by  transmitted  light. 

The  Prussian  blue  is  prepared  in  the  usual  manner,  by  adding  a solution  of  ferrocyanide  of  potassium  to  a 
dilute  solution  of  perchloride  of  iron.  The  mixture  should  have  the  appearance  of  a dark  blue  solution,  and 
should  contain  no  flocculi.  It  should  not  form  a deposit  until  it  has  stood  for  some  time.  About  a third  of  its 
bulk  of  spirit  should  be  slowly  added  and  the  mixture  well  stirred.  The  advantage  of  the  spirit  is,  that  it 
hardens  the  delicate  walls  of  the  finer  ducts  as  it  comes  in  contact  with  them,  and  thus  tends  to  prevent  their 
rupture.  The  mixture  must  be  strained  through  two  or  three  layers  of  fine  muslin  before  use.  The  Prussian 
blue  may  be  injected  by  means  of  a small  half-ounce  syringe,  or  by  the  pressure  of  a column  of  fluid  about 
four  feet  in  height  placed  in  a long  tube. 


380 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


are  then  stopped  and  the  liver  allowed  to  become  cool.  When  the  size  has  set,  very 
thin  sections  can  be  obtained  without  difficulty.  The  section  must  be  carefully 
washed  before  examination,  in  order  to  remove  loose  cells,  &c.  from  the  surface 
which  would  interfere  with  its  definition.  It  may  be  placed  in  thin  syrup,  glycerine 
or  dilute  alcohol,  and  will  bear  examination  with  a quarter,  or  with  an  eighth  of  an 
inch  object-glass  (400  diameters). 

By  injecting  the  ducts,  the  lymphatics  are  also  injected.  If  the  duct  does  not 
burst,  colourless  fluid  returns  by  the  lymphatics,  which  may  thus  be  injected  with 
plain  size,  while  the  colouring  matter  remains  in  the  duct.  If  a small  duct  rupture, 
the  injection  often  enters  the  abundant  plexus  of  lymphatics  in  the  portal  canals,  and 
may  even  reach  the  thoracic  duct,  as  occurred  to  Kiernan,  and  once  to  myself,  in 
the  case  of  a rabbit. 

A human  liver  which  has  afforded  many  excellent  specimens,  has  been  injected 
with  four  colours,  two  transparent,  and  two  opake ; as  follows,  artery  with  vermi- 
lion ; portal  vein  with  flake-white ; hepatic  vein  with  lake,  and  the  duct  with 
Prussian  blue. 

Evidence  of  the  existence  of  a Tubular  Basement  Membrane  in  which  the  Lwer -cells 

are  contained. 

It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  cells  with  shreds  of  delicate  membrane  attached  to 
them  in  specimens  which  have  been  slightly  hardened  in  dilute  alcohol.  A drawing 
which  has  not  been  published  shows  a cell  from  the  rabbit’s  liver  enclosed  in  a 
membrane,  which  can  be  traced  beyond  it  for  some  distance  as  a very  narrow 
contracted  tube. 

This  delicate  basement  membrane  is  also  well  displayed  in  certain  specimens  in 
which  a curious  chemical  change  has  taken  place  in  the  contents  of  the  tube.  In  a 
section  of  dog’s  liver,  which  had  been  soaking  for  some  time  in  a weak  solution  of 
soda,  most  of  the  cells  appeared  to  have  been  dissolved  at  their  outer  part,  and  in 
consequence,  a fusion  of  the  matter  of  which  they  were  composed  had  taken  place, 
causing  the  formation  of  a highly  refracting  mass  within  the  basement  membrane, 
the  outline  of  which  was  rendered  very  distinct.  This  preparation  is  represented  in 
Plate  XV.  fig.  18,  and  at  a one  of  the  tubes,  separated  and  drawn  out  with  its  con- 
tents contracted  within  it,  is  shown. 

I have  a drawing  of  a somewhat  similar  change  in  the  liver  of  a flounder  which 
had  been  treated  with  soda,  and  afterwards  by  acetic  acid,  causing  the  precipitation 
of  some  of  the  constituents  of  the  bile  which  had  been  previously  dissolved  by  the 
soda.  By  pressure  some  of  these  highly  refractive  masses  were  broken,  and  by 
examination  with  a very  dull  light,  the  continuity  of  the  delicate  basement  membrane 
could  be  traced  between  them. 

When  sections  of  liver  have  been  soaked  for  some  time  in  strong  syrup  or  glyce- 
rine, the  cells  in  the  interior  of  the  tubes  shrink  from  exosmosis,  and  the  delicate 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


381 


tubular  raembrane  contracts  upon  its  contents.  The  tubes  therefore  become  much 
narrower,  and,  except  in  the  highly  refracting  nature  of  the  contents,  the  altered 
cell-containing  network  closely  resembles  that  of  the  capillaries. 

In  a properly  prepared  liver,  it  is  often  possible  to  show  the  cell-containing  net- 
work in  one  section  and  the  capillary  network  in  another.  When  the  vessels  are 
distended  with  clear  size,  the  meshes  of  the  cell-containing  network  are  seen  ; but  if 
a section  be  well  washed  and  placed  in  glycerine,  the  sharp  well-defined  outlines  of 
the  capillary  vessels  are  brought  into  view.  In  such  a section  from  which  the  cells 
have  been  removed,  I have  seen  in  some  places,  just  at  the  thin  edge  of  the  specimen, 
stretched  across  the  space  between  two  capillary  vessels,  the  exceedingly  delicate 
basement  membrane  of  the  tube  in  which  the  cells  lie,  recognizable  rather  from  the 
small  quantity  of  debris  and  granular  matter  which  adheres  to  it,  than  from  any 
positive  characters  distinguishable  in  the  membrane  itself.  This  appearance  can 
only  be  seen  under  the  influence  of  a very  dull  light. 

The  network  is  capable  of  being  distended  to  a considerable  extent  in  every  part 
of  the  lobule  without  rupture.  Often  the  injection  accumulates  to  such  an  extent  as 
completely  to  obscure  the  cells,  and  in  consequence  of  the  pressure  thus  caused,  the 
vessels  are  rendered  invisible.  Even  in  such  specimens  the  appearance  cannot  be 
mistaken  for  extravasation  or  vascular  injection.  In  tubes  which  are  only  partially 
injected,  the  injection  often  accumulates  a little  on  each  side,  gradually  shading  off 
as  it  were  towards  the  centre,  while  towards  the  adjacent  capillary  vessel  it  forms  a 
distinct,  well-defined  and  dark  line. 

The  cells  which  escape  into  the  surrounding  fluid  from  an  injected  specimen  have 
portions  of  injection  adhering  to  them,  or  are  deeply  stained  with  it. 

A portion  of  the  cell-containing  network  of  the  human  subject  injected  is  shown 
in  Plate  XV.  fig.  19.  The  cells  represented  in  the  drawing  are  much  altered  from 
the  mode  of  preparing  the  specimen.  Their  position,  however,  is  shown.  In  the  pig, 
portions  of  the  cell-containing  network,  in  different  states,  are  represented  in  Plate 
XV.  figs.  23,  24,  26,  28.  In  the  seal,  in  Plate  XIV.  figs.  15  & 16.  In  the  rabbit,  in 
fig.  11  c.  In  the  dog,  in  Plate  XV.  fig.  18.  In  the  human  foetus,  in  Plate  XV. 
fig.  17,  and  in  Plate  XIV.  fig.  12. 

If  a section  be  made  through  the  hepatic  tissue  exactly  at  right  angles  to  a small 
branch  of  the  intralobular  vein,  the  cells  are  seen  to  form  rows  which  radiate  from 
the  centre  towards  the  circumference  of  the  lobule,  as  has  been  noticed  by  Muller, 
Valentin,  Bowman,  Theile,  Gerlach  and  others.  In  sections  made  in  many  other 
directions  this  radiated  arrangement  is  not  to  be  shown.  The  drawing  in  Plate  I. 
fig.  1 (not  published)  is  an  exact  copy  of  a section  of  horse’s  liver,  and  is  the  most  beau- 
tiful specimen  of  this  arrangement  which  I have  seen.  The  rows  increase  in  number 
as  they  pass  from  the  centre.  They  are  connected  at  irregular  intervals  by  oblique  or 
transverse  branches,  often  much  narrower  than  a cell,  and  containing  only  nuclei  and 
granular  matter.  These  communicating  branches  are  best  seen  in  injected  specimens. 

3 e 


MDCCCLVI. 


382 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


The  cells  of  which  these  rows  are  composed,  for  the  most  part  form  single  lines, 
although  here  and  there,  where  the  tubes  are  wider  than  usual,  two  cells  may  be 
seen  lying  transversely  across  the  tube.  In  a specimen  in  which  these  radiating  tubes 
had  been  injected,  not  only  was  the  existence  of  a basement  membrane  proved,  but 
one  distinct  from,  and  not  adhering  to  the  walls  of  the  capillary  vessels.  Although 
the  meshes  of  the  capillary  network  are  slightly  elongated  towards  the  centre  of  the 
lobule,  such  an  arrangement  could  not  produce  the  appearance  observed.  If  the  cells 
lay  promiscuously  in  the  meshes  of  the  capillaries  without  being  circumscribed  by  any 
basement  membrane,  the  radiating  lines  would  necessarily  be  connected  transversely 
by  very  numerous  cells. 

Some  of  these  tubes  from  the  human  liver  are  represented  in  a drawing  not 
published,  which  was  copied  from  an  injected  specimen*. 

The  contents  of  the  cell-containing  network  are  liable  to  considerable  alterations 
in  volume,  a change  which  can  be  readily  effected  artificially.  In  the  same  specimen 
the  diameter  of  the  network  varies  to  a limited  extent,  according  to  the  size  and 
number  of  the  cells  within  the  basement  membrane.  It  is  usually  about  jioowth  of 
an  inch  in  diameter  in  most  mammalian  animals,  and  is  considerably  wider  than  the 
narrowest  part  of  the  small  ducts  with  which  it  is  immediately  continuous. 

The  width  of  the  spaces  between  the  tubes  of  the  network,  or  in  other  words,  the 
diameter  of  the  vessels,  varies  much  in  different  parts  of  the  lobule  of  the  human 
liver,  being  much  wider  at  the  portal  surface,  where  the  small  branches  of  the  vein 
enter,  than  at  a greater  depth  where  capillaries  are  alone  found. 

This  point  is  shown  in  sections  from  different  parts  of  the  lobule  of  the  liver  of  the 
foetus  in  Plate  XV.  fig.  I7. 

In  some  situations,  then,  it  is  demonstrable  that  the  basement  membrane  of  the 
cell-containing  network  is  distinct  from  the  walls  of  the  capillaries  ; but  in  the  greater 
part  of  the  lobule,  where  the  two  membranes  come  into  close  contact,  they  are  incor- 
porated, so  that  really  the  majority  of  the  liver-cells  are  nearly  surrounded  with 
blood,  from  which  they  are  only  separated  by  one  thin  layer  of  delicate  structureless 
membrane. 

In  the  foetus  there  is  a distinct  interval  between  the  wall  of  the  tube  in  which  the 
secreting  cells  lie,  and  that  of  the  capillary  vessels  ; so  that  when  a good  section  is 
obtained,  two  distinct  lines  are  seen  between  the  liver-cells  and  the  cavity  of  the 
cajnllaries.  These  two  lines  are  separated  by  a transparent,  apparently  structureless 
substance,  in  which  no  trace  of  fibres  can  be  detected,  as  represented  in  fig.  17. 

These  circumstances  impress  me  with  the  notion  that  the  liver  is  originally  com- 
posed of  two  distinct  networks  which  intimately  interdigitate  with,  or  fit  into,  each 
other, — one  containing  the  secreting  cells,  the  other  the  blood.  The  walls  of  these 

* I have  not  been  able  to  demonstrate  the  presence  of  csecal  tubes  connected  with  the  branches  of  the  net- 
work in  the  lobules  of  the  liver,  but  from  the  arrangement  of  those  of  the  “ vasa  aberrantia,”  presently  to  be 
described,  and  from  other  appearances  which  I have  observed,  I think  it  likely  that  such  exist  in  small  number. 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


383 


two  sets  of  tubes  gradually  become  incorporated,  except  in  those  situations  where 
the  capillary  network  is  less  dense,  or  where  the  meshes  of  the  cell-containing  net- 
work are  more  widely  separated  from  each  other;  in  which  cases  a distinct  limitary 
membrane  to  the  tubes  containing  the  liver-cells  can  be  demonstrated  even  in  the 
adult.  The  cell-containing  network  and  the  vascular  network  can  be  alternately 
distended.  The  membrane  is  very  permeable  to  water  in  both  directions,  as  1 have 
proved  by  first  forcing  fluid  from  the  vessels  into  the  duct,  and  afterwards  in  the 
opposite  direction.  Subsequent  injection  proved  that  no  rupture  had  taken  place. 
The  greatest  force  which  can  be  applied  will  not  cause  the  bile  to  pass  through 
this  delicate  membrane  into  the  capillary  vessels.  It  is  permeable  to  bile  only  in 
one  direction. 

Of  the  contents  of  the  Tubular  Network  of  Basement  Membrane,  and  of  the  Arrange- 
ment of  the  Liver-cells  within  it. 

Within  the  tubular  network  lie  the  hepatic  cells,  with  a certain  quantity  of  granular 
matter  and  cell  debris,  and  in  some  instances,  free  granules  of  yellow  colouring 
matter  and  free  oil-globules.  The  liver-cells  have  been  described  by  many  writers. 
They  are  not  arranged  in  any  definite  or  regular  manner  within  the  tubes  of  base- 
ment membrane.  Their  form  appears  to  be  determined  to  a great  extent  by  mutual 
adaptation  and  pressure.  In  adult  animals  they  usually  contain  one  nucleus,  and 
within  this  is  a bright  point  (nucleolus)  and  faint  granules ; rarely  cells  containing 
two  nuclei  are  found.  In  the  embryo,  however,  the  cells  contain  two  nuclei  very 
commonly,  and  often  cells  are  met  with  which  contain  several  (from  two  to  six). 
Besides  the  nucleus,  the  liver-cell  contains,  as  is  well  known,  coloured  granules  and 
oil-globules,  apparently  suspended  in  a viscid  albuminous  material.  The  coloured 
granules  are  not  constantly  present.  Often  they  are  numerous  in  cells  near  the 
centre  of  the  lobule,  and  entirely  absent  in  those  near  the  margin,  while  the  reverse  is 
usually  the  case  with  reference  to  the  oil-globules.  On  some  occasions,  ceils  which 
contained  no  coloured  granules  when  first  examined,  were  found  to  contain  several 
after  having  been  allowed  to  soak  for  some  time  in  dilute  acetic  acid.  The  granules 
of  colouring  matter  are,  however,  not  unfrequently  present  in  the  cells  near  the  centre 
of  the  lobule,  as  well  as  in  those  containing  much  oil  at  the  circumference.  In  some 
instances  I have  observed  that  the  cells  near  the  centre  of  the  lobule  were  smaller  and 
were  surrounded  with  a greater  quantity  of  granular  matter  than  those  nearer  the 
margin. 

Many  observers  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  cells  of  the  liver  are  arranged 
in  a definite  manner.  Professor  Lereboullet,  one  of  the  latest  writers  on  this  point 
(1853),  describes  the  cells  as  arranged  in  double  rows,  between  which  injection  can 
be  forced  so  as  to  separate  them,  and  he  gives  two  diagrams  to  illustrate  his  views  on 
this  point.  I have  never  seen  anything  like  this  arrangement,  and,  as  I have  before 
remarked,  injection  passes  very  readily  at  the  outer  part  of  the  tubes.  In  mammalia, 

3 E 2 


384 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


for  the  most  part,  the  cells  form  a single  row  within  the  basement  membrane  (human 
subject,  pig,  dog,  cat,  rabbit,  horse,  seal,  Guinea-pig  and  others).  In  some  situa- 
tions the  tube  contains  two  cells  lying  transversely  across  it,  but  this  appearance  is 
often  produced  by  two  tubes  being  placed  in  close  juxtaposition.  Sometimes,  when 
the  ducts  have  been  injected,  two  ceils  may  be  forced  across  the  tube  by  the  pressure 
of  the  injection,  Plate  XV.  fig.  24.  The  cells  do  not  completely  fill  the  tubes,  neither 
are  they  always  placed  quite  close  together,  bat  a certain  quantity  of  granular  matter 
is  seen  to  intervene.  The  action  of  certain  reagents  in  causing  the  fusion  of  the 
contents  of  the  cells  has  been  alluded  to,  but  it  is  doubtful  if  these  so-called  cells  in  all 
instances  have  a distinct  membranous  wall.  Injection  runs  sometimes  on  one  side 
and  sometimes  upon  the  other  side  of  the  tube.  Often  it  entirely  surrounds  the  cells, 
and  not  unfrequentiy  presses  them  to  one  side  and  separates  them  a little  from  each 
other,  Plate  XV.  fig.  23. 

From  these  circumstances  it  would  appear  that  the  cells  are  not  firmly  adherent  to 
the  walls  of  the  tube  ; indeed  many  of  them  often  appear  to  lie  free  vvithin  its  cavity, 
but  exhibit  a tendency  to  cohere  to  each  other  when  set  free. 

In  the  only  embryos  of  mammalia  which  I have  examined,  there  is  often  more  than 
one  row  of  cells  within  the  tubes,  frequently  two  or  three  (human  subject,  calf),  Plate 
XV.  fig.  17.  The  cells  are  smaller,  but  in  many  situations  the  diameter  of  the  tubes 
is  greater  than  in  the  adult. 

In  birds,  the  tubes  in  some  parts  are  wide  enough  to  contain  two  or  three  iwvs  of 
cells,  but  in  others  there  is  only  room  for  one  row  (duck,  linnet,  turkey,  starling, 
fowl).  In  the  chick  several  rows  of  ceils  lie  within  the  tubes  of  the  network,  Plate 
XV.  figs.  29  & 30. 

In  those  reptiles  which  1 have  examined,  for  the  most  part  several  cells  are  seen 
lying  across  the  tube  (frog,  adder,  field-snake,  newt). 

In  fishes  also  the  tubes  are  wide  and  contain  several  in  the  transverse  direction 
(flounder,  frog-fish,  sturgeon,  herring,  cod),  Plate  XV.  figs.  36  & 3/. 

It  may  be  remarked  generally  that  the  cell-containing  network  is  widest  among 
fishes,  and  most  narrow  in  mammalia.  The  similarity  of  the  arrangement  of  the  cells 
in  the  tubular  network  in  the  embryos  of  the  higher  animals  with  that  existing  in  the 
adult,  as  well  as  in  the  embryonic  condition  of  the  lower,  is  a point  of  interest,  of 
which  there  are  many  analogous  examples  in  the  case  of  other  organs. 

The  changes  in  volume  which  the  hepatic  cells  so  readily  undergo,  renders  it  very 
difficult  to  ascertain  their  dimensions  with  accuracy. 

OF  THE  DUCTS  OF  THE  LIVER. 

The  duct,  like  the  artery,  lies  close  to  the  portal  vein  in  the  portal  canals,  and 
usually  on  the  same  side.  In  the  large  portal  canals  the  external  coats  of  the  duct 
and  artery  are  incorporated  with  that  of  the  vein,  a point  well  seen  in  the  horse  when 
the  duct  is  very  large.  The  position  of  the  vessels  remains  nearly  the  same  in  the 


ARRANGExMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


385 


smaller  canals,  but  they  often  change  the  side  upon  which  they  lie.  Usually,  one 
branch  of  the  duct  and  artery  accompanies  the  portal  vein,  but  not  unfrequently  there 
are  two  or  more  branches  of  these  vessels  around  the  vein. 

Anastomosis  of  the  ducts  near  the  trunk  from  which  they  come  oJf'.—T\\Q  anasto- 
mosis between  the  larger  ducts  and  of  the  larger  branches  of  the  interlobular  ducts 
with  each  other  in  the  human  liver  is  pretty  numerous,  but  they  are  confined  to  the 
trunks  near  their  origin.  In  some  animals  the  branches  resulting  from  the  division 
of  the  small  ducts  communicate  with  each  other  at  a distance  from  the  parent  trunk  at 
the  margin  of  the  lobule.  These  communications  may  be  very  few  in  number,  or  so 
numerous  as  to  form  a network  upon  the  surface  of  the  lobule. 

The  anastomoses  of  different  interlobular  ducts  with  each  other  round  the  lobules, 
according  to  my  observations,  are  very  rare ; and  out  of  numerous  injections,  I have 
been  able  to  satisfy  myself  of  its  actual  occurrence  only  in  one  instance. 

Kiernan  observed,  that  if  the  left  hepatic  duct  were  injected  with  size  or  mercury, 
the  injection  returned  by  the  right  duct.  It  seems  not  improbable  that  this  may 
have  resulted  from  the  numerous  communications  between  these  ducts  in  the  trans- 
verse fissure  of  the  liver,  rather  than  from  the  union  of  interlobular  branches.  Not 
only  do  the  right  and  left  hepatic  ducts  anastomose  by  the  intervention  of  small 
tortuous  branches  in  the  transverse  fissure  of  the  human  liver,  as  E.  H.  Weber  many 
years  ago  demonstrated,  but  the  branches  which  come  off  from  these  trunks  are  con- 
nected by  smaller  ones  which  arise  not  far  from  the  point  at  which  they  are  given 
off.  Many  of  my  preparations  show  a most  complete  and  intimate  network  at  a short 
distance  from  the  parent  trunks  in  the  transverse  fissure,  and  to  a less  extent  in  the 
portal  canals.  This  curious  and  beautiful  network  is  shown  in  Plate  XIII.  figs.  2, 
3 & 5.  The  smallest  of  these  branches  seem  to  have  no  fibrous  coat,  and  in  the  larger 
ones  this  is  much  thinner  than  in  the  ordinary  ducts.  In  the  portal  canals  these 
anastomosing  branches  connected  with  the  ducts  are  much  less  numerous,  and  some 
of  the  small  communicating  branches  lie  in  the  thick  coats  of  the  ducts,  Plate  XIII. 
fig.  6 a. 

In  the  foetus  the  communications  are  less  numerous  and  the  branches  less  tortuous, 
but  they  are  to  be  shown  more  readily  than  in  the  adult,  in  consequence  of  their 
being  surrounded  by  a much  less  quantity  of  areolar  tissue.  In  the  dog  and  in  the 
calf  I have  seen  similar  communications  (Plate  XIV.  fig.  13  a),  but  they  are  less 
numerous  than  in  the  human  subject. 

In  the  instances  above  referred  to,  an  irregular  network  of  ducts,  more  or  less 
extensive,  is  to  be  demonstrated  near  the  trunks,  but  the  arrangement  is  not  constant 
in  all  animals,  nor,  so  far  as  I can  ascertain,  are  these  communications  numerous 
enough  to  entitle  them  to  the  name  of  interlobular  plexus  or  network.  I have  not 
been  able  to  demonstrate  such  a network,  although  I am  not  prepared  to  say  that  it 
is  absent,  in  the  pig,  seal,  rabbit,  horse,  cat  and  monkey.  If  these  communications 
exist  in  these  animals,  they  can  only  be  present  in  a limited  extent. 


386 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


Of  the  Sacculi  of  the  Ducts. — The  so-called  “glands”  of  the  ducts  liave  been 
recognized  by  Kiernan  and  subsequent  observers,  but  the  attention  of  most  anatomists 
has  been  directed  to  those  which  surround  the  large  ducts,  rather  than  to  those  which 
are  found  in  the  walls  of  ducts  of  smaller  size. 

The  so-called  “ glands  ” are  small  cavities  of  a rounded  or  oval  form,  or  more  or 
less  branched,  communicating  with  the  cavity  of  the  duct  by  a very  constricted 
neck.  A very  simple  sacculus  is  represented  in  Plate  XIII.  figs.  7 & 8,  from  a small 
duct  of  the  pig’s  liver.  These  glands  are  for  the  most  part  situated  in  the  coats  of 
the  duct,  and  when  injected  scarcely  project  beyond  its  external  surface.  The  larger 
branched  glands,  however,  usually  extend  for  some  distance  from  the  duct.  The 
glands  are  usually  situated  all  round  the  tube  (pig,  dog,  monkey,  cat,  seal).  In  the 
smallest  ducts  in  which  they  occur  in  the  human  subject,  they  are  generally  confined 
to  two  lines  on  opposite  sides  of  the  tube,  but  not  unfrequently  a few  may  be  found 
between  these  lines  of  orifices.  These  orifices,  which  were  described  by  Kiernan,  and 
which  lie  tolerably  close  together,  forming  a straight  row  of  openings  on  each  side  of 
the  duct,  are  best  seen  when  the  small  duct  is  laid  open.  They  are,  however,  almost 
all  of  them  the  openings  of  small  branches  of  ducts,  many  of  which  anastomose  in  the 
fibrous  coat  of  the  branch  to  which  they  belong,  and  probably  very  few  only  should 
be  regarded  as  sacculi  or  glands,  which  are  scarce  in  the  small  ducts  of  the  human 
liver.  The  little  dilatations  connected  with  the  ducts  shown  in  Plate  XIII.  fig.  6 b, 
are  examples  of  these  so-called  “glands”  upon  some  of  the  smallest  ducts  in  which 
they  occur  in  the  human  liver.  In  the  largest  ducts  in  the  human  subject  they  are 
found  all  round  the  tube,  but  in  unopened  ducts  many  may  escape  notice  in  conse- 
quence of  the  pressure  of  the  glass  cover,  by  which  the  glands  on  the  upper  and 
lower  surfaces  are  rendered  almost  invisible,  while  an  undue  prominence  is  given  to 
those  at  the  sides  of  the  tube. 

The  largest  sacculi  in  the  pig  are  branched,  and  are  situated  at  the  point  where  a 
smaller  duct  leaves  the  large  trunk. 

In  the  human  subject,  at  the  point  where  the  smaller  ducts  open  into  the  large  one, 
the  lining  membrane  is  so  arranged  as  to  form  a valve  which  would  tend  to  prevent 
the  passage  of  the  bile  from  the  large  into  the  small  ducts,  more  especially  as  these 
latter  run  obliquely  for  some  distance  in  the  coats  of  the  larger  duct. 

In  the  pig,  glands  are  numerous  upon  ducts  from  the  to  the  y^th  of  an  inch 

and  more.  They  are  situated  all  round  the  tube,  and  are  rarely  seen  upon  ducts 
below  the  of  an  inch  in  diameter.  They  are  not  present  upon  the  small  inter- 

lobular ducts,  the  walls  of  which  are  very  thin.  In  the  human  subject,  in  the  seal, 
and  in  the  monkey,  they  are  rare  upon  ducts  below  the  of  an  inch  in  diameter. 

In  the  foetus  they  are  common  upon  ducts  xxofhs  of  an  inch  in  diameter.  They  are 
rarely  met  with  upon  ducts  in  the  cat’s  liver  less  than-yfo^hs  of  an  inch,  and  in  those 
of  the  hedgehog  below  x^yths  of  an  inch. 

Vasa  aherrantia. — The  most  curious  appendages  to  the  ducts  are  the  “vasa  aher- 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


387 


rantia,”  originally  described  by  Weber  in  the  transverse  fissure  of  the  liver.  They 
have  been  previously  alluded  to  when  the  anastomoses  of  the  ducts  were  described. 
Theile  regarded  these  ducts,  so  well  named  by  Weber,  as  irregular  and  branched 
mucous  glands.  Some  observers,  and  lately  Lereboullet,  have  altogether  failed  to 
discover  these  curious  branches.  The  csecal  appendages  connected  with  these  ducts 
are  very  numerous  and  of  uniform  size.  Their  coats  are  much  thinner  than  those  of 
the  ordinary  galUducts.  They  are  lined  with  epithelium,  principally  of  the  sub- 
columnar  form. 

These  curious  ducts  are  most  numerous  in  the  transverse  fissure,  but  are  also  found 
in  the  upper  part  of  the  umbilical  fissure.  I have  seen  these  ducts  in  all  the  large 
portal  canals,  and  in  those  not  more  than  a quarter  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  they  are 
found  occasionally.  Many  of  the  smaller  ducts  at  their  origin  from  a larger  trunk 
in  a portal  canal  have  csecal  appendages  like  a branch  of  the  vasa  aberrantia,  and  on 
the  other  hand  straight  branches  may  be  traced  from  these  aberrant  ducts  in  some 
instances  in  the  transverse  fissure,  to  the  hepatic  tissue,  Plate  XIII.  fig.  4 a. 

The  vasa  aberrantia  are  always  closely  surrounded  by  areolar  tissue,  in  which 
lymphatics  are  very  numerous,  and  adipose  tissue  not  unfrequently  abundant. 

The  arrangement  of  the  vessels  is  peculiar.  The  arteries  and  veins  form  a network, 
in  the  meshes  of  which  the  vasa  aberrantia  lie.  Each  small  branch  of  the  artery  is 
accompanied  by  two  branches  of  the  vein,  lying  one  on  each  side  of  it,  which 
communicate  by  numerous  transverse  branches,  some  of  which  pass  over  the  artery, 
and  others  under  it.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  this  peculiar  arrangement 
of  the  arteries  and  veins  exists  in  the  coats  of  the  gall-bladder,  in  the  transverse 
Jissure  of  the  liver,  and  in  the  portal  canals.  It  is  only  to  be  seen  in  good  double 
injections  ; but  when  the  vessels  are  thoroughly  injected  with  different  colours,  a most 
beautiful  appearance  is  produced.  The  veins  pour  their  blood  into  large  branches  of 
the  portal  vein.  This  peculiar  arrangement  of  the  veins  doubtless  has  the  effect  of 
ensuring  free  circulation  through  them  under  different  circumstances,  and  admits  of 
their  being  compressed  or  stretched  to  a great  degree  without  obstruction  to  the 
passage  of  blood  through  them.  Some  of  these  vessels  are  represented  in  Plate  XIII. 
fig.  1 a. 

In  the  transverse  fissure  of  the  adult  human  liver  the  vasa  aberrantia  lie  nearer  to 
the  trunk  of  the  portal  vein  than  to  the  hepatic  tissue,  and  they  can  be  removed 
without  cutting  into  it.  In  the  liver  of  the  foetus,  on  the  other  hand,  the  quantity  of 
areolar  tissue  is  much  less,  and  the  vasa  aberrantia  lie  so  close  to  the  hepatic  tissue, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  remove  them  without  a thin  layer  of  the  latter,  into  which  they 
enter  at  numerous  points.  In  the  foetus  these  ducts  are  less  numerous  than  in  the 
adult,  and  their  course  is  less  tortuous.  They  occur  in  small  patches  in  which  the 
branches  are  seen  to  be  very  numerous,  and  the  anastomoses  very  frequent.  The 
epithelium  is  more  abundant,  and  the  cells  large  and  of  a dark  colour,  and  the 
injection  does  not  run  so  readily  as  in  the  adult. 


.388 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


These  facts  appear  to  me  to  militate  strongly  against  the  notion  of  these  ducts 
being  modified  and  anastomosing  mucous  glands,  as  Theile  supposes.  From  their 
arrangement  it  seems  not  improbable  that  they  are  really  altered  secreting  tubes,  and 
at  one  time  formed  a part  of  the  secreting  structure  of  the  liver.  As  the  portal  vein 
increases  in  size  at  the  termination  of  intra-uterine  life,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to 
suppose  that  some  of  the  hepatic  tissue  close  to  it  vrould  be  removed  to  some  extent, 
to  make  room  for  the  enlarged  vein;  in  such  a case,  many  of  the  vessels  would 
degenerate  into  fibrous  tissue,  and  the  branched  and  anastomosing  vasa  aberrantia 
would  represent  all  that  remains  of  the  hepatic  tubular  network. 

In  the  very  thin  edge  of  a horse’s  liver  which  was  composed  principally  of  fibrous 
tissue,  I have  been  able  to  trace  the  gradual  alteration  of  the  ducts  and  the  ultimate 
complete  disappearance  of  secreting  cells. 

Spread  out,  as  it  were,  upon  the  surface  of  the  portal  vein  in  the  rabbit,  there  is  a 
very  thin  layer  of  hepatic  tissue,  and  I have  been  enabled  to  trace  the  different 
stages  between  the  vasa  aberrantia  and  the  cell-containing  network,  most  distinctly, 
in  a specimen  in  which  the  ducts  were  injected,  and  the  vein  distended  with 
plain  size. 

Function  of  the  glands  and  vasa  aberrantia. — To  the  sacculi  of  the  ducts,  the  office 
of  secreting  the  mucus  in  the  bile  has  been  assigned,  but  cavities  opening  into  a 
tube  by  a narrow  neck,  not  the  inch  in  diameter,  seem  ill-adapted  for 

pouring  out  a viscid  tenacious  mucus ; neither  is  it  easy  to  suppose  how  this  mucus, 
secreted  at  certain  points,  would  become  thoroughly  mixed  with  the  mass  of  the 
bile  as  it  flowed  through  the  ducts.  If  these  cavities  were  filled  with  mucus,  one 
would  hardly  expect  that  injection  would  enter  them  so  readily  as  it  does.  The 
complicated  and  highly  tortuous  vasa  aberrantia  possess  no  characters  which  would 
lead  to  the  inference  of  their  being  mucous  glands. 

Again,  the  bile  of  the  rabbit,  in  which  animal  these  glands  are  very  few  in  number, 
and  only  found  upon  the  largest  ducts,  affords  as  bulky  a precipitate  of  mucus  upon 
the  addition  of  alcohol  as  that  of  the  pig,  in  which  these  glands  are  so  numerous  and 
so  distinct. 

It  seems  highly  probable  that  these  little  cavities,  as  they  are  found  in  the  adult 
liver,  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  reservoirs  for  containing  bile,  whilst  it  becomes  inspis- 
sated and  probably  undergoes  other  changes.  The  numerous  vessels  and  lymphatics 
which  surround  them,  and  the  similarity  of  arrangement  of  those  around  the  vasa 
aberrantia,  and  of  the  vessels  of  the  gall-bladder,  still  further  strengthen  this  view 
of  their  office.  I have  not  yet  minutely  investigated  the  arrangement  of  the  glands 
of  the  ducts  in  many  different  animals,  nor  have  I been  able  to  ascertain  if  ducts, 
corresponding  to  the  vasa  aberrantia,  are  usually  present.  I have  preparations 
showing  them  in  the  pig,  in  the  rabbit,  and  in  the  monkey. 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


389 


Of  the  finest  branches  of  the  Ducts,  and  of  their  connexion  with  the  cell  containing 

Network. 

Mammalia. — In  well-injected  preparations  the  smallest  branches  of  the  duct  can  be 
readily  traced  up  to  the  secreting  ceils,  Plate  XIV.  fig.  10.  The  walls  of  these  ducts 
are  composed  of  basement  membrane  only,  lined  with  delicate  epithelium.  In  the 
human  liver,  and  in  that  of  most  mammalia,  except  the  pig,  a few  of  the  finest 
branches  of  the  duct  can  be  followed  for  some  distance  beneath  the  surface  of  the 
lobule,  and  are  seen  apparently  lying  amongst  the  secreting  cells. 

In  many  animals,  particularly  in  the  rabbit,  and  to  a much  more  limited  extent  in 
the  dog  and  in  the  human  subject,  these  smallest  branches  of  the  duct  are  connected 
together  so  as  to  form  a network  of  ducts,  distinguished  by  their  diameter  being 
much  less  than  that  of  the  netvvork  in  which  the  liver-cells  lie,  and  by  the  character 
of  their  epithelium.  These  branches  appear  to  lie  in  the  most  superficial  part  of  the 
cell  containing  network,  without  being  connected  with  the  cells  which  surround  them; 
but  they  join,  or  are  continuous  with,  a portion  of  the  cell-containing  network  at  a 
deeper  part  of  the  lobule.  The  most  superficial  portion  of  the  cell-containing  net- 
work is  connected  with  small  ducts  which  do  not  penetrate  amongst  its  meshes. 
This  arrangement  is  shown  in  a very  simple  form  in  Plate  XIV.  fig.  16,  which  repre- 
sents a section  from  a seal’s  liver,  in  which  the  ducts  and  cell-containing  network 
were  both  well  injected  with  transparent  blue  injection : at  c,  some  of  the  superficial 
branches  of  the  duct,  and  at  d,  branches  which  penetrate  beneath  the  surface  of  the 
lobule,  are  represented.  Some  of  these  branches,  which  appear  to  lie  amongst  the 
secreting  cells  at  the  peripheral  part  of  the  lobule,  have  been  figured  by  Gerlach, 
and  are,  as  he  justly  observes,  much  narrower  than  the  cells  amongst  which  they  lie. 
He  makes  them  terminate  by  open  mouths,  into  which  the  bile  is  poured  from  the 
cells.  The  narrowness  of  these  tubes  has  been  advanced  as  an  argument  against  the 
possibility  of  the  cells  lying  within  tubes,  but  from  the  description  just  given  it  will 
be  seen  that  this  objection  does  not  apply. 

In  the  pig,  numerous  fine  branches  of  the  duct  are,  as  it  were,  applied  to  the  sur- 
face of  the  capsule  of  the  lobule  (Plate  XIII.  fig.  9),  which  is  perforated  at  frequent  in- 
tervals by  many  very  narrow  short  branches,  which  are  immediately  connected  with 
a network  which  partly  lies  amongst  the  fibres  of  the  capsule.  This  network  may  be 
looked  upon  as  the  most  superficial  portion  of  the  cell-containing  network,  and  the 
narrow  tubes  of  which  it  is  composed  are  found  to  contain  oil-globules,  granular 
matter,  and  a few  very  minute  cells,  Plate XV.  fig.  25.  When  the  liver  is  very  fatty, 
however,  this  most  superficial  portion  contains  numerous  secreting  cells  filled  with 
oil-globules,  Plate  XV.  fig.  28.  I have  not  been  able  to  trace  any  ducts  passing 
amongst  the  meshes  of  the  most  superficial  part  of  the  cell-containing  network,  as  I 
have  described  in  animals  in  which  the  distinct  lobules  do  not  exist.  In  the  last 
figure,  the  very  narrow  ductal  portion  of  the  tube  is  seen  to  dilate  considerably  at  the 

MDCCCLVI.  3 F 


390 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


point  where  the  secreting  cells  commence.  This  drawing  is  an  exact  copy  of  a 
beautiful  preparation  of  a very  fatty  pig’s  liver  which  had  been  injected,  and  the 
parts  which  were  injected  in  the  preparation  are  represented  in  the  drawing  by  the 
dotted  shading.  The  continuity  of  the  narrow  duct  with  the  wide  tubes  in  which 
the  secreting  cells  lie  is  well  shown,  in  consequence  of  this  part  being  accidentally 
separated  from  the  adjoining  portion. 

The  extremely  delicate  nature  and  narrowness  of  the  ducts  will  readily  explain  the 
difficulty  of  demonstrating  their  continuity  with  the  cell-containing  network,  particu- 
larly in  the  pig’s  liver,  for  they  almost  invariably  break  at  this  constricted  portion, 
especially  as  this  partly  lies  in  the  substance  of  the  capsule  of  the  lobule.  I have 
seen  the  same  anatomical  point  in  many  specimens,  but  in  none  more  distinctly  than 
in  the  preparation  referred  to,  which  still  preserves  its  essential  characters  (June  9th, 
1856). 

In  Plate  XV.  fig.  19,  the  connexion  between  the  small  ducts  and  the  cell-containing 
network  is  shown  in  an  injected  specimen  of  human  liver.  The  duct  is  greatly  dis- 
tended with  injection,  and  the  hepatic  cells  have  been  much  altered  in  preparing 
the  specimen.  The  communications  between  the  finest  branches  of  the  duct  are  few 
in  the  human  liver  ; a branch  can  often  be  followed  for  some  distance  amongst 
the  meshes  of  the  peripheral  part  of  the  cell-containing  network,  until  it  is  seen  to 
become  continuous  with  it  at  some  distance  from  the  surface.  These  branches  can 
only  be  seen  in  injected  specimens. 

In  Plate  XV.  figs.  20  & 21,  the  connexion  between  the  ducts  and  secreting  network 
is  shown  in  an  uninjected  liver,  which  had  been  treated  with  soda,  and  kept  for  some 
time  in  strong  syrup.  The  liver-cells  have  been  destroyed  by  the  mode  of  prepara- 
tion. The  narrow  duct  is  well  seen  at  a,  fig.  21.  The  other  specimen  has  been  sub- 
jected to  considerable  pressure. 

In  the  human  foetus,  the  connexion  between  the  duct  and  cell-containing  network 
is  shown  under  the  influence  of  a low  power  in  Plate  XIV.  fig.  14  a,  and  also  in 
figs.  12  & 13. 

In  a seal’s  liver  which  I injected;  the  hepatic  cells  were  small,  and  the  injection 
very  readily  passed  into  the  cell-containing  network.  The  small  ducts  are  compara- 
tively few  in  number,  but  their  course  was  very  easily  traced.  Often  they  could  be 
readily  followed  upon  the  thin  wall  of  a small  portal  vein,  as  shown  in  Plate  XIV. 
figs.  15  & 16.  In  the  latter  figure,  small  branches  of  the  duct  are  seen  passing 
amongst  the  superficial  branches  of  the  cell-containing  network  to  join  some  of  those 
at  a deeper  part.  At  c,  two  or  three  branches  are  seen,  which  were  connected  with 
that  portion  of  the  network  nearest  to  the  large  duct. 

Fig.  1 1 is  a drawing  of  a section  of  a rabbit’s  liver,  taken  from  a very  thin  and 
emaciated  animal,  in  which  the  cells  were  much  smaller  and  more  granular  than 
in  health.  The  tubes  of  the  network  were  shriveled,  and  in  many  situations  con- 
tained only  granular  matter.  In  a thin  section  of  this  liver,  narrow  granular  lines. 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


391 


communicating'  at  intervals  with  each  other  (cell-containing  network),  were  seen 
separated  by  wide  clear  spaces  (capillaries)  intervening  between  them.  In  this  liver  the 
very  fine  ducts  were  injected  to  a greater  extent  than  can  be  effected  usually,  and  a 
network  of  anastomosing  branches  round  the  portal  vein  is  shown  in  the  drawing. 
Even  in  this  specimen  the  injection  has  not  entered  many  of  the  small  branches  of 
the  duct.  The  injection  ran  very  readily,  and  in  some  places  distended  the  tubes  of 
the  cell-containing  network  to  a very  great  extent,  in  which  case  of  course  the  cleat- 
intervening  space  (capillary)  was  obliterated. 

Birds. — In  the  fowl  and  in  the  turkey,  the  ducts  form  a network  continuous  with 
the  network  in  which  the  liver-cells  lie;  but  the  tubes  are  of  much  less  diameter 
than  those  of  the  latter.  I have  been  able  to  trace  the  continuity  in  the  livers  of 
the  two  birds  above  referred  to,  by  injection.  The  abundance  of  epithelium  in  the 
ducts  of  most  birds  forms  a great  obstacle  to  the  passage  of  the  injection,  and  the 
excessive  thinness  of  the  capillary  vessels  prevents  the  preliminary  injection  of  much 
water  without  rupture. 

In  the  chick  of  tlie  fifteenth  and  also  in  that  of  the  twenty-first  day,  the  continuity 
between  the  ducts  and  cell-containing  network  is  shown  in  Plate  XV.  figs.  29  & 30. 

Reptiles. — In  the  newt  {Triton  cristatus),  the  course  of  the  ducts,  in  an  uninjected 
specimen,  is  shown  in  fig.  31.  The  tubes  in  which  the  hepatic  cells  lie  were  much 
stretched  and  pressed  in  these  specimens.  I have  not  yet  been  able  to  inject  the 
ducts  of  the  newt  or  frog. 

I have  succeeded  in  making  a good  injection  of  the  ducts  of  the  adder,  and  was 
enabled  to  trace  their  continuity  with  the  wide  tubes  containing  the  liver-cells.  The 
large  branch  of  the  portal  vein  is  surrounded  with  a plexus  of  ducts. 

Fishes. — The  greatest  difficulties  presented  themselves  in  the  investigation  of  the 
anatomy  of  the  ducts  in  this  class.  The  ducts  become  exceedingly  narrow  before 
they  join  the  very  wide  tubes  of  the  network  containing  the  cells.  1 have  not  been 
able  to  harden  the  liver  sufficiently  to  obtain  very  thin  sections,  and  in  tearing  out 
the  finer  ducts  they  always  break  otF  in  the  narrow  part. 

Numerous  attempts  at  injecting  the  liver  failed  altogether  in  consequence  of  the 
vessels  rupturing  when  the  water  was  thrown  in.  Another  source  of  great  incon- 
venience is  the  frequent  occurrence  of  entozoa  and  their  ova.  In  consequence  of  the 
tubes  being  almost  always  full  of  cells  containing  oil,  and  free  oil-globules,  it  is 
difficult  to  obtain  a specimen  for  examination  which  is  not  rendered  obscure  by  the 
escape  of  numerous  cells  into  the  fluid  in  which  the  preparation  is  placed. 

In  the  common  flounder,  the  connexion  between  the  ducts  and  cell-containing 
network  has  been  demonstrated  in  an  uninjected  specimen.  In  this  specimen  the 
secreting  tubes  were  much  shrunken  and  of  less  diameter  than  usual,  a circumstance 
to  which  the  distinctness  of  their  outline  is  due, 

I have  injected  the  ducts  and  a part  of  the  cell-containing  network  of  the  sturgeon 

3 F 2 


392 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


and  Lophius.  In  Plate  XV.  figs.  32,  33,  34  & 35,  some  of  the  ducts  and  portions  of 
the  network  are  represented.  The  mode  of  branching  of  the  ducts,  and  an  anasto- 
mosis, is  shown  in  fig.  33.  Even  in  the  very  fatty  liver  of  the  cod,  I once  traced  the 
continuity  of  the  ducts  and  the  wide  tubular  network  distended  with  cells  containing 
oil  and  free  oil-globules. 

In  injecting  the  livers  of  fish  it  is  necessary  to  dilute  the  injecting  fluid  with  weak 
spirit,  or  it  will  not  penetrate  to  the  finest  branches.  Often  the  particles  of  the 
injection  accumulate  in  some  of  the  finer  ducts,  forming  what  appears  to  be  a rounded 
and  slightly  dilated  extremity,  for  the  further  continuity  of  the  tube  cannot  in  all 
cases  be  seen.  Indeed  so  perfect  is  the  resemblance,  that  it  is  only  by  examining 
numerous  different  specimens  that  one  becomes  convinced  of  the  fallacy. 

In  all  four  classes  of  vertebrata,  I have  seen  both  in  injected,  and  also  in  uninjected 
specimens,  the  communications  between  the  finest  ducts  and  the  cell-containing  net- 
work. Of  the  nature  of  this  continuity  there  can,  I think,  be  no  doubt.  I cannot 
conceive  any  other  explanation  of  the  facts  I have  observed,  or  of  the  appearances  I 
have  copied  from  my  preparations.  The  observations  upon  uninjected  specimens, 
shown  in  Plate  XV.  figs.  18,  20  &21,  were  made  in  1854,  many  months  before  I had 
succeeded  in  injecting  the  ducts. 

In  all  vertebrate  animals  which  I have  examined,  the  duct  becomes  much  narrowed 
just  before  it  becomes  continuous  with  the  tubes  of  the  network  in  which  the  secret- 
ing cells  lie.  The  arrangement  of  the  most  minute  ducts  varies  somewhat  in  different 
animals,  as  has  been  described.  In  some  they  form  a network  of  very  narrow  tubes, 
continuous  with  those  in  which  the  liver-cells  are  contained  ; in  others  these  com- 
munications are  excessively  few  in  number;  while  in  some,  I do  not  think  they  exist 
at  all.  But  I would  not  express  myself  positively  upon  this  point,  for  I feel  persuaded 
that  in  the  most  perfect  injection  which  I have  yet  made,  the  tninute  ducts  have  not 
all  been  injected,  and  from  a cursory  examination  of  these  preparations  alone,  only  a 
very  imperfect  idea  of  the  number  of  the  ducts  or  of  the  beauty  of  their  arrangement 
and  relation  to  the  other  structural  elements  of  the  liver  in  the  natural  state  of  the 
organ,  can  be  formed. 

Diameter  of  the  finest  ducts. — The  diameter  of  the  finest  ducts  can  only  be  obtained 
approximatively ; for  when  not  injected,  they  can  only  be  demonstrated  distinctly  in 
fortunate  specimens,  and  aie  probably  somewhat  narrower  than  during  life.  When 
it)jected,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  usually  distended,  and  sometimes  to  a very 
considerable  extent. 

In  the  pig,  the  smallest  branches  containing  a little  injection  are  not  more  than 
the-gTj-ooth  of  an  inch  in  diameter;  in  the  human  subject,  about  ^5^0  qth  ; in  the  seal, 
-3o-o-(jth  ; in  sotne  fishes,  not  more  than  -gTroofh. 

The  diameter  of  the  cavity  of  the  tube  and  the  total  diameter  of  ducts  of  different 
sizes  are  shown  in  the  following  Table: — 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUC'l’S. 


393 


External  diameter. 

Internal  diameter. 

r -008 

•004 

Pig 

} -006 

•003 

1 "001 

•001 

Human  subject  . 

r "01 

•0045 

. 

{ "002 

•002 

Human  foetus 

. 

•01 

•0045 

Cat 

•015 

•0075 

Monkey  . , . 

, -02 

•01 

Seal  ..... 

r -001 

•001 

< 

1 -0003 

•0003 

The  diameter  of  the  ducts  from  which  my  drawings  were  taken  can  be  readily 
determined  by  reference  to  the  scales  appended  to  the  Plates. 

The  narrowing  of  the  excretory  duct,  just  before  it  becomes  connected  with  the 
secreting  tube,  is  seen  in  other  glands  ; thus  the  straight  and  ductal  portion  of  the 
renal  tube  is  narrower  than  the  convoluted  and  secreting  portion.  It  must,  however, 
be  borne  in  mind,  that  although  the  excretory  portion  of  the  tube  is  so  small,  its 
cavity,  through  which  the  secretion  passes,  is  wider  than  in  that  part  in  which  the 
secretion  is  separated.  In  the  liver,  where  the  secretion  is  highly  elaborated  and 
slowly  removed  in  a more  concentrated  form,  we  should  naturally  expect  to  find  the 
contrast  between  the  ductal  and  secreting  portions  of  the  gland  still  greater  than  in 
most  other  secreting  organs. 

Epithelium  of  the  small  ducts. — As  is  well  known,  the  larger  ducts  have  a thick 
lining  of  columnar  epithelium,  the  cells  of  which  become  shorter  and  altogether 
smaller  in  the  finer  ducts.  In  the  narrowest  tubes  the  cells  of  epithelium  are  some- 
what flattened,  and  usually  of  a circular  form.  Sometimes  they  are  oval  or  angular, 
depending  probably  upon  being  stretched.  They  have  a faintly  granular  appearance, 
and  rarely  a nucleus  can  be  seen  within.  The  quantity  of  this  epithelium  varies 
very  much  ; sometimes  it  completely  lines  the  tube.  In  some  instances  it  is  so 
abundant  as  apparently  to  leave  no  distinct  cavity  in  the  duct,  while  it  is  not 
uncommon  to  find  some  of  the  finest  ducts  containing  only  a very  few  cells  scattered 
at  irregular  intervals  over  the  basement  membrane,  of  which  the  coats  of  these  small 
ducts  are  alone  composed.  In  a perfectly  normal  condition,  when  the  minute  ducts 
are  undisturbed  by  manipulation,  and  are  examined  in  a proper  medium,  they  are 
generally  seen  to  be  lined  by  epithelium ; but  from  the  extreme  minuteness  of  these 
ducts  and  tender  character  of  their  walls,  it  is  scarcely  surprising  that  one  should 
fail  in  making  out  distinctly  the  epithelium  in  every  instance.  The  epithelium  of 
the  small  ducts  presents  very  similar  characters  in  all  the  animals  in  which  I have 
been  able  to  demonstrate  it.  In  the  human  subject  it  is  shown  in  Plate  XV.  figs.  20 
& 21,  and  in  the  seal  in  Plate  XIV.  fig.  16,  at  h. 

This  ductal  epithelium  does  not  pass  by  insensible  gradations  into  the  secreting 


394 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


hepatic  cells,  but  usually  ceases  at  the  point  where  the  narrow  duct  expands  into  the 
wide  secreting  tubes  of  the  network.  In  a few  instances  I have  seen  tubes  contain- 
ing liver-cells  lined  with  this  delicate  epithelium,  observations  which  confirm  those 
of  Mr.  Wharton  Jones,  who  has  seen  hepatic  cells  in  the  smaller  ducts.  In  these 
cases  the  cells  may  have  accidentally  entered  the  ductal  portion  of  the  tube. 

The  arrangement  above  described  is  very  similar  to  that  which  occurs  in  the  gastric 
gland.  It  is  only  in  the  lower  part  (stomach  tube)  that  the  cells  of  spheroidal  epithe- 
lium (which  alone  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  take  part  in  the  secretion  of  the 
gastric  juice)  are  found.  The  upper  portion  or  duct  (stomach-cell)  is  lined  with 
columnar  or  subcolumnar  epithelium*.  The  secreting  cells  are  not  arranged  with 
any  order  or  regularity  round  the  basement  membrane  of  the  tube,  as  in  the  kidney, 
but  appear  to  fill  its  cavity;  so  that  the  secretion  having  escaped  from  the  cells  with 
or  without  their  liquefaction,  must  pass  off  by  the  slight  interstices  between  them. 
As  I have  before  remarked,  the  same  irregularity  occurs  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
secreting  cells  in  the  tubular  network  of  the  liver,  and  as  may  be  observed  in  a less 
remarkable  degree,  in  the  secreting  portion  of  many  other  glands,  as  the  pancreas, 
lacteal  glands,  sebaceous  and  sweat  glands. 

The  conclusions  to  which  I have  been  led  from  my  observations,  may  be  summed 
up  as  follows  : — 

1.  That  the  liver  of  vertebrate  animals  essentially  consists  of  two  “solid”  tubular 
networks  mutually  adapted  to  each  other.  One  of  these  networks  contains  the  liver- 
cells,  the  other  the  blood. 

2.  The  cell-containing  network  is  continuous  with  the  ducts.  The  small  delicate 
epithelial  cells  lining  the  latter  channels  contrast  remarkably  with  the  large  se- 
creting cells,  which  are  not  arranged  in  any  definite  manner  within  the  tubes  of  the 
network. 

3.  The  duct  is  many  times  narrower  than  the  tubular  cell-containing  network  at 
the  point  where  it  becomes  continuous  with  it. 

4.  Injection  passes  sometimes  on  one,  and  sometimes  on  the  other  side  of  the  tube, 
or  between  the  cells,  where  two  or  more  lie  across  the  tube.  As  injection  can  thus 
be  made  to  pass  readily  from  the  ducts  into  the  network  and  around  the  cells,  it 
follows  that  there  can  be  no  obstacle  to  the  passage  of  the  bile  along  the  same 
channels  in  the  opposite — its  natural  direction. 

5.  In  sotne  animals,  the  most  minute  ducts  are  directly  connected  with  the  tubes 
of  the  cell-containing  network.  Of  these  branches,  some  pass  amongst  the  most 
superficial  meshes  to  join  the  network  at  a deeper  part.  In  other  animals  the  finest 
ducts  form  a network  which  is  continuous  with  that  in  which  the  liver-cells  lie. 

6.  The  interlobular  ducts  do  not  anastomose,  but  the  branches  coming  oflf  from 
the  trunk  are  often  connected  with  each  other,  as  well  as  with  the  parent  trunk,  near 
their  origin  from  it,  by  intervening  branches. 

* Todp  and  Bowman’s  Physiology,  vol.  ii. 


ARRANGKAIENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


395 


7.  The  walls  of  the  smallest  ducts  are  composed  of  basement  membrane  only. 
The  thick  complex  coat  of  the  larger  ducts  contains  within  it  small  cavities  (the  so- 
called  glands  of  the  ducts),  by  which  the  bile  in  these  thick-walled  tubes  would  be 
brought  into  close  proximity  with  the  arteries,  veins  and  lymphatics,  which  are  very 
abundant  wherever  the  ducts  ramify. 

8.  The  office  of  the  vasa  aberrantia,  which  are  so  numerous  in  the  transverse  fissure 
of  the  human  liver  and  in  the  larger  portal  canals,  appears  to  be  similar  to  tliat  of 
the  cavities  in  the  walls  of  the  ducts.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  network  of 
vessels  ramifying  so  abundantly  in  the  coats  of  the  gall-bladder,  in  the  transverse 
fissure,  and  in  the  large  portal  canals,  is  arranged  in  a similar  manner,  each  branch 
of  artery  being  accompanied  by  two  branches  of  the  vein. 

9.  The  liver  is  therefore  a true  gland,  consisting  of  a formative  portion  and  a 
system  of  excretory  ducts  directly  continuous  with  it.  The  secreting  cells  lie  within  a 
delicate  tubular  network  of  basement  membrane,  through  the  thin  wall  of  which  they 
draw  from  the  blood  the  materials  of  their  secretion. 


Explanation  of  the  Plates. 

The  dotted  shading  in  the  Plates  corresponds  to  the  Prussian  blue  injection  represented  in  the  drawing. 

By  tracing  this  shading,  the  extent  to  which  the  injection  had  penetrated  in  the  preparation  is  shown. 

To  ascertain  the  diameter  of  any  object  represented,  it  is  only  necessary  to  compare  it  with  one  of  the  scales 

at  the  foot  of  the  Plates,  the  divisions  of  which  are  magnified  in  the  same  degree  as  the  drawing. 

PLATE  XIII. 

Fig.  1.  Vasa  aberrantia,  from  the  transverse  fissure  of  the  human  liver,  injected  with 
Prussian  blue.  a.  Branches  of  portal  vein  injected  with  white  lead.  h. 
Branches  of  hepatic  artery  injected  with  vermilion,  c.  Branches  of  duct 
or  vasa  aberrantia,  in  some  places  only  partially  injected. 

Figs.  2 & 3.  Ducts  with  vasa  aberrantia,  from  the  transverse  fissure  of  the  human 
liver,  injected  with  Prussian  blue. 

Fig.  4.  Dilated  portion  of  duct  from  the  transverse  fissure  of  the  human  liver,  giving 
off  long  straight  branches  to  secreting  structure. 

Fig.  5.  Vasa  aberrantia  and  parietal  appendages  of  ducts  from  the  transverse  fissure. 

This  drawing  represents  the  portion  of  fig.  3 marked  a,  magnified  8 
diameters. 

Fig.  6.  Interlobular  duct  with  lateral  appendages  and  one  or  two  irregular  branched 
ducts  or  vasa  aberrantia.  The  greater  number  of  the  lateral  channels  are 
seen  not  to  project  beyond  the  outer  surface  of  the  fibrous  coat  of  the 
duct,  a. 


396 


DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE 


Fig.  7*  Interlobular  duct  with  parietal  sacculi  of  the  pig,  injected  with  Prussian 
blue.  c.  Branch  of  artery. 

Fig.  8.  One  of  the  sacculi  marked  a,  fig.  10,  magnified  215  diameters,  a.  Fibrous 
coat  of  duct.  h.  Cavity  of  sacculus  filled  with  injection,  c.  Epithelium. 

Fig.  9.  A very  small  lobule  of  the  pig’s  liver,  showing  the  ducts  dividing  into  branches 
upon  the  surface  of  the  capsule. 

PLATE  XIV. 

Fig.  10.  Transverse  section  of  human  liver,  showing  the  general  ari  angement  of  the 
ducts  in  the  interlobular  fissures,  a.  Branches  of  portal  vein  injected  with 
white  lead.  h.  Small  branches  of  intralobular  vein,  injected  with  lake. 
c.  Capillaries  of  lobule,  represented  only  in  a few  situations,  d.  Branches 
of  duct  injected  with  Prussian  blue  passing  towards  the  lobules,  and  giving 
oflT  few  branches  in  their  course.  The  imperfect  manner  in  which  the 
lohules  are  mapped  out  in  the  human  subject  and  in  most  other  mamma- 
lian livers,  is  shown  in  this  figure. 

Fig.  11.  Interlobular  duct  of  the  rabbit,  injected  with  Prussian  blue.  a.  Trunk  of 
duct,  b.  Small  branches  passing  off  to  cell-containing  network,  and 
anastomosing  with  each  other.  c.  Commencement  of  cell-containing 
network  at  the  margin  of  the  lobule,  showing  its  continuity  with  the  finest 
ducts.  In  this  specimen  the  liver-cells  were  much  disintegrated  from 
disease.  The  tubes  of  the  cell-containing  network  were  occupied  with 
granular  matter  in  which  very  few  liver-cells  could  be  detected.  The 
injection  consequently  penetrated  very  readily  for  a considerable  distance, 
as  shown  by  the  tinting. 

Fig.  12.  Interlobular  duct,  parietal  sacculi,  and  branches  of  communication  {a)  from 
the  human  foetus.  At  h small  branches  of  the  ducts  are  seen  passing  off 
to,  and  becoming  continuous  with,  the  cell-containing  network  of  the 
lobule.  Injected  with  Prussian  blue. 

Fig.  13.  A corresponding  preparation  from  the  foetal  calf  near  the  full  time.  The 
sacculi  are  large  and  distinct.  In  this  figure  the  outline  of  the  portal  vein, 
which  was  injected  with  plain  size,  is  shown,  a.  Branches  of  duct  passing 
to  cell-containing  network  of  lobule. 

Fig.  14.  Interlobular  ducts  and  smaller  branehes  from  the  human  foetus,  showing 
their  anastomoses,  and,  at  a,  their  continuity  with  the  cell-containing 
network  at  the  margin  of  the  lobule,  b.  Section  of  a small  branch  of  the 
portal  vein  with  ducts  around  it,  which  have  been  cut  across  in  making 
the  section.  In  this  preparation  the  ducts  were  injected  with  carmine. 

Fig.  15.  A small  portal  canal  from  the  liver  of  the  seal.  The  portal  vein  injected 
with  plain  size,  and  the  duct  with  Prussian  blue.  a.  Artery,  b.  Duct. 


ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


397 


Small  branches  of  the  duct  upon  the  transparent  portal  vein  are  seen  to  be 
continuous  with  the  network  of  tubes  in  which  the  liver-cells  lie,  and  into 
which  network  a little  injection  has  passed  from  the  duct.  The  part  of 
the  cell-containing-  network  represented  in  this  figure  is  situated  immedi- 
ately round  the  portal  canals,  which  contain  but  little  areolar  tissue  in  the 
seal. 

Fig.  16.  Small  ducts  from  the  seal  injected  with  Prussian  blue,  showing  their  conti- 
nuity with  the  cell-containing  network  of  the  lobule.  At  a,  the  outlines  of 
a few  capillaries  of  the  portal  vein  injected  with  colourless  size  are  seen. 
h.  A small  branch  of  the  portal  vein.  The  narrowest  portions  of  the  duct 
in  this  preparation  have  been  distended  considerably  by  the  injection. 

PLATE  XV. 

Fig.  17.  Portion  of  cell-containing  network  of  human  foetus  at  the  point  of  entrance 
of  a small  branch  of  the  portal  vein  which  is  about  to  divide  into  capillaries. 
The  meshes  of  the  cell-containing  network  at  this  point  are  much  wider  than 
at  a greater  distance  from  the  circumference  of  the  lobule,  in  consequence 
of  the  vessels  being  larger.  The  outlines  of  the  tubes  of  the  network  and 
of  the  walls  of  the  capillaries  are  seen  to  be  separated  by  an  intervening, 
perfectly  transparent  material. 

Fig.  18.  Part  of  the  cell-containing  network  of  the  dog’s  liver  where  its  branches 
are  parallel,  altered  by  being  soaked  for  some  time  in  dilute  caustic  soda. 
A few  cells  are  seen,  but  the  greater  number  are  fused  together,  and  the 
tubes  are  chiefly  occupied  by  a yellow,  transparent,  highly  refracting 
substance,  in  which  numerous  oil-globules  are  contained,  a.  A tube 
stretched  and  separated  from  its  neighbours,  shovving  its  basement  mem- 
brane and  contents. 

Fig.  19.  A small  duct  from  the  human  liver  at  the  point  where  it  becomes  con- 
tinuous with  the  cell-containing  network.  The  cells  are  much  altered  in 
character  from  the  mode  of  preparing  the  specimen.  The  duct  is  very 
much  distended  with  injection. 

Fig.  20.  Section  of  the  liver  of  a man,  aged  43,  which  had  been  hardened.  Unin- 
jected. This  preparation  shows  the  continuity  of  the  most  minute  ducts 
with  the  cell-containing  network.  The  epithelium  of  the  smallest  ducts 
is  seen  in  this  specimen.  The  hepatic  cells  are  destroyed  by  the  action 
of  soda.  This  preparation  has  been  subjected  to  great  pressure  between 
the  glasses. 

Fig.  21.  A similar  preparation,  not  so  much  flattened  by  pressure,  a.  Finest  ducts. 
h.  A venous  capillary  cut  across,  c.  A small  artery. 

Fig.  22.  An  interlobular  duct  dividing  into  smaller  branches  upon  the  surface  of  a 

3 G 


MDCCCLVI. 


398  DR.  LIONEL  BEALE  ON  THE  ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  BILIARY  DUCTS. 


lobule  of  pig’s  liver:  injected  with  Prussian  blue.  The  injection  has 
entered  tlie  superficial  portion  of  the  cell-containing  network,  producing 
the  mottled  appearance  represented. 

Fig.  23.  A portion  of  cell-containing  network  near  the  surface  of  a lobule  from  the 
pig’s  liver,  injected  and  isolated.  The  injection  has  pressed  the  cells  to- 
wards one  side  of  the  tube,  and  partially  separated  them  from  each  other, 
and  has  thus  prevented  the  thin  wall  of  the  tube  from  being  in  close  con- 
tact with  them. 

Fig.  24.  Part  of  cell-containing  network  (pig),  showing  liver-cells,  granular  matter 
and  oil-globules  in  the  interior  of  the  tube.  In  one  part  the  tube  is  some- 
what dilated. 

Fig.  25.  Most  superficial  portion  of  the  cell-containing  network  (pig),  lying  partly 
in  the  fibrous  capsule  of  the  lobule,  and  partly  within  the  capsule.  The 
tubes  contain  a few  small  cells,  free  oil-globules  and  granular  matter. 
Partially  injected. 

Fig.  26.  Portion  of  cell- containing  network  within  the  capsule  of  the  lobule,  injected 
with  Prussian  blue.  Pig. 

Fig.  27.  A small  portion  of  fig.  25  distended  with  injection. 

Fig.  28.  Connexion  of  duct  with  cell-containing  network  from  a fatty  liver  of  the  pig : 

injected.  The  small  trunk  a gives  off  several  smaller  branches,  &,  not  more 
than  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  although  distended  by  the  injection 

which  has  reached  the  cell-containing  network.  The  tubes  of  the  latter 
are  four  or  five  times  wider  than  the  smallest  ducts. 

Fig.  29.  Part  of  cell-containing  network  and  finest  ducts  of  chick  on  the  15th  day 
of  incubation,  from  a preparation  which  had  been  hardened  in  alcohol 
and  soda. 

Fig.  30.  A similar  preparation  on  the  21st  day.  The  tubes  contain  much  oil. 

Fig.  31.  Branches  of  duct  of  newt  {Triton  cristatus).  At  a the  commencement  of 
the  tubes  of  the  cell-containing  network. 

Fig.  32.  Ducts  and  their  connexion  with  the  cell- containing  network.  Sturgeon. 
Injected. 

Fig.  33.  'DoqX,^  Lophius  piscatorius  \ injected.  Natural  size. 

Figs.  34,  35.  Finest  ducts  of  Lophius  and  their  connexion  with  cell-containing  net- 
work ; injected. 

Fig.  36.  Part  of  cell-containing  network.  Lophius. 

Fig.  37.  A similar  preparation  with  branches  of  capillary  vessels,  a. 

Fig.  38.  Portion  of  a large  duct  (Lophius),  with  a branch,  showing  epithelium  in  the 
interior,  an  internal  coat  composed  of  circular  muscular  fibres,  and  an 
external  thicker  coat  consisting  of  longitudinal  fibres. 


[ 399  ] 


XVII.  On  the  Enumeration  of  yi-edra  having  Triedral  Summits,  and  an  (x — \)-gonal 
Base.  By  the  Rev,  Thomas  P.  Kirkman,  M.A.  Communicated  by  A.  Cayley, 
F.R.S. 


Received  June  13, — Read  June  21,  1855. 

It  is  easily  proved  that  no  x-edron  has  a face  of  more  than  x—  I angles,  and  that, 
if  it  has  an  (x— l)-gonal  face,  it  has  at  least  two  triangular  faces.  The  object  of  this 
paper  is  to  determine  the  number  of  .r-edra  which  have  an  {x — l)-gonal  face,  and  all 
their  summits  triedral,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  number  of  .r-acra  which  have 
an  (^— l)-edral  summit,  and  all  their  faces  triangular. 

We  may  call  the  {x — l)-gonal  face  the  base  of  the  x-edron.  All  the  faces  will  be 
collateral  with  that  base,  and  k of  them  will  be  triangular  faces.  If  we  suppose 
those  k triangles  to  become  infinitely  small,  in  any  .r-edron  A,  we  have  as  the  result 
an  (j:— A:)-edron  B,  having  only  triedral  summits,  none  of  whose  triangular  faces 
was  a triangle  of  A.  And  it  is  evident  that  there  is  only  one  (,i  — A:)-edron  B from 
which  A can  be  cut  by  sections  that  shall  remove  no  edge  entirely,  and  shall  leave 
untouched  no  triangle  of  B.  It  is  plain  also  that  B cannot  have  more,  but  may  have 
fewer,  triangles  than  A ; for  if  the  vanishing  of  a triangle  of  A gave  rise  to  two  tri- 
angles in  B,  B,  having  two  contiguous  triangles,  and  all  its  summits  triedral,  would 
be  a tetraedron. 

If  now  we  suppose  the  triangular  faces  of  B to  vanish,  of  which  there  must  at  least 
be  two,  there  will  arise  a polyedron  C,  having  only  triedral  summits,  and  fewer  faces 
than  B.  In  like  manner  C is  reduced  by  the  vanishing  of  its  triangles  to  a solid  of 
still  fewer  faces,  and,  by  this  continual  evanescence  of  triangular  faces,  we  shall 
finally  arrive,  either  at  a tetraedron,  or  a pentaedron  with  two  triangular  faces. 

Hence  it  appears,  that  every  :r-edron  having  its  base  (a?— l)-gonal,  and  all  its  sum- 
mits triedral,  can  be  cut  from  one  of  these  two  simple  solids,  by  reversing  the  above 
process,  i.  e.  by  cutting  away  k summits  of  the  base  of  a polyedron  B,  having  k—h 
triangular  faces,  so  as  to  leave  none  of  those  k—h  triangles  untouched.  And  by  this 
process  no  polyedron  A can  be  twice  generated.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  we  are 
all  through  handling  no  polyedra  but  those  whose  summits  are  all  triedral. 

The  pentaedron  on  a 4-lateral  base,  has  around  that  base  the  faces  3434.  This  I 
call  a doubly  reversible  polyedron,  as  it  exhibits  in  the  faces  about  the  base  the  series 
34  repeated,  and  reads  backwards  and  forwards  the  same. 

If  we  cut  every  base  summit  of  the  tetraedron,  we  obtain  a heptaedron  having 
around  its  hexagonal  base  the  faces  353535.  This  I call  a trebly  reversible  hepta- 
edron. 


3 G 2 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEORA. 


40{) 

If  we  cut  a summit  of  either  triangle  of  the  pentaedron,  we  obtain  the  system  35344 
about  the  pentagonal  base.  This  is  a reversible  hexaedron. 

By  cutting  the  first  triangle  of  this  with  the  pentagon  and  the  second  with  the 
adjoining  quadrilateral,  we  obtain  the  system  4364354,  which  I call  an  irreversible 
octaedron  ; it  does  not  read  backwards  and  forwards  the  same. 

The  double  reversible  3434,  by  one  section  of  its  triangles,  becomes  435435,  a 
double  ij'reversible,  and  by  another,  436344,  a reversible  heptaedron. 

And  the  system  353535  gives,  by  cutting  the  triangles  in  one  way,  the  irreversible 
437346345,  and,  in  another  way,  the  trebly  irreversible  436436436. 

These  six  varieties  comprise  all  the  polyedra  that  have  only  triedral  summits. 
They  are  all  irreversible,  reversible,  doubly  irreversible,  doubly  reversible,  trebly  irre- 
versible, or  trebly  reversible. 

For  if  any  polyedron  exhibited  in  the  faces  about  the  base  the  fourfold  repetition 
of  any  period  of  m faees  containing  k triangles,  the  vanishing  of  the  Ak  triangles 
would  give  rise  to  a fourfold  repetition  of  a period  of  m—k  faces,  which  would  con- 
tain k'  triangles,  k'  being  not  more  than  k-,  and  this  system  around  the  base  would 
reduce,  by  the  vanishing  of  the  Ak’  triangles  in  it,  to  a fourfold  repetition  of  a period 
of  m — k — k'  faces  ; and  we  should  obtain  at  last  a base  of  4(m— K)  sides,  admitting 
no  further  reduction  by  the  vanishing  of  triangles,  i.  e.  we  should  obtain  a pyramid 
having  a tetraedral  summit;  which  is  impossible. 

Problem. — An  A?-et!ron  P being  given  on  an  1-gonal  base,  and  having  k triangular 
faces,  it  is  required  to  determine  how  many  (x+^+O-^dra  can  be  cut  from  it  by  the 
removal  of  k-\-l  base  summits,  so  that  none  of  the  k triangles  shall  remain  untouched, 
and  so  that  no  (j?+A-+/)-edron  shall  be  the  reflected  image  of  any  other. 

First,  let  P have  about  its  base  a series  of  x faces  which  read  differently  both 
backwards  and  forwards  from  every  face,  i.  e.  let  it  be  an  irreversible  a7-edron. 

As  no  two  contiguous  faces  about  the  base  can  be  triangles,  if  x>4  (for  then 
there  would  be  a teti’aedral  summit  at  least,  at  one  extremity  of  their  common  side), 
1),  and  k-\-l'^x—  J. 

We  are  bound  to  cut  each  of  the  k triangles  once,  which  can  be  done  in  2*  ways, 
giving  2^  different  irreversible  arrangements  of  1 faces.  Next  we  have  to  cut 

I of  the  remaining  x—\—k  angles  about  the  base  of  P.  These  may  be  any  I out  of 

r— 1— /r,  and  this  gives  us  2^^. — arrangements  of  our  sections.  But 

these  will  not  be  all  different  arrangements.  Any  one  of  them  will  contain  e cases 
of  twice  cut  triangles  of  P,  thus  made  into  e pentagons,  and  consequently  l—e 
triangles  which  are  not  cut  from  triangles. 

Let  us  suppose  e=2,  the  case  in  which  two  pentagons  are  newly  made,  standing  thus, 

...c353c?e353/... 

Of  these  four  triangles,  two  were  introduced  in  the  distribution  of  our  k sections. 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA. 


401 


and  two  others  in  that  of  the  I sections,  which  may  happen  in  2^  different  ways.  'J'his 
arrang-ement,  c353</e35^,  in  which  cdef  are  supposed  not  to  be  triangles,  will  then  be 
found  2^  times  with  every  disposition  of  the  remaining  k — 2 triangles  first  cut,  and 
with  every  (/— 2)  sections  of  angles  not  in  triangles,  of  which  angles  the  number  is 
x—\—2k.  We  have  therefore  counted  the  completed  arrangement  ...c353de353f..., 


, t t (ar— 1— ;t) 

in  the  number  2 

fl+l 


instead  of 


i\-i 


2^  .2*‘ 


(1-2+  I 


times, 


2k-2 


(a? — 1 — 2ky~^^~^ 
f/-2  + l 


times. 


The  same  error  has  been  made  with  every  value  of  e:^k,  and  e>»/,  or  e:t>  the  least  of 
k and  /,  and  this  with  every  set  of  e twice  cut  triangles  that  can  be  selected  out  of  k. 


Hence  there  is  an  error  made  in  excess,  in  2*- 


{w — 1 — 

1 


of 


(2'—  1).2''-^- 


(■r— 1 — 2A:)^-^l-‘  ^^1-' 
il—e+  1 (e  + 1 ^ 


for  every  value  of  the  least  of  k and  I ; for,  in  supposing  e twice  cut  triangles, 
we  assume  that  e>A:,  and  that  k-{-l—k<^e.  The  number  required  in  the  problem  is 
thus  proved  to  be 


(a?— A — !)*■■ 


I/+  1 


2,.(2*— 1)2*-". 


(a?  — 1 — 

l+i-e 


le+\ 


for  all  positive  values  of  e not  greater  than  either  k ov  1:  which  was  to  be  found. 

This  function  I shall  denote  by  the  symbol  k,  1).  It  expresses  the  number  of 
(j?+/i’+/)-edra  that  can  be  made  from  any  .r-edron  having  an  (j?— l)-gonal  base  and 
k triangular  faces,  of  which  no  two  are  contiguous,  by  removing  k-\-l  of  the  summits 
about  the  base,  so  that  no  edge  shall  be  entirely  removed,  and  that  no  one  of  the  k 
triangles  shall  remain  untouched.  Of  course  k-{-l':if>x—\.  Its  values  are 


ii{x,  k,  0)  = 2'^;  ii{x,  k,  1)  = 2*  \2x—3k — 2)  ; 


ii{x,  1,  l)  = 2 


{x  — 2Y~'^  (a?— 3)^“*!“'  . 


/7+r 


(I 


ii{x,  k,  2)  = 2’‘-\l{x-3){x-4:)-k.{x-\-2k)']-3.2’‘-\k.{k-\); 


2,  1)  =4.fc2^1'-4. <-2=^-3. 


\\+l 

&c. 


n 

&c. 


\l^ 


Let  I(j?,  k)  be  the  total  number  of  irreversible  j:-edra  on  an  x— 1-gonal  base  that 
have  k triangular  faces.  Then 

l{x,  k){ii.(x,  k,  /)},  part  of  l{x-\-k-^l,  k-\-l), 

is  the  whole  number  of  from  irreversible  j-edra 

having  k triangles,  so  as  to  have  k-[-l  triangles.  Others  can  be  cut  to  be  also  part  of 


402 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  FOLYEDRA. 


I(a?+A-+/,  k-\-l),  from  other  x-eclra  having  k'  triangles,  by  removing  k'-\-l'  summits 
about  the  base,  none  of  the  k'  triangles  being  untouched,  if  /r'+/'  = A:+/. 

Next  let  our  subject  of  operation  be  an  irreversible  containing  more  than  one 
period  of  faces  about  the  base.  If  it  be  a doubly  irreversible,  the  base  will  be  2x-gona\, 
as  every  face  will  be  opposite  to  a similar  one.  We  have  then  two  periods  each  of 
X faces,  and  if  we  operate  on  one  of  these  so  as  to  remove  angles,  leaving  no  triangle 
in  the  period  untouched,  and  then  repeat  the  operation  exactly  in  order  in  the  other 
period,  we  shall  obtain  a doubly  irreversible  for  our  result. 

Let  P(2a’d-1,  2k)  be  the  whole  number  of  doubly  irreversible  (2x+l)-edra  on  a 

2x-gonal  base,  having  2k  triangles.  Then  k,  ^ is  the  number  of  ways  in 

which  we  can  remove  k-\-^  summits  from  one  period,  and  therefore 

P(2j;+1,  2k)ii(x-^l,  k,^,  part  of  V‘{2x-\-  \ -\-2k-\-l,  2k-\-l), 


is  the  whole  number  of  doubly  irreversibles  having  2k-\-l  triangles,  and  a (2^7+2^+/)- 
gonal  base,  that  can  be  cut  from  all  the  P(2j?+1,  2k)  polyedra  before  us. 

If/  is  not  an  even  number,  n^x+1,  k,  ^ is  to  be  considered  nothing;  for  it  is  im- 
possible to  retnove  a fractional  number  of  summits. 

We  can  cut  also  from  these  P. (2x-|-l,  2k)  doubly  irreversibles  a number  of  singly 
irreversibles.  If  each  of  these  doubly  irreversibles  were  single,  it  would  give  rise  to 
ii{2x-\-\,  2k,  1)  singly  irreversibles  ; but  the  double  character  of  the  subject  of  opera- 
tion causes  every  method  of  removing  2^:+/ angles,  which  is  not  alike  in  both  periods 
of  the  subject,  to  appear  twice  in  the  number  just  written.  That  is,  we  are  to  sub- 
tract from  this  number  all  the  doubly  irreversibles  that  can  be  made,  and  take  half 
the  remainder,  which  is,  after  division, 


^\ii{2x-\-\,  2k,  l)  — ii(^-\-l,k,^^- 


The  second  term  of  this  is  zero  when  I is  odd.  We  obtain  thus  for  the  number  of 
singly  irreversibles  that  can  be  cut  to  have  2k-\-l  triangles  from  all  the  V{2x-{-\,  2k) 
under  consideration,  ' 

P.(2x-\-l,  2k)  .\^ii{2x-\-\ , 2k,  /)  — 

a part  of  \{2x-{-\-\-2k-\-l,  2k-\-l). 

Next  let  us  consider  the  operations  that  can  be  effected  on  triply  irreversible 
(3.r-l- ] )-edra  having  ^k  triangles.  Let  their  number  be  P(3.t7+1,  ^k).  It  is  easily 

proved  by  a repetition  of  the  preceding  argument,  that  k,  ^ is  the  number 

of  triply  Irreversibles  that  can  be  cut  from  each  of  them,  and  that 


3 


//(3a?-j-l,  ^k, 


k 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEURA. 


403 


is  that  of  the  singly  irreversibles,  where  the  appearance  of  a fraction  in  the  function 
ii,  reduces  it,  as  it  always  must,  to  zero.  That  is,  we  obtain 

P(3x-i-l,  Ti,  as  P.(3.r+3A:-f  Z+1, 

ZZ(3a?+l,  ^k,  /)  — k, 

as  a portion  of  I(3a?+3A:+Z+ 1 , 3Z:+/). 

From  an  irreversible  no  reversible  can  be  cut  by  this  removing  of  summits;  for  as 
the  summits  of  triangles  of  a reversible  correspond  in  pairs,  the  arrangement  of  faces 
about  the  base  will  still  be  reversible,  if  all  the  triangles  are  supposed  to  vanish. 

Let  us  now  operate  on  a reversible  polyedron,  whose  faces  about  the  base  read 
backwards  and  forwards  alike. 

There  will  be  a certain  period  ahc klm  reversed,  in  one  of  the  three  ways, 

ahc.,..klmlk....ch, 
ahc klmmlk ch, 

or  ahc klmmlk cha. 

There  is  in  any  of  these  what  may  be  called  an  axis  of  reversion,  which  in  the  first 
passes  through  the  faces  a and  m,  in  the  second  through  a and  between  two  m’s,  in 
the  third  between  two  a’s  and  between  two  m’s. 

It  is  evident  that  the  number  of  triangles  about  the  base  of  a reversible  cannot  be 
odd,  unless  the  axis  of  reversion  passes  through  a triangle  ; as  all  faces  recur  in  order 
reversed,  through  which  that  axis  does  not  pass  ; and  the  base  must  be  (2a?+ l)-gonal, 
if  the  axis  passes  through  one  face  only.  The  third  case,  of  an  axis  of  reversion  pass- 
ing through  no  face,  does  not  occur  when  all  the  summits  are  triedral. 

Fi  rst  let  the  base  be  even,  and  let  the  number  of  triangles  be  even  also ; we  have 
to  consider  the  operations  practicable  upon  a (2x+l)-edron  R reversible,  with  2k 
triangles.  Some  (2^+ 1 +2Z:+/)-edra  can  be  cut  from  it  reversible,  and  some  irre- 
versible, by  the  removing  oi  2k-\-l  summits  of  the  base,  leaving  none  of  the  2k  tri- 
angles untouched. 

A reversible  so  cut  will  have  on  either  side  of  its  axis  of  reversion  half  the  2^-1-Z 
added  triangles,  unless  it  passes  through  an  added  triangle,  in  which  case  it  will  have 
on  either  side  ^(2^-|-/— 1)  of  them. 

LetZ=2/';  then  the  number  of  possible  operations  on  one  side  of  the  axis  of  rever- 
sion, which  exhibits  x summits,  is  ii{x,  k,  I')  ; each  of  which  gives  by  repeating  it 
backwards  one  of  our  reversible  (2^+ 1 +2Z’-l-2/')-edra.  As  the  axis  does  nut  pass 
through  a summit,  I cannot  be  odd,  for  the  added  triangles  are  all  in  pairs. 

If  then  R(2x+1,  2k)  be  the  total  number  of  reversible  (2,r-|- l)-edra  having  2k  tri- 
angles, we  obtain 

^{2x-\-\i2k).n(^,k,^,  part  of  R(2.r-1- I H-2A:-[-Z,  2Z’-i-Z). 


and 


P(3j?+1,  3Zr)^ 


404 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA. 


Now  take  the  reversible  (2^+ l)-edron  R'  having  2^+1  triangles;  the  axis  of  rever- 
sion passes  through  one  of  them.  As  this  triangle  cannot  be  untouched,  it  must  be 
twice  touched,  so  that  we  have  only  other  seetions  to  make,  one  half 

of  these  on  the  x—\  summits  on  one  side  of  the  axis,  neglecting  the  summit  of  the 
central  triangle.  The  possible  operations  are 


or,  if  R(2^-l-l,  2k-\-\)  be  the  total  number  of  reversible  (2a?-l- l)-edra  having  2A:-1-1 
triangles,  we  obtain 

R(2x-1-  I,  2k-\- 1 )ii(^x,  h,  part  of  K{2x-\-2-\-2k-\-l,  2k-\- 1 -p/). 

We  take  now  a reversible  R"  having  a (2x — l)-gonal  base,  and  2k  triangles. 

The  axis  of  reversion  passes  through  a summit  and  through  a face,  which  we  shall 
suppose  to  be  not  a triangle.  It  is  not  difficult  to  prove  that  it  can  be  no  triangle  if 
2^:— 1 >3,  all  the  summits  being  triedral. 

We  have  on  either  side  of  the  axis  ^{2x  — 2)  summits,  that  in  the  axis  being 
neglected,  and  half  the  2k  triangles.  We  have  to  distribute  sections  on  these 
X—  ] summits.  The  number  of  ways  to  do  it  is 


which  requires  I to  be  even ; or  if  I be  odd,  we  may  cut  the  summit  in  the  axis,  and 
distribute  sections  on  the  ,r— 1 summits,  giving  u(^x,  A,  These  opera- 

tions reversed  on  the  other  side  of  the  axis  give  us  all  the  possible  results. 

If  then  R(2x,  2k)  be  the  total  number  of  reversible  2a?-edra  having  2k  triangles, 
we  can  cut  from  all  these 

R(2^,  2k)^^i(^x,  A,  ^-[■iii^x,  A,  ^)| 

(2x-i-2A-l-/)-edra  reversible,  having  2A+/  triangles.  One  of  the  terms  in  the  second 
factor  is  always  zero.  The  polyedra  so  cut  are  a portion  of  R(2:r-1-2A-1-/,  2A-|-/). 

When  k-\-lz=x—-i,  all  the  angles  about  the  base  of  the  reversible  with  A triangles 
are  cut,  and  the  result  is  of  necessity  reversible. 

But  if  A-l-/<.r~-l,  some  of  the  results  of  k-\-l  sections  will  be  irreversible.  The 
whole  number  of  results,  if  we  treated  the  w-edron  R or  R'  or  R"  as  irreversible,  would 
be  ii{n,  A,  /),  but  these  are  not  all  different. 

They  will  all,  except  the  reversible  ones,  have  a different  order  on  the  two  sides  of 
the  axis  of  reversion  ; and  each  irreversible  will  occur  twice,  the  second  time  reverted 
by  exchanging  the  arrangements  of  the  two  sides  of  the  axis,  so  as  to  make  a poly- 
edron  and  its  reflected  image.  As  we  are  not  to  count  these  reflexions,  we  have  to 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKxMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA. 


405 


subtract  from  ii{n,k,l)  all  the  possible  reversible  results,  and  divide  the  remainder 
by  two.  That  is,  by  what  precedes,  we  obtain  from  R,  R'  and  R" 

l|n(2a7+ 1,  2h,  l)  — ii(^x,  k,  ^ j, 

2k-{-],l)  — ii(x,  k,  j’ 

^\^i{2x,  2k,  l)  — ii(^x,  k,  0 —ii(x,  k,  j* 

It  is  to  be  understood  in  these  formulae  that 

2k-\-l<2x  in  the  first, 

2^d-l+/<2.r  in  the  second, 

2k-\-l<2x — 1 in  the  third. 

If  we  multiply  the  first  by  R(2xd-1,  2k),  the  second  by  R(2a:'+1,  2^+1),  and  the 
third  by  R(2a?,  2k),  we  obtain  the  corresponding  portions  of  I(2^+l  -\-2k-{-l,  2k-\-l), 
I(2x+2+2^+Z,  2/C+1  + /),  and  l{2x-\-2k-^l,  2k+l). 

Let  us  next  operate  on  a doubly  reversible  (4.r'|- l)-edron,  with  Ak  triangles.  All 
these  are  cut  from  the  pentaedron  3434,  and  by  the  addition  of  an  even  number  of 
triangles  in  each  period.  The  operations  by  which  doubly  reversibles  are  cut  from  a 
doubly  reversible  are  simply  those  whereby  reversibles  are  cut  from  the  reversible 

period  of  2x  summits,  containing  2k  triangles,  being  in  number  n(^x  + 1,  h by 

what  has  preceded.  Or,  if  R^(4A’d-l,  Ak)  be  the  number  of  (4a7+l)-edra  doubly 
reversible,  with  Ak  triangles, 

R^(4a?+1,  Ak)  .a.  ^^+1,  k,  =R^(4(a?+Z’)+/+l,  Ak-\-l), 

there  being  no  more ; for  one  of  these  latter  can  be  cut  from  nothing  but  a doubly 
reversible  with  Ak-\-l  faces  fewer. 

From  the  same  (4A^+l)-edra  can  be  cut  doubly  irreversibles,  namely  so  many 
as  the  irreversibles  producible  from  sections  of  one  period,  or  from  a reversible 
(2A:+l)-edron  with  2k  triangles.  This  number  is,  as  just  proved, 

•||«7(^2a?+1,  2k,  ^—ii(x-\-\,k, 

which  multiplied  byR^(4j';+l,  4Zr),  constitutes  a portion  of  V .{Ax-\-Ak-\-l-\-\,  Ak-\-l). 

As  a doubly  reversible  is  also  a reversible,  reversibles  can  be  cut  from  it.  It  is  to 
be  observed  that,  as  a reversible,  it  has  two  axes  of  reversion,  as  indeed  every  2;«-ly 
reversible  has.  Thus  the  enneaedron  35363536  has  an  axis  through  the  two  penta- 
gons and  another  through  the  hexagons.  If  we  operate  on  one  side  of  the  axis  for 
irreversible  results,  and  revert  our  operations  on  tlie  other  side,  we  obtain  reversibles. 
The  number  of  such  results  in  either  position  of  the  axis  of  reversion  is  that  of  the 

irreversibles  producible  by  ^2A-+^^  sections  of  a reversible  (2x-j-l)  gon  with  2k 

3 H 


MDCCCLVJ. 


406 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA. 


triangles,  or 

2k,  ^^—n(x+\,  ; 

whence  we  obtain,  from  both  }30sitions  of  the  axis, 


R".(4j?+1,  Ak).^ii(^.v+\,  2k,  , k,  ^y| 

as  part  of  11(4.^+ 1 +4A:  + /,  4A’+/). 

If  we  forget  for  a moment  the  character  of  one  of  these  R^(4w+1,  4A),  and  treat  it 
as  an  irreversible,  we  obtain  by  4A-f-/  sections  Ak,  1)  results.  Of  these  the 

doubly  reversibles  can  occur  only  once,  every  doubly  irreversible  will  occur  twice,  in 
one  result  as  the  reflexion  of  the  other;  every  reversible  will  occur  twice,  tbe  opera- 
tions in  the  first  period  in  the  second  result  being  those  of  the  second  period  in  the 
first ; and  every  irreversible  will  occur  four  times,  twice  by  the  exchange  of  the 
operations  on  the  first  period  for  those  on  the  second,  and  twice  again  by  the  rever- 
sion of  all  the  operations,  producing  reflected  images  of  two  preceding  results. 

That  is,  if  we  subtract  from  ii{4x-\-\,  4k,  1)  all  the  doubly  reversibles,  twice  the 
reversibles,  and  twice  the  doubly  reversibles  that  can  be  cut  from  a doubly  reversible 
(4.r-l- l)-gon  having  4k  triangles,  by  4A-1-/  sections,  there  remains  four  times  the  num- 
ber of  irreversibles  that  can  be  cut  from  it,  by  4k-\-l  sections. 

This  remainder,  divided  by  4,  is 


n{4x-\-\,  4k,  l)  — ii[x-\-\,  k 


— 1 , 2k,  gj— k, 

-|/y2.r-{-l,  2k,  /?yx-[-],  k, 

=^1  ii{4x-\-\,  Ak,  l)  + 2ii{x-\-\,  k,  j)— 3/7(2^+ 1,  2k, 


which,  multiplied  by  R'(4x-1-  1,  4k),  is  to  be  added  to  I(4a;-i- 1 +4A-1-/,  4A  + /). 


It  remains  that  we  handle  now  trebly  reversible  (6.r+ l)-edra,  having  6A  triangles. 
If  j?>l,  the  number  of  triangles  in  a triply  reversible  cannot  be  less  than  Qk,  as 
they  are  all  cut  from  the  heptaedron  h35353,  by  an  even  numbei’  of  sections  in  every 
period.  By  operating  on  one  reversible  period  of  2x  summits  and  2k  triangles  for 
reversibles  by  ^(6A-|-3/)  sections,  we  obtain  all  the  triply  reversibles.  The  number 

of  these  so  found  is  n.{^-\-\,  k,^,  giving  so  many  (6x-l- 1 -|-6A TSO-cdra  triply 

reversible  with  Qk-\-3l  triangles,  for  each  subject;  and  in  all 

IT(6x+l,  6A)(/7(:r-}-l,  k,  =:IT(6A-f  1 +6A+3/,  GA-fS/). 

1 he  number  of  triply  irreversibles  is  equal  to  that  of  the  irreversibles  producible 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA. 


407 


from  a reversible  period  of  2x  summits  and  2k  triangles  by  ^(6/c+3/)  sections,  and 
is,  by  what  precedes, 

^\i.i{2x-\-\,  2k,  /)— k, 

from  each  subject  of  operation.  This,  multiplied  by  R^(6xH- 1, 6Zr),  is  to  be  added  to 
P(6j:+1  + 6^-1-3/,  6A+3Z). 

The  reversibles  obtainable  from  a triply  irreversible  are  found  only  about  one  axis 
of  reversion.  Thus  735373537353  has  only  one  axis  through  a heptagon  and  a pen- 
tagon. We  are  to  cut  by  \{Qk-\-2l)  sections  on  one  side  of  this  axis  all  possible 
irreversibles  from  a reversible  system  of  3j?  summits  and  ^k  triangles.  These  results 
reverted  on  the  other  side  of  the  axis,  will  give  all  possible  reversibles.  Among  these 
will  be  all  triply  reversible  (6a;-l- 1 +6Z--l-2/)-edra,  with  Qk-\-2l  triangles,  for  these  are 
all  reversible  ; and  none  of  these  can  occur  more  than  once.  We  have  these  to  sub- 
tract from  our  results,  leaving 

ii{^x-\- 1 , ^k,  1)  —ii 

reversibles  from  every  subject ; which  number,  multiplied  by  R^(6a?-1-1,  Qk),  forms 
part  of  R(6a^-l-l+6Z:+2/,  Qk-\-2l). 

If  we  treated  a triply  reversible  as  an  irreversible  by  Qk-\-l  sections,  we  should 

ii{Qx-^\,  6k,  /)  results. 

Among  these  every  triply  reversible  is  found  once;  every  triply  irreversible  twice, 
one  place  showing  the  reflected  image  of  the  other  ; every  reversible  three  times,  each 
time  the  same  operations  commencing  at  a different  period;  and  every  irreversible 
six  times,  being  begun  both  backwards  and  forwards  in  three  different  periods.  If 
then  we  subtract  from  u{6x-\-\,  6k,  1)  every  triply  reversible,  twice  the  triply  irre- 
visibles,  and  thrice  the  reversibles  that  can  be  made  by  6k-\-l  sections  of  a triply 
reversible  (6a; fl-  l)-edron  having  6k  triangles,  there  will  remain  six  times  the  number  of 
irreversibles  that  can  be  so  cut  from  the  same.  This  remainder,  after  division  by  6,  is 

|^|z7(6a;-f- 1,  6k,  k,  ^ — ii(^x-\-\,  2k,  k, 

— oii(^3x-{-l,  3k,  0 -|-3^7^a;-l- 1,  k, 

=^|n(6a?-|- 1,  6k,  l)-\-3U(^x-\-\,  k,  ^—ii(2x-\-\,  2k,  ^ — 3/7^3a;-l- 1,  3k,  0|, 

which,  multiplied  by  R^(6a;-f-l,  6Z-),  forms  part  of  I(6a;-1- 1 +6Z--1-Z,  6k-\-l). 

It  is  most  convenient  to  treat  the  case  of  the  triply  reversible  having  only  three 
triangles  by  itself.  From  this  heptaedron  can  be  cut  one  triply  reversible  by  cut- 
ting every  summit  of  the  base.  One  triply  irreversible  only  can  be  made,  a deca- 
edron,  by  cutting  each  triangle  once.  Two  reversibles  can  be  cut,  by  four  sections, 

3 H 2 


^x-f-l,  k,  ^ 


408 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA, 


differing-  in  the  manner  of  cutting-  the  triangle  through  which  the  axis  of  reversion 
does  not  pass,  giving  two  reversible  11-edra.  Three  irreversibles  can  be  cut  from  it, 
one  by  three,  another  by  four,  a third  by  five  sections,  as  is  evident  on  a moment’s 
consideration,  giving  a lO-edron,  11-edron,  and  12-edron, 

We  can  now  collect  into  one  group  all  the  formulae  above  deduced,  which  con- 
tain the  complete  solution  of  our  problem  ; to  find  the  number  of  these  x-edra  on  an 
(x— l)-g-onal  base.  There  is  no  ambiguity  in  the  case  of  two  (x— l)-gonal  faces,  for 
the  figure  is  always  identical  with  itself  whichever  be  considered  the  base,  and  can 
have  only  two  triangles. 

Let  Il(x,  k,  1)  or  IR(x,  k,  1)  be  the  number  of  irreversible  (x+Zc+Zj-edra  that  can 
be  cut  to  have  {k-\-l)  triangles  from  an  irreversible  or  reversible  x-edron  having  k 
triangles,  the  capital  on  the  right  denoting-  the  subject  of  operation : {k-\-l)<x. 

n(x,  k,  l)  =li(x,  k,  /), 


lR(2x+l,  2k^\,  1) 


lTR^(4x+l,  Ak,  1)  =ii{x-\-\,  k,  \l), 

ITT(4x-l-l,  Ak,  1)  =i{n(2x+l,  2k,  \l)  — ii{x-\-\,  k, 

RR^(4x+l,  Ak,  1)  =ii{2x-\-\,  2k,  \l)  — ii{x-\-\,  k,  \l), 

IR^(4x+ 1,  4/f, /)  n{Ax-\-\,  Ak,  l)-\-2n{^-\-\,  k,^-^—iiii{2x-\-\ , 2k,  \l)  ; 


R^R^(6x+l,  Qk,  1)  =^7(x-f  1,  k,  1/),  R^R«(7,  3,  3)=1, 

lTT(6x+  1,  6/i-,  1)  =^{/7(2x+l,  2k,  i/)  — k,  ^l)], 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA. 


409 


RR^(6a’+l,  6k,  1)  =^■^■(3x+l,  3A-,  k,  ^l),  RR^(7,  3,  \)  — 2, 

IR®(6oC+l,  6k,  1)  =^{^7(6.r+l,  6k,  Z)+3ii(a:+l,  k,  ^l) 

—u(2x-j-l,  2k,  — Zk,  \l)), 

IR^(7,  3,  2)  =IR=^(7,  3,  1)  = IR=*(7,  3,  0)  = 1 : 

rR'"(j:+l,  k,  x—k)-=.6, 

for  if  all  the  summits  of  a reversible  are  cut,  the  result  is  reversible. 

In  IT(x,  k,  1),  rR’”(j:,  k,  1),  R”R’"(a?,  k,  1),  the  second  capital  marks  the  character 
and  multiplicity  of  the  a?-edra  having  k triangles,  from  which  are  cut  the  {x-\-k-{-l)- 
edra  having  k-\-l  triangles,  of  which  the  character  and  multiplicity  are  denoted  by 
the  first. 

To  show  the  use  of  these  equations,  we  can  easily  by  trial  verify  the  following : — 
R^(4,  3)  = 1,  R^(5,  2)  = 1,  R(6,  2)=1, 

R(7,  2)=1,  R’(7,  3)=1,  P(7,2)  =1, 

R(8,  2)  =2,  1(8,2)  =1,  1(8,3)  =1, 

R(9,  3)=2,  R(9,  2)  =2,  R"(9,  4)  = 1, 

1(9,  3)  =3,  1(9,  2)  =2,  P(9,  2)  =2  ; 

then  to  find  the  decaedra  on  a 9-gonal  base,  with  only  triedral  summits,  we  first  write 
down  the  classes, 

R(10,  2)  = R(8,  2).RR(8,  2,  0) ; 

1(10,  2)  =R(8,  2).IR(8,  2,  0)  + I(8,  2). 11(8,  2,  0)  ; 

1(10,  3)  =R^(7,  3).IR^(7,  3,  0)+R(7,  2).IR(7,  2,  1)  + P(7,  2).IP(7,  2,  1) ; 

P(10,  3)  = RX7,  3).PR^(7,  3,  0)  ; 

R(10,  4)  = R(6,  2).RR(6,  2,  2)  ; 

1(10,  4)  =R(6,  2).IR(6,  2,  2). 

That  is,  by  what  precedes, 

R(10,  2)=2.m(4,  1,  0)  = 2.2  = 4; 

1(10,  2)  =2.i{«(8,  2,  0)-m(4,  1,  0)} 

= 2.1{4-2}=2; 

1(10,  3)  =l.i{n(7,  3,  0)-m(3,  1,  0)}  + l.i«(7,  2,  l)  + l.i»(7,  2,  1) 

= 1{8_2}+^+^  = 13; 

P(10,  3)  = 1.1  = 1 ; 

R(10,  4)  = 1.^(3,  1,  1)  = 1.(6-5)="1  ; 

1(10,  4)  =1.1{27(6,  2,  2)-n(3,  1,  1)}  = 1 .i{72-108  + 41-l}  = 2. 


410 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA. 


Next  to  find  the  hendecaedra,  we  write  down 
1(11,  5)  =R(6,  2).IR(6,  2,  3)=0; 

R(ll,  5)  — R(6,  2).RR(6,  2,  3)  ; 

R(l],  4)  = R(7,  2).RR(7,  2,  2)  + R®(7,  3).RR^(7,  3,  1); 

1(11,  4)  =R(7,  2).IR(7,  2,  2)+P(7,  2).IP(7,  2,  2)  + R^(7,  3).IR^(7,  3,  1) ; 
P(11,4)  = P(7,  2).PP(7,  2,  2); 

R(ll,  3)  = R(8,  2).RR(8,  2,  1) ; 

1(11,  3)  =R(8,  2).IR(8,  2,  1)  + I(8,  2). 11(8,  2,  1)  + I(8,  3). 11(8,  3,  0)  ; 
R(ll,  2)  = R(9,  2).RR(9,  2,  0)  ; 

1(11,  2)  =R(9,  2).IR(9,  2,  0)  + I(9,  2). 11(9,  2,  0)  + P(9,  2).IP(9,  2,  0)  ; 


P(ll,  2)=P(9,  2).PP(9,  2,  0). 

That  is — 

R(ll,  5)  = 1.m(3,  1,  1)  = 1 ; 

R(ll,  4)  = l.f«(4,  1,  1)  + 1.2  =5; 

1(11,  4)  2,  2)-z7(4,  1,  1)} 

+ l.i{n(7,  2,  2)-iii4,  1,  1)}  + 1.1  =11  ; 

P(ll,  4)  = l.n(4,  1,  1)  = 3 ; 

R(ll,  3)  = 2.f/(4,  1,  0)  = 4 ; 

1(11,3)  =2.i{z7(8,2,  1)-m(4,  1,0)} 

+ l.u(8,  2,  1)  + 1.m(8,  3,  0) 

= 2.7+1.16+1.8  =38; 

R(ll,  2)  = 2.77(5,  1,  0)=2.2  =4; 

1(11,  2)  =2.i{'«(9,  2,  0)  — n(5,  1,  0)}+2.i«(9,  2,  0) 

+ 2.1{z7(9,  2,  0)-^7(5,  1,  0)}=2. 1+2. 4 + 2. 1 = 12  ; 

P(ll,  2)=2.z7(5,  1,  0)  = 4. 


As  a verification,  it  may  be  worth  while  to  write  down  these  eighty-two  1 1-edra,  to 
show  the  faces  in  order  about  the  10-gonal  base. 

R(ll,  5)  is  3537353636; 

R(1 1,  4)  are  5383535453,  4383453635,  3464363636,  4373537345,  3463536437; 
1(11,4)  are  4438353635,  6346436363,  5437436363,  3543835354,  3637374354, 
6353653463,  6353644373,  6346354373,  5353736345,  6353644373, 

4437363536; 

P(ll,  4)  are  5353653536,  6346363463,  5437354373; 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  A CLASS  OF  POLYEDRA. 


411 


R(ll,  3)  are  4439344535,  5347435535,  4355534636,  3445443737; 
1(11,3)  are  5444439353,  5734446353,  6634455353,  7534545353, 


5463447353, 

5553456353, 

5643546353, 

5436444383, 

5436634463, 

6436356344, 

5436453473, 

7346354534, 

6436355435, 

5439344453, 

5438435453, 

5437443653, 

5436444383, 

5436383444, 

5436354435, 

5436374354, 

5534653463, 

6443743643, 

5443743734, 

5443834634, 

6534643643, 

5534734634, 

5534643734, 

6534734543, 

5443843553, 

5534653463, 

5534644373  ; 

R(  11,  2)  are  4534843544,  44431034444,  5435653454,  6344644364; 
1(11,2)  are  4534934444,  6344653454,  6734445443,  6643545443, 
5643545534,  5834444543,  4834444634,  5743544543, 

6444374534,  6553455443; 

r(ll,2)  are  5553455534,  7444374443,  6544365443,  6453464534. 


8435445353, 

8436354443, 

5436543563, 

5437535453, 

5443744373, 

6443834543, 

5443753463, 


5734445534, 

4743544634, 


The  dodecaedra  are  found  by  rather  less  calculation  than  the  hendecaedra,  form- 
ing only  eight  classes,  as  follows  : — 

1(12,  5)  =R^(7,  3) . IRX7,  3,  2)  + F(7,  2).  IP(7,  2,  3)  + R(7,  2).  IR(7,  2,  3), 

R(12,  5)  = R(7,  2)RR(7,  2,  3)  + R*(7,  3).RR^(7,  3,  2), 

1(12,  4)  =1(8,  3)11(8,  3,  I)  + I(8,  2).  11(8,  2,  2)  + R(8,  2).IR(8,  2,  2), 

R(12,4)  = R(8,  2).RR(8,  2,2), 

1(12,3)  =:I(9,3).n(9,3,0)  + l(9,2)II(9,2,l)  + R(9,3).IR(9,3,0)  + R(9,2).IR(9,2,l), 
R(12,  3)  = R(9,  3).RR(9,  3,  0)  + R(9,  2)RR(9,  2,  1), 

1(12,2)  =1(10,  2)11(10,  2,  0)-l-R(10,  2).IR(10,  2,  0), 

R(12,  2)  = R(10,  2).RR(10,  2,  0). 

These  are,  by  what  precedes,  all  given  numbers ; and,  by  continuing  the  process,  we 
can  finally  obtain  all  the  .r-edra  on  an  {x—  l)-gonal  base,  numbered  in  their  proper 
classes,  which  have  only  triedral  summits. 

I have  generalized  the  expressions  Fl”(.r,  k,  /),  R”R'"(a?,  k,  /),  rR”(j7,  k,  1),  which 
the  theory  requires  for  enumerating  all  the  j:-edra  having  an  {x — l)-gonal  base,  and 
any  summits  whatever;  but  the  formulae  are  not  worth  producing.  The  number  of 
distinctions  to  be  made  is  too  great  to  be  of  any  ready  use.  If  the  a?-edra  having  an 
(x — l)-gonal  base  were  classed  and  enumerated  according  to  their  summits,  it  would 
be  possible  to  count  all  the  (a:+/i)-edra  on  the  same  (a;— l)-gonal  base,  by  removing 
summits  not  in  the  base,  thus  producing  crown-faces,  and  by  the  vanishing  of  edges 
about  the  crowns  and  base,  thus  producing  faces  contiguous,  but  not  collateral.  That 
is,  it  would  be  possible  to  enumerate  and  classify  the  N-edra. 


^ , I'J! 


f-Vt: 


. f!^^rC:il, 


[ 413  ] 


XVIII.  On  the  Representation  of  Polyedra.  By  the  Rev.  Thomas  P.  Kirkman,  M.A. 

Communicated  hy  A.  Cayley,  F.R.S. 

Received  August  6, — Read  December  6,  1855. 


To  every  jo-edral  ^'-acron,  or  solid  having-  p faces  and  q summits,  corresponds  a 
§'-edial  ^-acron,  whose  q faces  have  the  same  order  (of  succession)  and  rank  (as  to 
number  of  edges)  with  the  q summits,  and  whose  ^ summits  correspond  in  the  same 
way  to  the  p faces,  of  the  (/-acron. 

Whenjo^g-,  the  corresponding  pair  will  sometimes  be  identical  figures,  as  to  the 
number,  rank  and  arrangement  of  their  faces  and  summits  ; whilst  at  other  times,  as 
will  always  be  the  case  ifjo  is  not  =q,  the  two  figures  will  differ.  When  they  differ 
they  may  be  called  a sympolar  pair  of  heteropolars,  or  simply  a sympolar  pair-,  when 
they  are  the  same  figure,  it  may  be  called  an  autopolar  polyedron. 

An  elegant  method  of  representing  an  immense  number  of  sympolar  pairs  and 
autopolars,  may  be  deduced  from  the  property  enunciated  in  the  theorems  following, 
A.  and  B. 

Def. — Any  most-angled  face  of  a polyedron  being  taken  as  its  base,  the  angles  of 
the  base  may  be  called  hase-summits,  the  remaining  angles  of  the  faces  either  colla- 
teral or  synacral  with  the  base  may  be  termed  wall-summits,  and  all  summits  lying 
only  in  faces  neither  collateral  nor  synacral  with  the  base,  we  may  name  crown- 
summits. 

If  a polyedron  has  base-summits  a^a.yi^...,  wall-summits  and  crown- 

summits  besides,  the  latter  may  consist  of  a system  c^c^c^...  lying  in  faces  that  con- 
tain also  some  of  b^bf^...,  and  an  interior  system  d^df^...  not  lying  in  faces  containing 
any  of  b^bj)^....  The  summits  dff^...  may  be  looked  at  as  wall-summits  referred  to 
C1C2C3...  as  base-summits,  and  as  crown-summits  referred  to  bfif^...  as  base-summits. 
And  there  may  be  any  number  of  systems  of  crown-summits  interior  to  dff^...,  as 
616363...  leading  up  iofff...  &c. 

A.  If  in  any  g'-acron  there  are  either  no  crown-summits,  or  if  from  each  of  the  wall- 
summits  bib^b^...  tliere  passes  an  edge  to  one  of  the  crown-summits  CjCgC,...,  and  from 
each  of  616363...  an  edge  to  one  of  dff^...,  and  from  each  of  dff^...  an  edge  to  one 
of  616363...,  and  so  on,  the  q summits  of  the  g'-acron  are  the  angles  of  a closed  g-gon, 
whose  q sides  are  all  edges  of  the  g-acron. 

B.  If  in  any  p-edron  there  are  either  no  faces  yiy^yz...,  of  which  none  has  any 

summit  collateral  or  synacral  with  the  most-angled  summit  S of  the  g?-edron,  or  if 
each  of  the  faces  about  S is  collateral  with  some  one  of  717273 ••••?  a closed 

3 I 


MDCCCLVI. 


414 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  POLYEDRA. 


polygon  of^  sides  can  be  drawn  on  the  faces  of  the  figure,  so  as  to  have  a side  on 
every  face,  and  to  pass  through  no  summit. 

There  is  no  use  in  perplexing  further  the  enunciation  of  B,  as  its  truth  follows  from, 
and  its  extent  is  parallel  with,  that  of  A.  Nor  is  it  worth  while  to  trouble  the  reader 
with  demonstrations  of  these  properties,  since  they  are  not  properties  of  all  polyedra, 
a negative  which  may  however  be  worth  the  proving.  It  may  suffice,  and  may  per- 
haps be  useful,  to  show  the  connexion  between  these  closed  polygons  and  a pleasing 
mode  of  representation. 

Let  us  suppose  that  in  any  ^-edral  ^-acron  we  have  traced  the  closed  jo-gon  through 
the  faces,  and  the  closed  ^’-gon  through  the  summits,  and  let  the  edges  of  the  jo-gon 
be  numbered  in  order  1 2...p,  and  the  angles  of  the  g'-gon  1 2...q.  Thus  are  all 
the  faces  and  summits  of  the  jo-edral  §'-acron  numbered,  in  the  circles  1 2 3...p\2.., 
and  1 2 3...q\2.. 

Any  edge  of  the  figure  may  be  read  abed,  a and  c being  its  left  and  right  summits, 
and  b and  d its  upper  and  lower  faces,  or  edab,  which  is  the  same  thing,  turning  the 
figure  about.  In  the  same  face  d we  read,  passing  towards  the  right  from  c to  the 
summit  e,  the  edge  cfed  or  edef,  in  the  two  faces  d and  f.  Thus  it  appears  that,  in 
the  reading  of  the  edges,  any  consecutive  and  external  duad,  as  cd  in  abed,  will  occur 
reversed  and  internal,  as  dc  in  edef,  and  vice  versa.  We  can  thus  represent  the 
edges  of  the  jo-edral  5^-acron  by  as  many  quadruplets,  so  formed,  that  every 
contiguous  internal  or  external  duad  shall  occur  again  reversed  as  an  external  or 
internal  duad  ; the  quadruplets  being  all  read  from  left  to  right. 

Let  xyx^y^,  x^y.^x^y^  be  two  of  these  quadruplets.  The  former  is  an  edge  at  the  xth 
summit  and  in  the  yih  face,  and  also  at  the  .rAh  summit  and  in  the  yfa  face.  The 
like  is  conceived  of  the  latter.  At  the  points  xy  and  x^y^  referred  to  right  axes,  write  a, 
at  Xji/i  and  x^y^  write  b,  and  so  on  with  all  the  j»+g'-l-2  edges  abed.... 

The  result  is  a paradigm  of  the  figure  and  its  sympolar.  The  horizontal  multiplets 
will  be  the  faces,  denoted  by  their  edges,  the  vertical  ones  the  summits  so  denoted, 
or  viee  versa.  The  edges  in  summit  or  face  will  stand  in  their  true  order.  For  the 
closed  q-goi\  through  the  summits,  if  it  leaves  any  face  before  it  has  completed  the 
circuit  thereof,  must  return  to  it  to  complete  that  in  the  same  direction  ; otherwise 
it  would  cross  its  own  path  and  pass  more  than  once  through  one  or  more  summits, 
which  is  impossible,  as  it  has  only  q sides. 

Every  pyramid  is  autopolar.  If  the  base  be  (2w-l- l)-gonal,  the  system  of  edges  is 
denoted  by  An-\-2  quadruplets  in  pairs  of  the  form  abed,  deba;  or  as  well  by  as  many 
in  pairs  of  the  form  abed,  dabc.  Either  edge  in  any  pair  lies  between  the  poles  of  the 
faces  through  the  other.  I call  these  two  edges  (aA)  a gamic  pair,  and  either  is  the 
gatnic  of  the  other.  Thus  the  pentagonal  pyramid  is  represented  by  either  of  the 
systems, 

a 1356  b 2416  c 3526  d 4136  e 5246 
A 6531,  B 6142,  C 6253,  D 6314,  E 6425, 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  POLYEDRA. 


415 


a 

1126 

b 2536 

c 3446  d 4356 

e 

5226 

A 6112, 

B 6253, 

C 6344,  D 6435, 

E 6522, 

giving  the  paradigms 

• 

• 

A d 

• 

B 

a E 

0 

A 

• 

• 

. B 

e 

C 

A . 

e 

B 

a 

• 

• 

c 

D 

, * 

d B 

C 

D 

b 

, * 

• 

E 

c 

C . 

D 

• 

E 

c 

A 

. b 

D 

* , 

E 

b 

c 

d e 

a 

. 

e a 

b 

c d 

The  first  arrangement  may  be  so  folded  that  A shall  fall  upon  a,  B upon  b,  &c. 
The  second  cannot.  Every  e-gonal  face  is  polar  to  an  e-edral  summit,  the  face  and 
summit  showing  letters  on  their  edges  of  like  names  and  succession.  And  every  con- 
tiguous duad,  as  aD,  in  a horizontal  line,  is  contiguous  also  in  a vertical  line,  if  we 
observe  that  the  extremes  of  any  multiplet  are  a contiguous  duad.  This  shows  that 
any  angle  «D  in  a face  is  also  an  angle  in  a summit,  a property  which  the  paradigm 

of  course  always  has,  whether  of  autopolar  or  heteropolar  figure.  It  is  observable, 

that  in  the  first  arrangement  no  edge  a meets  its  garnic  A in  a point ; whilst  in  the 
second  we  see  the  angles  ah.  and  cC,  which  may  be  denominated  nodal  angles,  in 
the  nodal  face  aEA,  at  the  nodal  summit  ahe. 

The  2m-gonal  pyramid  can  only  be  represented  by  pairs  of  quadruplets  of  the 
second  form,  abed,  dabc.  Thus  for  7w=3,  the  system 

a 1127  b 2637  c 3547  d 4457  e 5367  / 6217 

A 7112,  B 7263,  C 7354,  D 7445,  E 7536,  F 7621 

gives  this  paradigm,  showing  two  nodal  gamic  pairs  ah  and  dY), 

a F . . ...  A 

A . . . . / B 

. . . . e B C 

. . , d C . J) 

c D . . E 

. E . . . F 

f a b c d e 

The  reason  why  the  (2m-l- l)-g’onal  pyramid  has  the  first  arrangement  as  well  as  the 
second,  is,  that  every  base-summit  may  be  taken  for  the  pole  of  the  wall-face  opposite 
it.  In  the  2m-gonal  no  summit  is  opposite  to  a face,  nor  can  the  interval  between 
a base  summit  and  its  polar-wall  face  be  constant.  This  is  best  seen  by  inspection 
of  the  schemes 

ABCDEAB,  ABCDEAB,  ABCDEAB. 

d e a b c d c b a e d c b a e d c b 

ABCDEFAB,  ABCDEFAB. 

e f a b c d e c b a f e d c 

3 I 2 


416 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  POLYEDRA. 


The  triangles  made  by  three  adjoining  letters  in  all  the  three  upper  examples,  as 

A^d,  T)ab,  correspond  ; but  this  is  the  case  only  in  the  second  of  the  lower  ones. 

I add  the  following  examples  : — 

a 1357  b 2617  c 3527  d 4137  e 5847 

A 7531,  B 7162,  C 7253,  D 7314,  E 7485, 


which  forms 


A d 


a 

D 

G 

b 


f 

c 


s 

B 


F 

b' 


B 

C 

D 

E 

A 


G 

E 

F 


d 


f 


an  aiitopolar  octaedron,  having  a pentagonal,  two  quadrilateral,  and  five  triangular 
faces. 


and 


give 


T1 

lis  can 

be  folded 

to 

lay  a upon 

A,  &c. 

a 

1228 

b 1382 

c 

1864 

d 

1473 

e 

4657 

/ 5668 

s 

3758 

A 

8122, 

B 2138, 

C 

4186, 

D 

3147, 

E 

7465, 

F 8566, 

G 

8375, 

a 

1 138 

b 1473 

c 

1824 

d 

2574 

e 

2765 

/ 5 

667 

s 

3728 

A 

8113, 

B 3147, 

C 

4182, 

D 

4257, 

E 

5276, 

F7 

566, 

G 

8372, 

B D 

C . 

. A 

a 

. B 

C 

. A 

a 

A . 

. 

, 

. b 

• 

D 

E 

G C 

b 

. 

. 

d G 

A 

, * 

b G 

d 

. 

. 

c 

E . 

b 

c 

d . 

. 

. 

E 

G F 

• 

d . 

, 

e 

F . 

. 

. 

e / 

F 

. G 

. 

• 

/ 

F 

E . 

• 

O' 

■ 

D e 

. 

• 

e g 

B 

D 

/ 

. 

c 

a B 

• s 

/ 

. 

c 

g « 

• 

. 

These  are  both  autopolar  octaedra  having,  like  the  preceding,  a pentagonal,  two 
quadrilateral,  and  five  triangular  faces.  They  are  all  three  different  figures.  In  the 
first,  the  pentagon  bcdea  has  every  other  face  either  collateral  or  synacral  with  it, 
for  yBC  and  DEG,  the  only  ones  not  collateral  with  it,  have  the  summits  fCae, 
and  oDGb  common  with  it,  as  is  evident  from  the  duads  fC  and  DG.  And  its  two 
quadrilaterals  Ac?gB  and  AEFc  have  the  common  side  A. 

The  second  octaedron  has  also  its  pentagon  either  collateral  or  synacral  with  every 
other  face,  but  its  two  quadrilaterals  have  not  a common  side. 

The  thiid  has  a crown  triangle  AbG,  neither  collateral  nor  synacral  with  the 
pentagon  y'egBD,  for  none  of  the  angles  Ab,  bG,  GA  are  in  the  summits  of  that 
pentagon. 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  POLYEDRA. 


417 


The  following  gives  a sympolar  pair  of  octaedra,  having  each  a pentagon,  two 
quadrilaterals,  and  five  triangles  : — 

a 1228,  A2338,  c3344,  dAbM,  e5566,  f7Q^7,  ^8118, 

41142,  /2243,  j3456,  4 3678,  Z8541,  m6587,  n77QS-, 


h . . 

a i 

b c 

• • J 

. : k 

gab 


I ...  g 

h ...  . 

i . . . 

c d . . . 

d c m . I 

• j e f . 
f n m 
k n. 


Here  are  two  distinct  heteropolars  ; one  has  two  quadrilaterals,  deml  and  kjef, 
having  a common  side  e ; the  other  has  two  quadrilaterals,  cjkl  and  glnin,  that  have 
no  common  side.  The  reader  will  find  no  difficulty  in  drawing  these  octaedra,  by 
joining  the  angles  of  a pentagon  to  three  included  wall-summits. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  in  all  these  sets  of  quadruplets  representing  any  jo-edral 
^--acron,  if  we  collect  those  which  contain  any  given  numeral  in  the  same  place,  we 
shall  find  that  in  the  two  adjoining  places  they  exhibit  circles  of  the  same  numbers 
differing  by  one  cyclical  step.  Thus,  collecting  from  the  above  the  quadruplets  con- 
taining 8 in  the  fourth  place, 


8118,  1228,  2338,  3678,  7788, 

show  the  circle  81237  in  the  first  and  third  places.  And  those  containing  1 in  the 
second  place,  8118,  1142,  4185,  show  the  circle  814  in  the  first  and  third. 

From  this  property  of  the  closed  jw-gon  and  gc-gon  of  props.  A.  and  B,  it  is  possible 
that  some  light  may  be  thrown,  when  the  matter  is  better  handled,  on  the  classifi- 
cation of  polyedra,  such  as  may  lead  to  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  their  enume- 
ration. 

It  is  easy  to  prove  that  there  are  polyedra  on  which  the  closed  polygons  cannot  be 
drawn. 

For  suppose  the  g'-gon  of  prop.  A.  drawn  on  a ^'-acron.  In  making  the  circuit  of 
any  face  G which  we  enter  across  an  edge  FG,  which  is  not  an  edge  of  the  ^-gon,  we 
add  to  the  number  of  summits  counted  in  F and  other  faces,  all  the  summits  of  G, 
except  two,  these  two  having  been  enumerated  in  the  circuit  of  F from  which  we 
enter  G.  That  is,  counting  first  all  the  summits  of  the  base,  we  add  to  these  for 
every  m-gon  whose  circuit  we  proceed  to  make,  m— 2 summits  more.  The  num- 
ber of  faces,  connected  with  each  other  and  with  the  base  by  edges,  not  part  of 
the  closed  g'-gon,  whose  circuits  the  closed  ^'-gon  makes  and  includes,  will  be 
«3+«4+“5+ •••+«/(;  vvhere  is  the  number  of  m-gons  among  them,  and  a*  that 


418 


REV.  T.  P.  KIRKMAN  ON  THE  REPRESENTATION  OF  POLYEDRA. 


of  the  k-gons,  the  base  being  one  of  these.  The  whole  number  of  summits  will 
therefore  be 

053+ 2054+ 3a5+ — 2)a*+2  = 5 ; 

for  we  have  counted  all  the  summits  of  one  k-go\i,  viz.  of  the  base. 

In  order,  then,  that  such  a 5^-gon  should  be  possible,  it  is  necessary  that  among 
the  p faces  of  our  ;?-edral  g'-acron,  there  should  be  triangles,  quadrilaterals, 
pentagons,  &c.,  of  which  the  above  equation  can  be  affirmed.  Now  if  q should  be 
odd,  and  all  the  p faces  even-angled,  this  equation  becomes 

2o54-l-4a6H-6a8-}-&c.  = 2r-l-  1, 

which  is  impossible.  Hence  it  appears,  that  if  the  number  of  summits  of  a ^-acron 
be  odd,  while  the  faces  are  all  even-angled,  the  closed  ^'-gon  cannot  be  drawn  through 
its  summits.  I find  exceedingly  few  polyedra  on  which  the  closed  jo-gon  and  q-gon 
cannot  be  drawn.  In  fact,  it  is  far  from  being  necessary  to  their  existence,  that  all 
the  conditions  of  the  theorems  A and  B should  be  fulfilled. 

If  we  cut  in  two  the  cell  of  the  bee  by  a section  of  its  six  parallel  edges,  we  have  a 
13-acron,  whose  faces  are  one  hexagon  and  nine  quadrilaterals.  The  closed  13-gon 
cannot  be  drawn.  But  if  a line  be  drawn  from  the  triedral  vertex  to  the  opposite 
angle  of  one  of  the  quadrilaterals  about  that  vertex,  and  this  quadrilateral  supposed 
broken  into  two  triangles  having  that  line  for  their  common  edge,  we  shall  then  have 
a 13-acron  whose  faces  are  one  hexagon,  eight  quadrilaterals,  and  two  triangles; 
and  whose  summits  are  nine  triaces  and  two  tessaraces.  Of  this  figure  the  paradigm 
can  be  constructed.  Here  I would  fain  beg  the  reader’s  permission  to  call  a 5-edral 
summit  a pentace,  a 6-  or  7-edral  summit  a hexace  or  a heptace.  The  words  are  at 
least  convenient  in  speaking  of  the  summits  of  polyacra. 

As  authorities  and  analogy  are  alike  divided  about  the  spelling  of  the  word  poly- 
edron,  I have  pleased  myself  herein.  Why  polyhedron  of  necessity,  and  yet  not  peri- 
hodic  ? 


PHILOSOPHICAL  TRANSACTIONS. 


XIX.  On  the  Structure,  Functions,  and  Homologies  of  the  Manducatory  Organs  in 
the  Class  Rotifera.  By  Philip  Henry  Gosse,  Esq.  Communicated  hy  Thomas 
Bell,  H.P.R.S.,  Pres.  L.S. 


Received  January  5, — Read  February  22  and  March  1,  1855. 


1.  An  examination  of  the  whole  alimentary  system  in  the  class  Rotifera  would  in- 
clude— The  buccal  funnel ; the  manducatory  apparatus,  with  its  muscular  bulb  and  the 
muscular  bands  by  which  it  is  retained  in  situ ; the  salivary  glands  ; the  oesophagus ; 
the  pancreatic  glands  ; the  stomach  ; the  hepatic  follicles  ; the  cseca ; the  intestine ; 
the  rectum  ; and  the  cloaca.  Of  these,  however,  the  manducatory  organs  will  occupy 
my  principal  attention;  and  I shall  endeavour  to  trace  them  throughout  the  class; 
and  to  show,  that  the  various  forms  which  they  assume  can  all  be  reduced  to  a com- 
mon type.  I also  propose  to  inquire,  what  are  the  real  homologues  of  these  organs 
in  the  other  classes  of  animals ; and  what  light  we  can  gather,  from  their  structure, 
on  the  question  of  the  zoological  rank  of  the  Rotifera. 

2.  Considering  the  attractive  appearance  which  the  Wheel-animals  present,  and 
the  facilities  which  are  afforded  for  their  investigation  by  their  abundance — since 
they  are  found  in  great  variety  in  almost  every  river,  lake,  pond,  and  ditch, — it  is 
rather  remarkable  that  they  have  been  so  little  studied. 

3.  The  foundation  of  our  acquaintance  with  the  organization  of  the  Rotifera  was 
broadly  laid  by  Professor  Ehrenberg,  in  the  ‘Transactions  of  the  Berlin  Academy,’ 
as  early  as  1830;  and  in  1838  he  published  his  ‘ Infusionsthiercheu,’  a work  which, 
in  spite  of  its  mistakes  and  deficiencies,  must  be  considered  a magnificent  monument 
of  industry  and  scientific  acumen.  It  is  true,  Leeuwenhoek,  Baker,  Joblot,  and 
other  early  microscopists  had  figured  a few  species ; and  Rosel,  Schaffer,  and  espe- 
cially Muller,  had  attempted  to  resolve  the  internal  anatomy  of  some  ; but  all  that 
had  been  accomplished  amounted  to  little  more  than  vague  guessing,  when  Ehren- 

3 K 


mdccclvi. 


420  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


BERG  took  them  up.  He  penetrated  into  the  minute  org-anization  of  these  animals ; 
resoh^ed  and  figured,  with  a precision  and  minuteness  up  to  that  time  unattempted, 
the  nutritive,  circulatory,  nervous,  muscular  and  generative  systems  ; and,  though  the 
details  of  some  of  the  organs  which  he  has  described  existed  only  in  his  imagination, 
and  the  functions  of  others  which  he  clearly  saw  were  quite  misunderstood,  it  would 
be  absurd  to  deny  that  his  elaborate  plates  and  descriptions  are  generally  faithful 
representations  of  these  minute  creatures. 

4.  M.  Dujardin,  like  his  great  predecessor,  included  the  Rotifera,  by  the  name  of 
SystoUdes,  among  the  Infusoria,  in  his  work  on  the  subject  published  in  1841.  In 
many  particulars  his  observations,  which  were  largely  polemical,  have  advanced  our 
knowledge  of  the  subject ; but  in  some  respects  they  are  a retrogression.  His  per- 
sonal acquaintance  with  species  was  greatly  inferior  to  that  of  the  Prussian  zoologist, 
and  insufficient  for  satisfactory  generalisation. 

5.  Since  then,  I am  not  aware  that  any  naturalist  has  attempted,  from  personal 
observation,  a revision  of  the  class,  or  even  of  any  considerable  number  of  species; 
and  the  science  has  advanced,  chiefly,  by  isolated  papers  on  individual  species,  and 
by  critical  examinations  of  the  facts  already  accumulated.  These  memoirs  I shall 
enumerate  in  chronological  order. 

6.  In  1843,  Dr.  Kolliker  published  a memoir*  on  Megalotrocha,  confining  him- 

self to  the  segmentation  of  the  egg,  and  the  (so-called)  seminal  threads.  Dr.  Oskar 
Schmidt,  in  1846,  gave  a resume  of  what  was  then  known  of  the  organization  of  the 
Rotifera  generally'!'.  same  year,  the  late  Dr.  Mantell,  in  his  ‘Thoughts  on 

Animalcules,’  though  chiefly  founded  on  Ehrenberg,  added  some  information  of 
interest  and  value  on  the  development  of  the  young  in  Stephanoceros  and  Melicerta. 
In  the  ‘Annals  of  Natural  History’  for  1848,  Dr.  Dobie  described  with  minuteness 
two  new  species  of  Floscularia and  Mr.  Brightwell  recorded  his  important  disco- 
very of  the  dioecious  character  of  a Rotiferon  which  I have  since  named  Asplanehna. 
The  same  species  formed  the  subject  of  a valuable  memoir  by  Mr.  Dalrymple  read 
before  the  Royal  Society  in  February  1849.  Meanwhile,  however,  some  additional 
observations  had  appeared  by  Dr.  Leydig^,  on  the  egg-segmentation  of  Notommata, 
EucJilanis,  and  Megalotrocha  •,  and  in  the  same  year  (1848),  Dr.  Frey  had  published 
a work  on  the  class  generally  1|,  which  I have  not  been  able  to  see. 

In  1850  I published  several  memoirs  on  Rotifera  in  the  ‘Transactions  of  the 
Microscopical  Society’  and  the  ‘ Annals  of  Natural  Flistory,’  viz.  “ On  the  Habits  of 
Melicerta  ringens^"  (January);  “On  the  Anatomy  of  Notommata  aurita^"'  (May); 
“ On  Asplanehna  priodonta**"  (July);  and  “ On  Notommata  parasita^'’’  (December). 

* Froriep’s  Neue  Not.,  No.  28.  p.  17.  f Wiegmann’s  Archiv,  1846,  p.  68. 

X Philosophical  Transactions,  1849.  § Isis,  1848,  p.  170. 

11  Ueber  die  Bedeckungen  der  wirbellosen  Thiere.  Gottingen,  1848.  This  work  I know  only  by  a citation 
in  SiEBonn  and  Stannius’  ‘ Comparative  Anatomy.' 

^ Trans.  Micr.  Soc.  i,  pp.  58,  93, 143. 


**  Ann.  Nat.  Hist.  July  1850. 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


421 


In  1851  I published  a catalogue  of  108  species  that  I had  observed,  including 
descriptions  of  five  new  genera  and  thirty-two  new  species*.  In  this  latter  year 
M.  d’Udekem  published  in  the  ^Memoirs  of  the  Brussels  Academy’  two  papers -f', 
the  one  on  the  circulatory  system  in  Lacinularia  socialis,  the  other  on  Floscularia 
cornuta-,  the  latter  as  if  a new  species,  but  which  had  been  described  and  figured  by 
Dr.  Dobie  four  years  before. 

The  former  of  these  animals,  Lacinularia  socialis,  became  the  subject  of  two  very 
valuable  papers  in  the  year  1852;  the  one  by  Mr.  Huxley  j:,  and  the  other  by 
Dr.  Leydig  In  the  following  year  appeared  a Memoir  on  the  Anatomy  of  Meli- 
certa  ringens,"  by  Professor  Williamson  |1,  closely  followed  by  a second^  on  the  same 
species,  by  myself. 

7.  In  this  enumeration  I believe  I have  included  all  that  has  been  published  on  the 
subject  of  the  Rotifeba,  from  original  observation : should  anything,  however,  have 
been  omitted,  it  is  because  it  has  eluded  my  most  careful  scrutiny. 

8.  What  changes  may  have  been  produced  on  the  state  of  our  knowledge  of  the 
nervous,  vascular,  glandular,  muscular  and  reproductive  systems  of  the  Rotifera, 
by  these  researches,  it  is  not  my  province  here  to  inquire.  My  present  business  is 
with  the  digestive  system,  and  particularly  with  the  organs  of  manducation  ; and  of 
these,  I think  it  is  no  more  than  the  truth  to  say,  our  knowledge  is  almost  exactly 
where  Ehrenberg  placed  it  five-and-twenty  years  ago. 

9.  This  assertion  seems  strange  after  so  many  memoirs,  of  more  or  less  value,  by 
different  observers,  on  various  species ; but  the  wonder  is  much  lessened  by  a re- 
examination of  their  subjects.  Of  the  thirteen  monographs  enumerated,  two  are  on 
Floscularia,  three  on  Melicerta,  three  on  Lacinularia,  three  on  Asplanchna,  and  two 
on  Notommata.  Now  in  Melicerta  and  Lacinularia  the  manducatory  apparatus  is  of 
the  same  type,  and  that  an  abnormal  one ; in  Floscularia  and  Asplanchna  the  types  of 
structure  differ  widely  from  the  former,  and  as  greatly  from  each  other.  These  three 
types  are  in  fact  unintelligible  in  themselves,  and  can  be  explained  only  by  tracing 
the  organs  from  their  normal  development,  through  their  modifications  and  degene- 
rations. Nothing  then,  in  fact,  has  been  attempted  towards  an  explanation  of  the 
jaws,  in  the  great  families  of  Hydatinoea,  Fuchlanidota,  and  Brachionoea — -the  true 
types  of  Rotifera — except  my  own  two  memoirs  on  Notommata  in  1850.  And  I 
freely  confess,  that,  in  spite  of  many  and  persevering  efforts,  I had  not,  at  that  time, 
been  able  to  attain  any  satisfaction  on  the  true  structure  of  these  organs. 

10.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  see  the  forms  of  the  various  parts,  in  outline,  in  some 
one  aspect;  to  obtain,  for  example,  a dorsal  or  ventral  view  of  the  jaws  in  Brachio- 

* Ann.  Nat.  Hist.  Sept.  1851.  f Bull,  de  I’Acad.  Belg.  xviii.  pp.  39,  43.  I Journ.  Micr.  Soc.  i.  (Trans.)  p.  1. 

§ SiEB.  et  Koll.  Zeitschr.,  Feb.  1852.  ||  Journ.  Micr.  Soc.  i.  (Comm.)  p.  1. 

^ Ibid.  p.  71.  Note. — Since  the  presentation  of  this  paper  to  the  Royal  Society,  there  has  appeared  in  the 
‘Journal  of  Microscopical  Science’  an  abstract  of  another  memoir  by  Dr.  Leydig,  “On  the  Structure  and 
systematic  Position  of  the  Rotifera.”  The  original  I have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  examining. — P.  H.  G. 

3 K 2 


422  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


tms,  or  a lateral  one  in  Furcularia  : but  when  we  have  done  this,  we  have  gone  but  a 
little  way  towards  such  an  understanding  of  the  whole  form,  and  the  relation  of  the 
complex  parts  to  each  other,  as  will  enable  us  to  project  them,  or  to  form  an  ideal 
model  of  the  whole.  A little  more  light  is  shed  on  the  structure  by  crushing  the 
animals  between  plates  of  glass,  or  under  the  graduated  pressure  of  a compressorium; 
but  the  distortion  of  the  parts  is  very  great ; and  some  of  them,  especially  those  which 
form  the  intermediate  piece  {incus),  on  which  the  greatest  obscurity  rests,  are  almost 
invariably  broken  into  a multitude  of  separate  fragments  in  the  process  of  flattening ; 
and  thus  the  result  merely  tantalizes  the  expectation. 

11.  Little  more  seems  to  be  yet  known  of  the  structure  of  the  manducatory  organs 
(I  speak  of  the  normal  forms)  than  can  be  obtained  by  these  modes,  and  the  pub- 
lished descriptions  of  them  are  vague  and  unsatisfactory. 

12.  Thus  Ehrenberg  describes  the  general  structure  as  follows: — “The  normal 
intestinal  canal  in  the  Rotifera  consists  first  of  a globose  muscular  throat-bulb 
(schlundkopf),  in  which  are  fixed  two  toothed  jaws,  and  the  anterior  opening  of  which 
is  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  wheel-organ,  somewhat  towards  the  belly  [side]*.” — 
“ In  all  the  forms  there  is  a moving  manducatory  organ  (kauorgan),  furnished,  in 
forty-eight  genera,  with  indubitable  teeth,  and  evidently  ministering  to  the  aliment- 
ary canal  'f'.” 

Again,  in  proposing  a division  of  the  class,  according  to  the  teeth,  he  groups  the 
Rotifera  as,  i.  Toothless  {Agomphia) ; ii.  Free-toothed  {Gymnogomphia),  where  the 
teeth  resemble  the  fingers  of  a hand  fastened  to  the  jaw-frame  behind,  but  free  in 
front ; iii.  Bound-toothed  (Desmogomphia),  where  the  teeth  are  fastened  across  upon 
the  jaw,  like  an  arrow  upon  a bow 

The  most  laboured  description  of  the  normal  structure  the  same  zoologist  has 
given  under  the  genus  Hydatina,  which  he  professedly  makes  the  vehicle  for  ardsfini^ 
of  his  acquaintance  with  the  typical  forms  of  the  class.  “ The  nutritive  system,”  he 
observes,  “ consists  of  a great  buccal  cavity,  chiefly  enclosed  and  formed  by  the  rota- 
tory organ,  as  an  upper  lip  ; in  the  bottom  of  which,  near  the  ventral  side,  lies  the 
spherical  four-muscled  throat-bulb,  with  two  many-toothed  jaws.  In  each  jaw  are 
held  five  conical  teeth,  resembling  a hand,  somewhat  converging  towards  the  bot- 
tom, diminishing  in  size  inwardly.  Sometimes  a minute  sixth  tooth  appears  to  be 
developed.  The  five  teeth  of  each  jaw,  which  are  perceived,  on  crushing  the  body 
between  glass  plates,  to  be  the  only  hard  and  solid  parts,  are  jointed  into  a cartila- 
ginous frame,  which  serves  for  the  attachment  of  the  muscles,  and  has  the  form  of  a 
shoulder-blade.  This  is  the  proper  jaw,  which  is  composed  of  several  parts.  In- 
wardly, both  jaws  are  in  connexion  with  a frame  of  cartilaginous  throat-arches, 
which  is  very  complicated,  and  seems  more  fitted  for  the  support  and  attachment  of 
the  masticatory  muscles  than  for  proper  activity  §.” 

13.  I sliall  presently  show  that  these  descriptions  are  both  very  imperfect  and  very 

* Trans.  Berl.  Acad.  1830,  p.  29.  f Infusionsth.  p.  385.  + Ibid.  p.  386.  § Ibid.  p.  414. 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


423 


incorrect ; and  the  figures,  with  which  they  are  illustrated,  are  but  rude  approxima- 
tions to  verisimilitude. 

14.  M.  Dujardin  sums  up  his  observations  on  the  same  organs  in  the  following 
words.  After  alluding  to  the  Tardigrada,  which  he  includes  in  his  Systolides,  the 
genus  Enteroplea,  which  is  said  to  be  toothless,  and  the  genera  Floscularia  and  Lin- 
dia,  which  he  describes  (incorrectly)  as  lacking  a ciliated  mouth,  he  observes, — 

All  the  other  Systolides,  having  jaws  enclosed  in  a muscular  pharyngeal  bulb, 
which  is  moveable  and  protractile,  at  the  bottom  of  a ciliated  vestibule,  may  be 
distinguished  according  to  the  form  of  these  jaws.  Thus  the  Rotifers  have  their 
jaws  in  the  form  of  a stirrup,  opposed  by  the  base,  and  bearing  two  or  more  small 
teeth,  laid  parallel,  like  arrows  on  a bow.  The  outer  border,  which  is  semicircular, 
furnishes  a point  of  attachment  for  the  muscles  of  the  pharyngeal  bulb ; and,  drawn 
by  them,  it  is  strongly  elevated  and  depressed,  to  produce,  during  manducation,  the 
movement  of  the  jaws.  Their  inner  border  is  composed  of  two  transverse  bars,  a 

little  arched  outwardly All  the  others  . . . have  jaws  more  resembling  those  of 

articulated  animals,  and  composed  of  an  assemblage  of  articulated  pieces,  which  we 
may,  up  to  a certain  point,  compare  to  the  two  pairs  of  mandibles  and  jaws,  to  the 
lips,  to  the  tongue,  and  to  the  labial  palpi  of  insects.  In  fact,  in  many  of  the  Systo- 
lides we  observe  a central  odd  piece,  on  which  are  articulated  two  simple  branches, 
which  bear  upon  each  other,  or  meet  as  by  a hinge,  in  the  midst  of  moveable  and 
articulated  pieces,  supporting  the  jaws  properly  so  called,  and  transmitting  to  them, 
thus,  all  the  effort  of  the  median  muscular  mass,  to  make  them  bite  upon  the  prey,  by 
furnishing  to  them  et.  point  d'appui,  when  the  lateral  muscles  draw  back  the  external 
branches  which  carry  the  jaws 

15.  The  eminent  French  naturalist,  in  this  description  of  the  jaws,  which  appears 
to  be  drawn  from  the  type  found  in  such  genera  as  Diglena  and  Albertia,  has  touched 
a key  which  might  have  unlocked  the  structure,  not  in  a few  genera  only,  but  in  the 
whole  class  of  Rotifera.  As  it  is,  however,  I cannot  agree  with  Dr.  Oskar  Schmidt, 
that  the  arrangement  and  function  of  the  teeth,  and  of  the  surrounding  bulb,  are  so 
manifest  as  to  need  no  further  observation  -I*. 

16.  It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  describe  the  manner  in  which  the  following 
observations  were  made.  The  desideratum  was  to  obtain  views  of  various  aspects  of 
the  same  animal ; particularly  of  the  dorsal  and  ventral  aspects,  of  the  lateral,  and 
of  the  vertical  or  frontal.  But  the  minuteness  of  the  objects,  ranging  from  to 
-^th  of  an  inch,  precluded  the  possibility  of  affixing  them  to  a needle,  or  other 
machinery,  by  which  they  could  be  made  to  revolve  while  in  the  field  of  vision ; and 
the  more,  since,  being  aquatic  animals,  they  must  be  viewed  immersed  in  water;  a 
momentary  removal  causing  the  death  of  most  species.  The  incessant  activity  of 
these  little  animals  is  also  a great  bar  to  accuracy  of  observation,  if  they  be  allowed  . 
freedom  ; and  if  we  confine  them  by  means  of  the  compressorium,  the  form  of  their 

* Infusoires,  p.  583,  f Wiegmann’s  Archiv,  1846,  p.  69. 


424  MR.  P.  H,  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


bodies  causes  them  to  present  almost  invariably  the  same  aspect  to  the  observer,  viz. 
that  in  which  the  greatest  width  is  at  right  angles  to  the  line  of  vision ; so  that  we 
may  examine  specimen  after  specimen,  till  patience  is  exhausted,  and  acquire  no  new 
information,  because  we  look  each  time  at  the  same  aspect. 

17.  In  the  course  of  experiments  with  various  chemical  reagents  on  these  animals, 
I found  that  a solution  of  potash  had  the  effect  of  instantly  dissolving  the  flesh,  and 
most  of  the  viscera ; leaving  the  general  integument,  the  walls  of  the  pharyngeal 
bulb,  and  ail  the  solid  parts  of  the  manducatory  apparatus  uninjured*.  In  most 
cases,  also,  the  last-named  organs  are  expelled  from  the  visceral  cavity  by  the 
contraction  of  the  integuments ; so  that  they  float  at  large,  in  brilliant  clearness, 
undimmed  by  intervening  tissues,  and  as  patent  to  observation  as  when  crushed 
between  plates  of  glass ; with  the  advantage  of  all  the  parts  being  unbroken,  and 
retaining  their  relative  positions.  Now,  by  turning  the  screw  of  the  compressorium, 
flattening  or  deepening  the  drop  of  water,  waves  were  communicated  to  it,  by  means 
of  which  the  floating  bulb,  being  nearly  globular,  was  made  to  revolve  irregularly, 
and  thus  to  present,  in  succession,  various  aspects  to  the  eye. 

18.  The  observations  which  I am  about  to  record  were  made  with  one  of  Powell 
and  Lealand’s  microscopes,  with  a power  of  560  diameters;  except  those  on  Stepha- 
noceros  and  Diglena,  on  which  the  powers  employed  were  220  and  300  diameters. 

19.  For  the  sake  of  precision  in  description,  it  may  be  well  here  to  mention  a few 
terms  that  I shall  employ,  and  to  define  the  sense  in  which  they  will  be  used.  The 
symmetry  of  the  Rotifera  is  truly  bilateral,  the  genera  Sfephanoceros  and  Flos- 
culm'ia  alone  retaining  a lingering  remnant  of  radiism,  in  the  arrangetnent  of  the 
frontal  lobes  ; even  in  these,  however,  the  whole  of  the  anatomy  besides,  both  external 
and  internal,  is  bilateral.  In  most  cases  this  arrangement  is  obvious ; the  motions 
of  the  animal,  like  those  of  the  footed  larvae  of  insects,  being  performed  on  the  belly, 
with  the  head  foremost.  Where  this  is  not  the  case,  as  with  those  genera  which, 
either  with  or  without  an  enveloping  tube,  adhere  to  foreign  substances  by  the  tip  of 
the  foot,  and  elevate  the  body  in  an  erect  position,  the  dorsal  aspect  is  always  deter- 
minable by  the  eye  or  eyes  being  towards  that  surface,  by  the  stomach  and  intestine 
passing  down  it,  and  by  the  cloaca  being  on  that  side  of  the  foot.  The  ventral  aspect 
has  the  manducatory  apparatus,  and  the  ovary.  The  anterior  extremity  carries  the 
vibratile  cilia  ; the  posterior  \'Si  terminated  by  the  foot.  In  such  species  as  are  clothed 
with  a lorica,  I shall  call  the  anterior  termination  of  the  dorsum,  the  occipital  edge; 
and  the  anterior  termination  of  the  venter,  the  mental  edge.  Other  terms  will  be 
defined  in  the  process  of  description. 

20.  As  the  manducatory  bulb,  with  its  complex  contents,  is  the  principal  subject 
of  these  observations,  I shall  commence  with  it ; treating  the  other  parts  as  accessory 
to  it.  In  most  Rotifera  this  organ  forms  a prominent  object,  conspicuous  from  its 

* Dr.  Leydig,  I find,  has  used  the  same  agent  in  examining  the  teeth  in  Lacinularia ; but  he  does  not  ap- 
pear to  have  employed  it  in  the  investigation  of  other  Rotifera  (Siebold  and  Koll.  Zeitschr.  1852). 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


425 


form  and  motions.  By  old  observers  the  vigorous  workings  of  its  internal  parts 
caused  it  to  be  mistaken  for  a heart;  but  it  has  long  been  recognized  as  an  organ 
of  mastication.  Dr.  Ehrenberg  sometimes  calls  it  Kauorgan,  but  more  generally 
Schlundhopf,  and  its  contents  Kau-apparat.  M.  Dujardin  speaks  of  it  as  le  hulbe 
pharyngien.  Von  Siebold  calls  it  a pharynx ; and  English  zoologists  have  generally 
used  the  term  gizzard.  1 hope  to  prove  that  it  is  neither  a gizzard  nor  a pharynx, 
but  a true  mouth:  in  the  mean  time,  however,  whatever  its  homological  value,  it  is 
doubtless  a form  of  apparatus  which  has  no  parallel  in  other  classes  of  animals,  and 
therefore  deserves  a proper  appellation.  I propose  then  to  appropriate  to  the  sub- 
globose  muscular  bulb,  which  contains  the  manducatory  organs  in  most  Rotifera, 
the  term  mastax. 

21.  The  mastax,  with  its  contents,  is  found  in  the  highest  degree  of  development 
in  the  genera  Brachionus,  Euchlanis,  and  some  of  the  Hydatinrea.  It  is  usually  more 
or  less  globose  in  form,  composed  of  three  lobes,  which  are  confluent  anteriorly,  with 
a common  rounded  outline;  but  separated  posteriorly,  one  lobe  diverging  towards 
the  ventral  side,  the  others  laterally,  and  a little  dorsally ; so  that  a posterior  aspect 
would  assume  the  outline  of  a trefoil.  The  general  form  is  sub-hemispheric  in  Bra- 
chionus and  its  allies  ; that  of  an  oblate  spheroid  in  Euchlanis  ; a prolate  spheroid  in 
Notommata  aurita ; cordate  in  Notommata  petromyzon ; sub-triquetrous  in  Plagio- 
gnatha  ; triglobular  in  Notommata  clavulata  ; purse-like  in  Mastigocerca  ; irregularly 
oblique  in  Synchasta  and  Polyarthra ; and  wanting  in  Floscularia. 

22.  In  substanee  it  varies  from  a state  in  which  its  walls  are  thick  and  solid,  com- 
posed of  dense  muscular  fibre,  with  little  cavity,  as  in  Brachionus,  to  one  in  which  it 
forms  a capacious  sac,  with  thin,  apparently  membranous,  parietes,  as  in  Furcularia. 

23.  The  anterior  side  of  the  mastax  is  perforate,  its  walls  here  merging  into  the 
tube  of  the  huccal  funnel.  It  is  perforate  also  on  its  dorsal  aspect ; whence  the 
oesophagus  issues  to  join  the  stomach. 

24.  Let  us  now  examine  in  detail  the  mastax,  \n  the  modifications  which  it  assumes 
in  various  species.  In  Brachionus  urceolaris  (Plate  XVI.  figs.  1 to  10),  it  is  a dense, 
colourless,  highly- refractive  mass  of  muscles,  sub-hemispherical,  distinctly  trilobate 
posteriorly,  and  cleft  deeply  on  the  ventral  side  of  its  anterior  surface  (fig.  1).  Within 
it  are  placed  two  geniculate  organs  {h),  which,  from  their  resemblance  in  form  and 
action  to  hammers  working  on  an  anvil,  I have  elsewhere  named  mallei ; and  a third 
{f),  still  moie  complex,  which  I call  the  incus.  These  three  pieces  are  not  arranged  in 
the  same  plane ; for  the  mallei  approach  each  other  a little  dorsally,  while  the  incus 
is  placed  on  the  ventral  side  of  the  centre,  its  stem  pointing  considerably  towards  the 
same  side.  Thus  each  of  the  three  organs  corresponds  to,  and  occupies  the  centre 
of,  one  of  the  lobes  of  the  mastax.  This  obliquity  of  tbe  parts  with  respect  to  each 
other,  and  to  the  planes  of  the  body,  is  one  cause  of  the  great  difficulty  which  attends 
an  endeavour  to  reconcile  the  various  aspects  of  this  organ  in  any  intelligible  manner. 

25.  Each  malleus  consists  of  two  principal  portions,  articidated  with  each  other  by 


426  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


a powerful  joint,  which  seems  to  be  ginglymate  in  its  character,  admitting  of  motion 
in  one  plane  only.  The  two  opposing  surfaces  appear  to  be  united  by  elastic  liga- 
ments, while  their  irregularities  lock  into  each  other. 

26.  The  inferior  portion  of  the  malleus,  which  I shall  call  the  manubrium  (c),  is  an 
irregularly-curved  piece,  shaped  somewhat  like  the  scapula  of  a mammal,  knobbed 
at  its  head,  and  flattened  at  its  lower  or  free  end,  where  also  it  is  twisted  to  one  side. 
Ridges  run  down  it,  on  both  the  interior  and  exterior  surfaces.  The  head  is  obliquely 
truncate  ; and  it  is  this  oblique  surface  {d),  that  is  jointed  to  the  superior  portion  (e), 
which,  from  its  prevalent  form  in  other  genera,  rather  than  in  this,  I call  the  uncus. 

27.  The  uncus,  when  at  rest,  is  placed  nearly  at  right  angles  to  the  manubrium, 
but  is  capable  of  considerable  change  of  relative  position  by  means  of  the  joint.  It 
consists  of  five  or  six  Jinger-like  processes  (figs.  2,  3),  set  parallel  to  each  other,  and 
separated  by  narrow  interspaces,  which  appear  to  be  occupied  by  a thin  membrane. 
These  are  not  joints,  moveable  inter  se,  but  resemble  the  teeth  of  a comb  in  their 
mode  of  origination.  They  are  slender,  rough,  and  enlarged  at  their  tips ; and  the 
ultimate  one  of  the  series,  next  the  dorsal  side  (fig.  3),  is  an  offshoot  from  the  penul- 
timate. Their  extremities  are  bent  abruptly  downward,  approaching  each  other ; 
and  they  are  so  arranged,  that  the  whole  uncus  forms  a segment,  about  one-third,  of 
a cylinder,  or  a drum  with  incurving  sides,  with  a broad  truncate  end  (fig.  4). 

28.  The  incus  {/)  also  consists  of  distinct  articulated  portions.  The  principal  are 
two  stout  rami  (g),  together  vase-like  in  ventral  aspect  (fig.  1),  resting  on  what 
appears  to  be  a slender  pedicel  {fulcrum,  h).  But  viewed  laterally,  the  fulcrum  is 
seen  to  be  a thin  plate  (fig.  5),  to  one  edge  of  which  the  rami  are  jointed,  in  such  a 
manner,  that  they  can  open  and  close,  like  a pair  of  shears.  Each  ramus  is  a thick, 
somewhat  trigonal  piece,  with  the  outer  side  rounded,  the  upper  side  hollowed,  and 
the  inner  side  flat,  and  in  contact  with  the  corresponding  face  of  its  fellow,  in  a 
state  of  repose.  The  uncus  of  each  malleus,  respectively,  falls  into  the  concavity  of 
each  ramus ; and  is  fastened  to  it  by  a stout  triangular  muscle  {i),  which  is  seen 
passing  from  the  hollow  of  the  ramus  to  the  under  surface  of  the  uncus. 

29.  Such  are  the  firm  parts ; which,  whatever  their  material,  have  great  strength, 
solidity,  and  density.  Their  density,  however,  is  not  uniform ; for,  in  some  parts, 
they  appear  to  merge  insensibly  into  membrane,  or  into  the  muscular  bands.  They 
are  perfectly  transparent  and  colourless,  and  have  a high  refractive  power.  Their 
substance  is  not  affected  by  a solution  of  potash,  but  is  instantly  dissolved,  without 
effervescence,  by  hydrochloric,  nitric,  and  acetic  acid.  Sulphuric  acid  also  dissolves 
it,  without  any  ebullition  that  appears  to  originate  from  the  contact. 

30.  The  special  muscles  which  move  these  organs  are  numerous,  and  several  of 
them  massive.  The  walls  of  the  mastax  themselves  are,  as  has  been  already  said, 
muscular,  and  so  thick  as  to  leave  the  internal  cavity  but  small.  There  are  indica- 
tions of  muscles,  which  I have  not  been  able  satisfactorily  to  define ; but  the  following 
are  well  made  out.  A thick  muscle  (/)  embraces  the  upper  and  outer  angle  of  the 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


427 


articulation  of  the  malleus,  and  is  inserted  in  the  wall  of  the  mastax  immediately  over 
against  it.  A semi-crescentic  band  {It)  is  inserted,  by  its  broad  end,  into  the  inferior 
and  basal  part  of  the  uncus,  and  by  its  slender  end  into  the  middle  of  the  inner  side 
of  the  manubrium.  The  former  of  these  {j)  may  be  considered  as  an  extensor,  the 
latter  (k)  as  a flexor.  A broad  and  powerful  band  (/)  is  inserted  along  the  whole 
inner  side  of  the  manubrium,  and  also  apparently  into  the  basal  part  of  the  uncus, 
and  passes  inwards  towards  the  posterior  or  lobate  wall  of  the  mastax ; into  which 
it  probably  merges,  as  I have  not  been  able  to  trace  its  inferior  insertion. 

31.  The  movements  of  these  organs  are  very  complex.  The  most  conspicuous  is 
an  alternate  -approach  and  recession  of  the  two  unci,  by  a perpendicular  motion  on 
the  hinge-joint.  The  opposing  faces  come  into  successive  contact,  and  bruise  down 
the  particles  of  food  in  the  manner  of  mullers.  But  a moment’s  observation  shows 
that  there  are  other  movements  besides  this.  The  manubria  move  also  at  the  same 
time ; their  free  extremities  are  made  to  approach  each  other,  as  the  unci  mutually 
recede ; and  that  with  a peculiar  twist,  which  greatly  alters  the  apparent  figure  of 
these  organs.  [See  figs.  6 to  8 ; of  which  6 represents  the  right  manubrium  when  the 
unci  have  receded,  8 the  same  when  the  unci  approach,  and  7 an  intermediate  con- 
dition.] The  incus  also  has  considerable  motion.  Sometimes  the  fulcrum  is  elevated 
and  the  rami  depressed,  so  that  the  former  is  invisible:  the  rami  open  and  shut  with 
the  working  of  the  mallei,  being  fastened  to  them  by  the  strong  triangular  muscle 
above-mentioned ; but  it  is  also  evident  that  they  have  a motion  of  separating  and 
closing  independent  of  the  mallei,  though  this  is  comparatively  limited  in  extent,  and 
not  very  often  exercised.  Again,  when  substances  are  brought  into  contact  with  the 
jaws,  which,  for  any  reason,  are  not  acceptable,  they  are  thrown  up  through  the  buccal 
funnel,  by  a peculiar  scoop-like  action  of  the  unci,  which  is  very  curious  to  witness. 

32.  I have  seen  this  action  many  times  ; but,  in  particular,  on  one  occasion,  in 
which  much  intelligence  seemed  to  be  displayed.  1 was  watching  a Brachionus  pala 
in  water,  in  which  a number  of  that  beautiful,  mulberry-like  animalcule,  Syncrypta 
volvox,  were  revolving.  One  or  two  of  these  had  been  devoured,  and  were  very 
visible  in  the  intestinal  canal  of  the  Brachioyius,  which  appeared  excited  by  the  enjoy- 
ment to  unusual  efforts.  The  mode  in  which  it  directed  its  ciliated  flaps  towards 
the  spot  where  a Syncrypta  was  whirling,  or  suddenly  stretched  forward  to  the  extent 
of  the  long  foot,  as  if  it  would  seize  the  prey,  seemed  to  indicate  a perception  of  its 
presence;  as  did,  still  more,  the  manner  in  which  it  depressed  the  lip-like  lobe  of  the 
rotatory  organ  on  one  side,  when  the  prey  was  in  the  vortex  on  that  side,  and  the 
eager  haste  with  which  it  shrank  down  into  the  lorica,  the  instant  the  animalcula 
dropped  at  length  into  the  buccal  funnel.  Now,  however,  arose  a difliculty ; the 
black,  millstone-like  unci  opened  and  stretched  forward  to  grasp  the  little  victim  ; 
they  touched  the  globular  investing  case,  but  could  not  embrace  it.  The  Brachionus 
redoubled  his  efforts  ; the  jaws  gaped  vigorously,  but  could  only  scrape  the  sides  of 
the  little  globe,  which  at  every  touch  slipped  away,  the  expanse  of  the  unci  being  not 

MDCCCLVI.  3 L 


428  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


quite  sufficient  to  grasp  it.  At  length  the  animal  appeared  indignant;  the  jaws  no 
more  endeavoured  to  grasp,  but,  with  a very  distinct  and  sudden  upward  jerk,  threw 
out  the  prey,  which  until  then  had  been  retained  and  pressed  downwards  by  the 
contraction  of  the  sides  of  the  hiiccal  funnel.  Several  times  I saw  this  scene  occur, 
with  the  same  violent  efforts,  and  the  same  ill  success.  A smaller  Syncrypta,  how- 
ever, was  bruised  down  by  the  jaws,  while  under  my  eye,  and  passed  quickly  into  the 
stomach. 

33.  This  incident  I have  described  with  some  minuteness,  not  only  as  illustrating 
the  particular  movement  in  question,  but  also  because  of  its  bearing  upon  the  gene- 
ral functions  of  the  organs  under  review — the  prehension  and  rnanducation  of  food. 
And  it  may  be  well,  before  I notice  the  modifications  of  the  mastax  in  other  forms, 
to  say  a few  words  on  the  structure  and  functions  of  the  buccal  funnel,  and  of  some 
other  contiguous  organs. 

34.  The  broad  vibratile  disk  of  Brachionus  is  deeply  cleft  at  its  mental  edge,  the 
incision  reaching  down  to  the  summit  of  the  mastax.  The  sides  of  the  cleft  can  be 
brought  into  contact ; and  hence  the  structure  is  visible  only  at  certain  times,  as 
when  food  is  taken  in.  But  the  interior  is  a wide  infundibuliform  cavity,  narrowing 
to  a slender  tube  at  its  lower  extremity,  where  its  sides  merge  into  the  parietes  of  the 
mastax.  This  is  the  cavity  which  I have  called  the  buccal  funnel. 

35.  In  Brachionus  amphiceros  the  strong  setiform  cilia  of  the  disk-lobes  overarch 
the  incision  ; and  its  upper  edges,  for  a short  distance  downward,  are  irregularly 
jagged  or  crenated.  In  other  species,  as  B.  Bakeri  and  B.  dorcas,  the  margins  are 
smooth.  In  every  case,  however,  the  interior  surface  of  the  funnel  is  set  with  fine 
cilia,  and  currents,  or  ciliary  waves,  may  constantly  be  seen  pouring  down  the  tube. 

36.  The  sides  of  the  funnel,  in  all  cases,  are  formed  of  irregular  bulbous  masses  of 
transparent  flesh,  which  may  be  presumed  to  be  muscular.  Those  masses  which 
encircle  the  rim  are  usually  large,  and  more  regular.  The  parts  are  very  flexible  and 
mobile.  The  tube  can  be  quite  closed  by  the  contact  of  its  walls,  even  while  the 
upper  part  of  the  funnel  remains  expanded  ; in  B.  Bakeri  I have  seen  a globose  mass 
occasionally  pushed  up  from  behind  the  tube  to  a considerable  distance  up  the  funnel, 
and  presently  retracted.  It  may  be  that  some  function  analogous  to  taste  is  exer- 
cised by  this  organ. 

37.  Attached  to  the  tube  of  the  funnel,  resting  on  the  summit  of  the  mastax,  are 
seated  a pair  of  large,  clear,  vesicular  organs  (see  fig.  9,  w),  which,  from  their  appear- 
ance and  their  situation,  may  be  assumed  to  be  salivary  glands.  In  Brachionus  they 
are  of  great  size,  and  are  generally  two-  or  three-lobed.  In  Asplanchna  (fig.  56), 
also,  they  are  very  large,  and  kidney-shaped.  In  the  genera  Euchlanis  (fig.  12)  and 
Anurcea,  similar,  and  probably  homologous  vesicles  are  seated  on  the  oesophagus,  just 
below  its  exit  from  the  mastax. 

38.  The  tube  of  the  buccal  funnel  (m)  invariably  opens  upon  the  spot  where  the 
unci  meet.  The  particles  of  food,  or  the  minute  animalcules,  which  form  the  prey  of 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


429 


the  Rotifera,  are  drawn  by  the  discal  vortices  into  the  funnel,  and  lodged  at  this 
point,  within  the  mastax.  The  unci,  and  the  rami  of  the  incus,  conjointly  work  on 
them;  and  they  are  speedily  dismissed  to  the  tips  of  the  rami,  immediately  below 
which,  on  the  dorsal  side  of  the  mastax,  the  oesophagus  opens  ip)',  a membranous 
tube,  capable  of  great  expansion  and  contraction,  but  varying  much  in  length  and 
diameter  in  different  genera.  A current  of  water  appears  to  be  almost  constantly 
setting  through  the  funnel,  along  the  rami,  in  a direction  towards  their  extremities, 
and  thence  through  the  oesophagus  into  the  stomach. 

39.  In  general,  the  ciliary  vortices  are  sufficient  to  bring  the  prey  within  ihe funnel-, 
but  in  several  genera  of  the  family  Euchlanidota,  as  Metopidia,  Colurus,  Monura,  and 
Stephanops,  there  is  a curious  accessory  organ,  which  aids  in  the  capture  of  prey ; at 
least,  I am  sure  it  is  so  employed  in  several  species  of  Metopidia. 

40.  Thus,  in  M.  acuminata  (fig.  1 1),  the  frontal  region  is  formed  by  an  arched  fleshy 
process  occipitally,  which  is  approached  by  a small  one  at  the  mental  side;  and  be- 
tween these  is  the  wide  entrance  of  the  huccal funnel.  The  occipital  process  is  pro- 
tected by  a horny  crystalline  plate,  forming  a segment  of  a sphere,  and  when  viewed 
laterally  taking  the  appearance  of  a curved  horn.  It  can  be  partially  protruded  and 
retracted,  and  also  bent  down  to  meet  the  mental  lobe. 

41.  This  apparatus,  when  the  animal  is  taking  food,  is  kept  in  vigorous  action.  A 
strong  vortex  is  produced  by  the  ciliary  wheels ; and  as  the  floating  atoms  whirl  by, 
the  moveable  plate  is  thrown  forward  with  a grasping  motion,  the  fleshy  head  being, 
at  the  same  time,  protruded  ; and,  when  the  lobes  are  in  contact,  retracted.  This  is 
repeated  almost  every  instant,  with  manifest  eagerness  and  discrimination,  the  man- 
ducatory apparatus  working  vigorously  all  the  while. 

42.  The  same  curious  organ  is  frequently  employed  in  another  way.  It  is  bent 
considerably  downward ; and,  as  the  animal  crawls  deliberately  up  and  down  the 
stems  of  aquatic  plants,  it  is  used  to  rake  and  grub  among  the  floccose  deposits,  the 
minute  Diatomacece,  &c.,  that  adhere  to  them.  (See  fig.  11.) 

43.  Taking  the  structure  described  in  Brachionus  as  the  standard,  I now  proceed 
to  examine  how  it  is  modified  in  other  genera.  In  Euchlanis  deflexa  (figs.  12  to  15), 
the  fulcrum  of  the  incus  (h)  is  thinned  off  ventrally  to  a blade-like  edge,  which  is 
minutely  jagged,  and  dilated  laterally  at  the  foot.  The  rami  are  very  large  (g),  ex- 
panding at  the  sides  in  a triangular,  pointed  form  ; and  arching  across  the  mastax 
towards  the  dorsum,  where  each  terminates  in  an  elongated,  curved,  descending  spine. 
The  two  points  approach  each  other  in  a forcipate  manner. 

44.  The  rami  are  crossed  at  right  angles  by  the  four-fingered  unci  of  the  mallei,  which 
by  their  motions  evidently  open  the  rami ; though  these  latter  do  not  appear,  as  usual, 
to  be  separable  to  the  fulcrum,  but  to  be  united  into  one  piece,  with  an  ovate  exca- 
vation between  them  (fig.  14),  that  does  not  reach  to  the  fulcrum. 

45.  The  manubria  are  more  developed  than  in  Brachionus.  Instead  of  the  thick- 
ened knob,  to  which  the  uncus  is  articulated,  the  upper  portion  of  the  manubrium 

3 L 2 


430  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


forms  a broad  laminar  dilatation,  down  which  run  several  carinse,  or  ridges,  of  solid 
material ; the  interspaces,  apparently,  being  filled  with  membrane,  or  softer  and  more 
fleshy  substance  (c).  The  ridges  enclose  three  areas,  of  which  the  central  one  extends 
through  the  whole  length  of  the  manubrium,  and  the  two  external  ones  are  smaller, 
and  compose  the  dilatation.  This  structure  is  worthy  of  notice,  since  it  is  highly 
characteristic ; and,  as  we  shall  presently  find,  will  help  us  to  identify  this  organ  under 
very  modified  forms. 

46.  The  parietes  of  the  mastax  are  much  thinner  than  in  Brachionus.  A stout 
muscle  {j)  embraces  the  articulation  of  the  malleus,  including  a portion  of  the  manu- 
brium, and  of  the  uncus.  In  E.  hipposideros,  a fan-shaped  muscular  band  spreads 
along  the  interior  side  of  both  these  parts,  filling  the  angle,  and  stretching  from  one 
to  the  other : it  is  evidently  a powerful  Jlexor. 

47.  In  this  genus  we  see  a structure  of  the  incus,  which  prevails  extensively  in  the 
class:  each  ramus  is  produced  into  an  angular  projection  on  either  side  of  the  ful- 
crum. To  this  projection,  which  I shall  call  alula  (0),  a muscular  band  is  fastened, 
which  passes  down,  and  is  inserted  into  the  fundus  of  the  mastax.  Another  more 
slender  band  or  ligament  connects  the  projection  with  the  foot  of  the  fulcrum. 

48.  The  tube  of  the  buccal  funnel  {m)  is  very  wide.  The  oesophagus  (p)  is  also 
wide,  and  short.  On  the  latter  duct  are  seated  two  globose  clear  salivary  glands  {n), 
each  of  which  encloses  a spherical  nucleated  nucleus.  These  must  not  be  confounded 
with  the  pancreatic  glands,  which  are  much  larger,  and  seated  on  the  stomach,  below 
the  entrance  of  the  oesophagus. 

49.  In  Notommata  aurita  (figs.  16  to  21),  while  there  is  much  resemblance  to  Eu- 
chlanis,  the  structure  is  in  some  respects  peculiar.  The  form  of  the  mastax  is  prolate, 
the  longitudinal  diameter  exceeding  the  transverse, — a figure  which  is  dependent  on 
the  fact,  that  the  fulcrum  of  the  incus,  and  the  manubria  of  the  mallei,  are  greatly 
produced  in  length,  and  are  all  extended  nearly  in  the  same  direction ; viz.  that  of 
the  longitudinal  axis  of  the  body  (see  figs.  16  & 17)- 

50.  The  manubrium,  as  in  Euchlanis,  is  three-looped,  and  dilated  at  the  summit, 
unsym metrically  (see  fig.  20).  The  uncus  is  broad,  composed  of  five  fingers,  which 
are  somewhat  divergent,  and  is  arched  transversely  as  well  as  longitudinally.  It  is 
furnished,  on  that  side  which  is  next  to  the  dorsum,  with  a peculiar,  semicrescentic 
process  {q),  strengthened  by  a carina:  the  points  of  these  two  processes  are  opposed 
to  each  other  at  their  tips,  beyond  the  tips  of  the  rami  of  the  incus. 

51.  The  fulcrum  of  the  incus,  when  viewed  ventrally,  might  be  mistaken  for  a 
straight  slender  rod,  with  a round,  dilated  foot  (fig.  16).  It  really  consists  of  two 
slender  curved  rods,  united  by  a thin  lamina : the  exterior  of  these,  which  is  dilated 
laterally  at  the  foot,  is  more  curved  than  the  interior,  whose  extremity  it  receives  in 
the  hollow  of  its  own  (fig.  17),  as  the  chord  of  a bow  joins  the  extremity  of  the  arc. 
The  summit  of  the  fulcrum  is  obliquely  truncate,  and  to  this  oblique  surface  are  arti- 
culated, by  a hinge-joint,  the  two  rami. 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


431 


52.  The  rami  here  take  the  form  of  moveable  blades  or  jaws  (figs.  16,21),  which 
arch  across  the  vault  of  the  mastax  towards  the  dorsum,  and  receive,  on  their  convex 
surfaces,  the  unci,  which  are  tied  to  them  near  their  extremities.  The  rami  are 
capable  of  being  widely  opened  (fig.  21),  when  several  jagged  teeth  are  seen  on  their 
opposing  edges,  which  lock  into  each  other  when  closed.  In  the  act  of  expansion, 
an  obtusely  pointed  lamina  is  seen  below  their  arch  (fig.  21,  r),  which  is  capable  of 
being  slightly  protruded  or  contracted,  independently  of  the  motion  of  the  rami  or 
unci.  The  rami  themselves,  though  opened  and  closed  with  the  mallei,  are  not 
dependent  on  the  action  of  the  latter,  for  they  evidently  possess  a powerful  sponta- 
neous motion  in  opening  and  closing.  This  movement  is  doubtless  produced  by  the 
muscular  bands  which  (as  we  saw  in  Euchlanis)  connect  the  lateral  processes  {alulce) 
of  the  rami,  which  are  greatly  developed,  with  the  fundus  of  the  mastax,  and  with  the 
foot  of  the  fulcrum  (t  and  u). 

53.  The  muscles  of  the  malleus  differ  from  those  which  we  have  seen  in  Brachionus 
and  Euchlanis.  A long  band  passes  from  the  summit  of  the  manubrium  to  the  fun- 
dus of  the  mastax ; another  ties  its  lower  extremity  to  the  paries,  immediately  below 
it ; while  a third  passes  upward  from  the  inner  face  of  the  same  piece,  probably  to  the 
inferior  surface  of  the  uncus  (fig.  16). 

54.  The  entrance  of  the  buccal  funnel  into  the  mastax  is,  in  this  species,  protected 
by  a vault  of  many  complex  pieces,  which  appear  solid  (fig.  16,  v),  though  of  such 
tenuity  and  fragility  that  I have  not  been  able  to  resolve  them  satisfactorily. 

5l5.  Notommata  clavulata  (figs.  22  to  26),  a species  of  large  size  and  of  peculiar 
beauty,  is  remarkable  for  the  great  development  of  the  mallei.  The  buccal  funnel  is 
here  shallow,  but  richly  ciliated ; its  short  tube  merges  insensibly  into  i\\e  mastax 
(fig.  23),  which  consists  of  three  lobes,  more  than  usually  marked,  and  nearly  sphe- 
rical. Each  manubrium  is,  as  usual,  dilated  above,  where  the  lateral  loops  are  tri- 
gonal, and  attenuated  below.  A broad  trapezoidal  uncus  (figs.  25,  26)  is  articulated 
to  it,  of  eight  fingers,  of  which  the  second  and  third  are  branches  of  the  first.  The 
fingers  are  arched  both  transversely  and  longitudinally,  and  their  extremities  are  con- 
nected by  a web  (fig.  26).  A transverse  process  crosses  their  inferior  surface,  doubt- 
less a point  of  attachment  to  the  ligament,  which  fastens  them  to  the  ramus  of  the 
incus,  and  which  corresponds  to  the  triangular  ligament  {i)  described  in  Brachionus 
(§  28).  The  elasticity  of  this  ligament  is  well  shown  in  the  working  of  the  jaws;  for 
the  uncus  is  elevated  to  a considerable  distance  above  the  level  of  the  incus  (see  fig.  24), 
when  the  appearance  and  action  of  the  pair  are  exactly  those  of  curved  dentate  man- 
dibles, opening  and  snapping  across  the  tube  of  the  buccal  funnel.  The  incus  is 
placed  nearly  horizontally,  or  at  right  angles  with  the  plane  of  the  manubria;  but, 
during  the  vigorous  working  of  these  organs,  they  are  alternately  depressed  and  ele- 
vated to  so  great  a degree,  that  the  fulcrum  appears  now  above,  now  below  their  level. 

56.  The  fulcrum  is  rather  short,  much  compressed,  and  thickened  at  its  free  extre- 
mity; its  direction  scarcely  deviates  from  that  of  the  rami, — in  this  respect  contrast- 


432  MR,.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


ing  widely  with  IVot.  aur'ita.  The  rami,  when  closed,  assume  a pyriform  or  lozenge- 
like outline,  but  are  cleft  to  their  base ; and  as  the  unci  are  attached  to  the  terminal 
half  of  their  length,  they  open  widely  (fig.  24). 

57.  The  whole  manducatory  apparatus  in  Anurcea  acuminata  bears  a resemblance, 
singularly  exact,  to  this  of  Not.  clavulata,  notwithstanding  the  external  diversity  of 
the  two  animals.  The  similarity  extends  even  to  the  manner  in  which  the  unci,  which 
are  seven-fingered,  are  protruded  into  ihe,  funnel,  and  fiercely  snapped. 

58.  Notommata  'petromyzon  (Plate  XVII.  figs.  27  to  31)  is  remarkable  for  the  ex- 
treme simplicity  of  the  parts  under  review  ; a circumstance  which  makes  it  peculiarly 
valuable  as  a study.  It  is  one  of  those  species  in  which  the  ciliated  facial  disk  is  very 
oblique,  being  nearly  on  the  plane  of  the  venter.  Hence  the  buccal  funnel  is  short  at 
all  times,  and  can  be  quite  obliterated,  the  entrance  of  the  mastax  opening  on  the 
facial  surface.  This  organ  is  a delicate  sac  with  membranous  walls,  of  obcordate 
form  (fig.  31),  deeply  trilobate  at  the  fundus. 

59.  The  fulcrum  of  the  incus  (fig.  31)  is  thin  and  blade-like ; straight,  except  that 
its  free  extremity  is  slightly  incurved,  very  deep,  and  truncate  at  its  articulate  extre- 
mity. I’lie  ra7ni  (fig.  29),  when  united,  form  an  isosceles  triangle,  cleft  to  the  fulcrum 
and  arching  downwards. 

60.  The  mallei  are  equally  simple.  The  manubrium  (figs.  28,  31)  is  a slender  rod, 
with  a projecting  process  near  its  articulation.  The  uncus  (fig.  28)  consists  of  two 
fingers,  membranous  in  texture,  and  at  times  evanescent,  which  work  on  the  ramus 
near  its  extremity;  and  two  muscular  threads  are  seen  connecting  the  former  with 
the  latter. 

61.  Notwithstanding  the  simplicity  of  the  organs  in  this  instance,  a comparison  with 
Not.  aurita  will  show  that  the  structure  is  essentially  the  same  in  the  two  species. 

62.  In  Notommata  lacinulata  (figs.  32  to  34)  the  tnastax  is  very  large,  subtrihedral, 
with  the  orifice  at  the  surface  of  the  disk  or  protruding  from  it ; so  that  there  is  no 
buccal  funnel.  The  incus,  though  somewhat  simple,  is  very  large;  and  the  rami, 
when  closed,  form  a hemispherical  dome  of  thin  texture;  so  as  to  resemble,  when 
viewed  obliquely  from  above  (fig.  33),  a globe  of  glass  standing  on  a pedestal  (the 
fulcrum).  The  similitude  is  enhanced  by  lines  passing  in  different  directions  over 
the  vault,  like  the  astronomical  circles.  The  mallei  (fig.  34)  are  slender  rods,  hooked 
at  the  bottom;  and  soldered  at  the  upper  part  across  the  dome,  where  they  become 
very  much  attenuated,  without  any  distinct  division  into  manubrium  and  uncus. 

63.  The  rami  of  the  mcus  diVe  divided  to  their  base  ; in  use,  they  are  protruded  con- 
siderably, and  are  distinctly  organs  of  prehension  ; their  edges  being  employed  vigor- 
ously, in  nibbling  at  the  floccose  matter  that  accumulates  on  aquatic  plants,  as  the 
little  animal  crawls,  by  means  of  its  two-toed  foot,  up  and  down  the  stalks. 

64.  M.  Dujardin  has  constituted  a genus  (Plagiognatha)  for  this  species  and  Not. 
felis  of  Ehrenberg  ; mainly,  however,  because  they  have  “ machoires  a branches 
parallHes  tournees  du  meme  cote,  et  recourb^es  vers  le  bord  cilie,  avec  une  tige  cen- 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


433 


trale  {fulcrum)  droite,  tres-longue,  elargie  a sa  base  This  description  is  so  vague, 
that  it  might  embrace  a multitude  of  widely  remote  species  and  genera  ; while  it  does 
not  at  all  indicate  the  true  peculiarity  of  the  organs  it  professes  to  define. 

65.  Furcularia  gihba  (figs.  35  to  37)  comes,  in  the  form  of  its  jaws,  very  near  to 
Not.  lacinulatu',  but  most  of  the  species  of  this  genus,  as  described  by  Professor 
Ehrenberg  {not  by  M.  Dujardin,  who  includes  in  it  a number  of  dissimilar  species, 
already  well  defined  and  separated  by  his  Prussian  predecessor),  are  distinguished 
by  the  manubria  being  dilated  laterally  at  their  free  extremity,  so  as  to  resemble 
the  foot  of  a towel-horse.  These  expansions  are  doubtless  for  the  attachment  of 
muscles  (which,  however,  I have  not  been  able  to  define);  and  as  the  simple  uncus 
is  affixed  to  the  edge  of  the  ramus  only  by  its  point  (fig.  36),  a greater  play  is  pro- 
bably afforded  it  by  such  muscles,  in  the  combined  action  of  the  jaws  upon  the  prey. 

66.  The  rami  are  broad,  glassy,  vaulted,  cleft  throughout,  capable  of  widely  open- 
ing (fig.  36),  and  produced  into  long  decurved  points  (fig.  37).  Their  lower  edges 
are  thickened,  so  as  to  form  a marginal  band. 

67.  Furcularia  marina  has  its  manducatory  organs  formed  on  another  type,  ap- 
proaching that  of  Diglena ; as  I shall  presently  notice. 

68.  Notommata  gibba  (figs.  38  to  40)  prepares  us  for  the  remarkable  modification 
of  these  organs  which  we  find  in  Synchceta  and  Polyartkra.  It  is  a minute  species, 
having  much  of  the  appearance  and  habits  of  Not.  lacinulata  ; but  remarkable  for  the 
length  and  lozenge-form  outline  of  the  mastax,  owing  to  the  great  posterior  develop- 
ment of  the  ventral  lobe,  which  is  itself  dependent  on  the  great  elongation  of  the 
fulcrum.  The  manubria  (fig.  39)  are  long  and  incurved  at  their  free  extremities ; the 
unci  are  single-toothed,  and  soldered  to  the  rami.  The  latter  are  curved,  glassy 
blades  ; along  the  middle  of  each  runs  a line,  which  is  difficult  to  understand : after 
much  study,  I think  it  to  be  the  angle  of  depression  of  the  surface,  as  represented 
ideally  at  fig.  40. 

69.  In  Synchceta  and  Polyarthra,  the  mastax  and  its  included  organs  attain  their 
maximum  of  development  as  regards  dimensions,  though  not  as  regards  complexity. 
In  some  species  of  the  former  genus  fully  one-third  of  the  entire  bulk  is  occupied  by 
these  organs.  Owing,  however,  to  the  extreme  delicacy  of  the  parts,  particularly  of 
the  mallei,  and  the  unequal  refraction  produced  by  the  prismatic  form  of  the  animals, 
the  structure  is  unusually  difficult  to  resolve.  Ehrenberg  evidently  did  not  under- 
stand it : the  points  of  the  unci  he  appears  to  have  seen,  in  S.  pectinata,  but  no  more  ; 
and  the  frontal  styles  he  mistook  for  accessory  jaws -f-.  In  Polyarthra,  he  merely 
says  that  “there  are  two  single-toothed  jaws:{:.”  His  figures  give  little  or  no  light 
on  the  true  structure  in  either  genus. 

70.  Dujardin  knows  nothing  of  Synchceta,  no  species  of  which  he  seems  to  have 
seen ; but  concludes,  most  groundlessly,  that  it  is  not  distinct  from  Hydatina.  Of 
Polyarthra  he  merely  says,  “Machoires  unident^es^ and  though  he  figures  a spe- 

* Infusoires,  p.  651.  f Infusionsthier.  p.  437.  1 Ibid.  p.  440.  § Infus.  p.  641. 


434  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 

cies*,  he  gives  no  details  of  the  internal  structure,  but  represents  two  projecting  arti- 
culated setae,  which  he  calls  “ appendices  de  la  bouche.”  Of  the  latter,  however,  I 
must  confess,  after  the  examination  of  dozens  of  specimens,  I can  discern  no  trace, 
with  a power  of  560  diameters. 

71.  In  1850  I had  discovered,  in  a species  of  Synchoeta,  what  seemed  to  me  a most 
anomalous  condition  of  the  manducatory  organs.  As  the  species  appeared  new,  I 
described  it-f-,  in  1851,  by  the  name  of  S.  mordax.  The  peculiarity  consisted  in  two 
pairs  of  hooked  jaws,  exactly  resembling  the  mandibles  and  maxillae  of  a beetle,  now 
and  then  projected  from  the  front,  and  opened  with  a sudden  snapping  motion,  and 
instantly  withdrawn.  Each  pair  moved  independently  of  the  other,  but  in  evident 
connexion  with  two  pairs  of  bulbous  muscles,  seated  deep  in  the  breast.  They  could 
scarcely  be  discerned,  when  withdrawn  beneath  a sort  of  membranous  lip  that  formed 
the  frontal  outline ; and  no  trace  of  them  could  be  recognized  after  the  animal  had 
been  subjected  to  the  compressorium. 

72.  Until  recently,  this  structure  completely  baffled  my  endeavours  to  solve  it.  It 
was  totally  unlike  anything  that  I was  acquainted  with  in  the  whole  class ; and  yet 
I was  quite  sure  of  the  exactitude  of  the  observation,  having  witnessed  the  pheno- 
mena on  many  occasions.  Very  lately,  however,  I have  succeeded,  by  means  of  the 
solution  of  potash,  in  defining  the  whole  structure  of  the  solid  parts,  and  can  demon- 
strate them  at  pleasure.  I found,  with  surprise,  that  there  is  in  them  no  deviation 
from  the  normal  type,  while  the  function  and  homology  of  the  organs  are  greatly 
illustrated  by  their  action. 

73.  Themastax,  as  before  stated,  is  of  large  size,  ventricose,  globose,  or  subcubical 
in  figure,  with  both  the  incus  and  the  mallei  so  much  bent,  as  to  form,  when  viewed 
laterally  (fig.  43),  each  two  sides  of  a quadrangle.  The  f ulcrum  is  a slender,  com- 
pressed rod,  slightly  arcuate.  The  rami  are  thin,  elastic  blades,  nearly  straight  when 
viewed  laterally  (fig.  43),  but  arched  in  a forcipate  manner  ; the  internal  edges  not  in 
contact,  but  approaching  at  the  points,  which  are  somewhat  twisted.  The  mallei  are 
slender ; the  manuhrium  much  bent ; the  uncus  a single,  pointed  finger,  connected 
with  the  ramwi' by  a delicate  membrane,  cut  into  teeth, — at  least  in  S.  tremula  (fig.  42). 
The  points  of  the  unci  form  the  anterior,  as  the  points  of  the  rami  form  the  posterior, 
pair  of  snapping  teeth. 

74.  The  vigorous  action  of  these  jaws  would  lead  us  to  expect  powerful  muscles, 
and  we  find  them  peculiarly  thick  and  bulbose.  The  great  convergent  pair  with 
clubbed  summits,  that  form  a conspicuous  V-shaped  object  in  the  midst  of  the  ani- 
mal, are  muscles,  which  envelope  the  mallei  (fig.  41),  and  are  seen,  during  the  mo- 
mentary protrusion  of  their  tips,  like  thick  gums  around  the  bases  of  the  teeth.  A 
thick,  clavate  muscle  also  proceeds  from  the  articulation  of  the  uncus,  and  lines  the 
globosity  of  each  lateral  lobe  of  the  mastax  (fig.  41).  In  8.  mordax  a pair  of  muscu- 
lar bulbs  are  placed,  one  on  each  side  of  the  foot  of  the  f ulcrum : these  are  probably 

* Infus.  pi.  21.  fig.  6,  A.B.  t Ann.  Nat.  Hist.,  8ept.  1851. 


OP  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


4 35 

the  extremities  of  fasciae,  that  extend  to  the  rami;  as  the  motions  of  the  latter  are 
synchronous  with  twitchings  in  these  bulbs. 

73.  There  is  a subtile  clear  membrane  stretched  over  the  whole  apparatus,  but  not 
in  contact  with  it ; for  it  has  a slight  power  of  independent  contraction  and  pro- 
trusion. It  is  of  considerable  breadth,  with  a blunt  point  in  the  centre,  which  is 
simple  in  S.  mordax,  bifid  in  S.  tremula  (fig.  41).  As  there  is  no  buccal  funnel^  tins 
must  be  the  occipital  (or  rather  frontal)  margin  of  the  niastax,  the  teeth  being  evi- 
dently extruded  from  beneath  it  ; there  must  also  be  a mental,  or  inferior,  margin, 
but  I have  not  defined  it. 

76.  Polyarthra  differs  little  from  Synchceta  in  the  form  of  its  jaws.  The  mastax  is 
more  oblique  (fig.  47),  its  central  lobe  being  much  produced,  and  pointing  towards 
the  venter.  The  muscles  of  the  upper  portion  are  so  dense  (fig.  44)  as  to  shut  out 
all  sight  of  the  interior,  until  they  are  dissolved  away  by  potash  (fig.  46). 

77.  The  rami  are  very  broad,  somewhat  square  at  the  base,  flat,  but  much  arched 
longitudinally  (fig.  47).  They  open  and  shut  vigorously,  with  a snapping  action,  but 
are  not  protruded  from  the  front;  their  whole  interior  edges  come  into  contact. 

78.  The  mallei  are  simple,  slender,  bent  rods,  apparently  without  distinct  articula- 
tion (fig.  48).  During  life  they  are  thick,  and  irregular  in  oulline  (fig.  46),  owing, 
doubtless,  to  their  being  invested  with  muscle,  as  in  Synchceta. 

79.  There  is  a clear  vaulted  membrane,  spreading  like  a dome  over  the  jaws,  when 
viewed  vertically  (i.  e.  from  the  front),  which  is  certainly  the  paries  of  the  mastax-.  it 
has  an  advancing  and  receding  margin  (fig.  49),  which  is  placed  considerably  towards 
the  mental  aspect,  where  the  mastax  opens  at  the  bottom  of  a shallow  funnel. 

80.  From  these  forms,  especially  that  of  Synchceta,  the  transition  is  easy  to  Diglena, 
Eosphora,  Albertia,  and  Furcularia  marina.  Thus,  in  Diglena  forcipata  (figs.  50,  51), 
the  incus  is  a true  forceps  ; the  rami  projecting  in  nearly  the  same  plane  as  the  fuL 
a-um.,  and  the  hooked  points  coming  into  contact.  The  edges  have  a peculiar  struc- 
ture, being  delicately  ridged  transversely;  while  from  the  terminal  points  of  the  ridges 
spring  slender  setse  in  a double  row,  which  project  so  as  to  oppose  those  of  the  other 
ramus.  This  curious  structure  I find  also  in  Diglena  grandis.  The  fulcrum  is  com- 
pressed. 

81.  The  mallei  have  nearly  straight  manuhria,  slightly  enlarged  at  the  free  extre- 
mity, and  clubbed  towards  the  joint,  where  they  are  invested  with  thick  muscle.  The 
uncus  is  a simple  curved  piece,  so  far  as  its  point  of  attachment  to  the  ramus ; but  at 
this  point  there  is  articulated  to  it  a stout  curved  acute  spine,  which,  when  the  rami 
are  closed,  crosses  its  fellow  of  the  opposite  uncus,  and  plays  over  the  setae  of  the 
ramus  (fig.  50),  In  Diglena  grandis  there  are  two  spines  on  each  uncus,  the  one  much 
shorter  than  the  other;  as  there  are  also  in  Eosphora  aurita.  In  the  latter  species 
these  tooth-like  spines  are  projectile,  as  a formidable  pair  of  jaws;  and  1 doubt  not 
that  such  is  their  function  in  Diglena  also,  though  I have  not  seen  them  so  used  ; 
especially  as,  in  both  genera,  the  ciliated  disk  is  prolonged  on  the  prone  surface 

3 M 


MDCCCLVI. 


436  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


nearly  in  the  longitudinal  plane  of  the  venter ; so  that  the  aperture  of  the  mastax  is 
brought  to  the  surface,  without  the  intervention  of  any  appreciable  funnel. 

82.  Scarcely  differing  from  this  structure  is  that  of  the  curious  little  Alhertia  ver- 

miculus,  first  found  by  M.  Dujardin,  living  entozoically  in  Lumhricus  and  Limax, 
and  which  I have  found  in  the  intestine  of  Nais  prohoscidea  (figs.  52,  53).  Whether 
the  uncus  has  an  accessory  tooth,  or  not,  I cannot  certainly  say,  owing  to  the  minute- 
ness of  the  parts ; the  animal  being  only  of  an  inch  in  length,  and  the  dental 

apparatus  being  unusually  minute  in  proportion.  It  is,  however,  frequently  protruded, 
to  the  extent  of  fully  half  of  the  apparatus,  from  the  front,  and  vigorously  snapped. 

83.  Furcularia  marina  (figs.  54,  55)  is  another  species,  in  which  these  organs  are 
greatly  protrusile  ; the  whole  of  the  long  mallei  being  sometimes  exterior  to  the 
frontal  disk  (fig.  54).  The  incus  (fig.  55)  seems  to  me  a simple,  much-arcuated  for- 
ceps; and  the  mallei  to  be  without  unci,  the  manuhria  (simple  incurved  rods)  being 
articulated  to  the  bases  of  the  rami.  M,  Dujardin  describes  and  figures  them  differ- 
ently*, but  I believe  he  is  mistaken. 

84.  We  are  now  prepared  to  understand  the  form  of  dental  apparatus,  which  has 
hitherto  appeared  perfectly  anomalous  in  this  class, — that  of  Asplanchna,  as  described 
and  figured  by  Mr.  Brightwell  and  Mr.  Dalrymple,  in  the  case  of  A.  Brightwellii, 
and  by  myself  in  that  of  A.  priodonta.  To  these  must  be  added  Notommata  myrmeleo, 
and  N.  syrinx,  of  Ehrenberg  ; referrible  doubtless  to  the  same  genus.  A moment’s 
comparison  of  the  jaws  of  A.  priodonta  (Plate  XVIII.  figs.  56  to  59)  with  those  of  Syn- 
chceta  tremula,  or  of  Diglena  forcipata  (Plate  XVII.  figs.  41,  50)  either  opened  or 
closed,  will  show  that  the  former  constitute  an  incus,  with  the  fulcrum  much  dimi- 
nished ; the  very  row  of  teeth  that  runs,  like  the  edge  of  a saw,  along  the  interior  of 
the  ramus  (figs.  58, 59),  having  its  counterpart  in  the  ridges  and  setee  ai Diglena as 
also  in  the  teeth  of  these  organs  in  Notommata  aurita. 

85.  The  mallei,  at  first  sight,  seem  wholly  wanting  in  Asplanchna-,  but  they  are 
really  present,  though  in  a state  of  extreme  attenuation  and  degeneration.  Mr.  Dal- 
rymple thought  he  saw  an  occasional  glimpse  of  an  accessory  curved  point,  outside 
the  tip  of  each  jaw,  in  A.  BrightwelUi ; and  I have  invariably  observed  the  same  in 
both  that  species  and  A.  priodonta  (figs.  58,  59).  It  is  a curved  pointed  rod,  which, 
at  its  lower  end,  that  ordinarily  would  be  free,  is  attached  to  a process,  which  is 
itself  attached,  I believe,  by  a transverse  ligament,  to  the  ramw.?,  near  its  articulation. 
It  is  most  evanescent ; yet  it  is  not  dissolved  by  treatment  with  potash,  and  I have 
no  doubt  that  it  represents  the  malleus. 

86.  HhQ  fulcrum,  though  short  and  thin,  is  very  deep  ; the  depth  in  fact  exceeding 
the  length  (fig.  59) ; and  it  affords  a clear  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  articulation 
of  the  7'ami — a ginglymus  of  the  simplest  kind ; the  articulating  parts  having  straight 
parallel  edges,  united  by  an  interposed  membrane. 

87.  Another  peculiarity  in  this  genus  is  the  absence  of  the  mastax-,  at  least  in  its 

* Infus.  p.  649 ; and  pi.  22.  figs.  4,  c,  n,  e. 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


437 


ordinary  form  of  a chamber  inclosing^  the  trophi.  The  fulcrum  is  attached  to  a reni- 
form  muscular  cushion  (fig.  56) ; with  the  rami  projecting  freely  into  the  huccal  funnel ; 
and,  under  graduated  pressure,  protruded  from  the  front,  when  they  snap  vigorously. 
But  when  we  consider  that  the  normal  form  of  the  mastax  is  that  of  three  lobes,  of 
whieh  one  belongs  to  the  incus,  and  two  to  the  mallei,  it  is  natural  to  expect  that 
the  evaneseence  of  the  mallei  would  be  accompanied  by  the  evanescence  of  their 
muscular  lobes.  And  this  I conclude  is  the  true  state  of  the  case:  the  cushion  is 
the  lobe  of  the  incus,  and  therefore  the  sole  representative  of  the  mastax ; the  lateral 
lobes  having  become  obsolete. 

88.  I was  unwilling  to  interrupt  the  regular  gradation,  through  which  we  have 
traced  the  degeneration  of  the  mallei  to  evanescence ; but  I now  retrace  my  course 
a little,  to  notice  how  the  same  organs  degenerate  in  other  modes.  In  a beautiful 
and  common  species,  well  known  to  most  microscopists,  Mastigocerca  carinata  (figs. 
60  to  62),  the  dental  apparatus  occurs  under  an  unusual  form.  The  mastax  is  a 
somewhat  slender  sac,  much  produced  in  length,  and  with  the  component  lobes 
greatly  and  irregularly  developed.  The  incus  has  a fulcrum  of  great  length  and 
slenderness,  a straight  rod  with  a dilated  foot  (fig.  62,  h).  The  rami  are  small, 
forcipate,  and  resembling  those  I have  lately  described  ; but  with  the  alulce  greatly 
produced  (o).  The  mallei  have  long,  slender,  incurved  manuhria,  and  simple  unci. 

89.  But  the  remarkable  circumstance  is  the  non-sym metrical  character  of  the 
apparatus.  The  left  side  is  much  more  developed  than  the  right.  The  left  alula  of 
the  incus  (o)  descends  to  a greater  distance  than  the  right  (o') ; and  its  extremity  is 
dilated  into  an  expansion,  with  several  irregular  angles,  to  which  muscular  threads 
are  attached.  The  ramus  also  of  the  same  side  is  larger  than  its  fellow.  So  with 
the  mallei.  The  manubrium  of  the  right  (o')  is  comparatively  short,  very  slender,  and 
of  uniform  thickness;  with  a long,  slender,  rod  like  uncus  (e'),  doubly  bent  in  the 
middle,  'fhe  left  is  much  longer,  irregularly  swollen,  clubbed  at  the  articulation, 
and  bearing  a thick,  curved,  knobbed  uncus,  which  terminates  at  a point  not  precisely 
opposite  the  tip  of  its  fellow  (e)*. 

90.  In  Monocerca  (fig.  63), — from  which  Mastigocerca  can  scarcely  be  said  to  differ 
generically,  though  Professor  Ehrenberg  places  it  in  another  family, — the  right 
malleus  entirely  disappears,  not  a vestige  of  it  remaining  ; though  the  left  {h)  is  long, 
and  well  developed.  The  incus  is  a straight  rod,  with  a high  carina  (/*),  with  the 
rami  almost  obliterated : the  alulce,  however,  are  rather  large,  but  unequal. 

91.  This  want  of  symmetry  is  a remarkable  character  of  the  genus,  and  is  dis- 
played in  other  particulars.  For  example,  in.  Monocerca  bicornis,  the  little  projecting 
tubular  organ,  which  Ehrenberg  has  called  the  respiratory  tube,  but  which  I con- 
sider a rudimentary  antenna,  is  double ; but  the  two  are  unequal.  In  the  same 
species,  and  also  in  M.  porcellus,  the  lorica  terminates  frontally  in  two  spines,  of 

* In  Notommata  parasita  there  is  a similar  want  of  symmetry,  the  right  manuhrium,  being  much  shorter  than 
the  left  (see  my  memoir  in  Trans.  Micr.  Soc.  iii.  p.  143). 

3 M 2 


438  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


which,  again,  the  left  is  considerably  larger  than  the  right.  The  lorica,  in  Mon. 
ratt.ii.'i,  and  much  more  prominently  in  Mast,  carinata,  is  furnished  with  a dorsal 
Carina,  running  along  the  median  line;  the  elevation  of  this  ridge  is  not  perpendi- 
cular, but  leans  considerably  over  to  the  right  side.  Even  the  single  foot-spine,  which 
is  so  characteristic  of  the  genus,  must  be  considered  either  as  representing  the  ordi- 
miry  pair  soldered  together,  or  as  single  through  the  obsolescence  of  the  other.  That 
the  latter  is  the  true  solution  is  the  more  probable,  since,  in  Mastigocerca,  there  is, 
at  the  base  of  the  foot-spine,  another  spine,  very  minute,  but  distinctly  jointed  to  the 
foot-bulb.  This  unsymmetrical  development  is  not  without  parallel  in  higher  animals  ; 
of  which  it  will  be  sufficient  to  allude  to  a single  example,  in  the  case  of  the  pro- 
jecting tooth  of  the  Narwhal. 

92.  The  figure  of  the  incus  fulcrum  in  Monocerca  porcellus,  and  the  obsolescence 

of  its  ra7ni,  make  an  approach  to  the  structure  which  we  find  in  a very  curious  form, 
Scaridium  longicaudum  (Plate  XVII.  figs.  64,  65).  The  whole  organization  of  the 
manducatory  apparatus  is  here  so  abnormal,  that  I shall  describe  it  in  detail ; espe- 
cially as  Dujardin  has  not  noticed  the  genus  at  all,  and  Ehrenberg  confines  him- 
self to  the  vague  remark,  that  “ the  Schlundkopf  is  oblique,  with  unequal, 

pincer-toothed  (one-toothed)  jaws.” 

93.  The  mastax  is  somewhat  obconic,  or  shaped  like  the  heart  of  a mammal ; a 
muscular  sac,  on  the  parietes  of  which  transverse  rugce  appear  (/3).  The  eye  (j7),  a 
large  flattened  capsule,  with  the  crimson  pigment  not  quite  filling  it,  is  attached  to 
its  occipital  surface;  apparently  not  connected,  as  usual,  with  the  large  occipital 
ganglionic  sac  {y) ; which,  however,  presses  upon  it  from  above  and  behind.  The 
summit  of  the  mastax  projects  into  a point,  which,  though  within  the  level  of  the 
ciliated  ridges  of  the  front  (fig.  64),  seems  to  be  in  contact  with  the  surrounding 
M^ater,  without  the  intervention  of  a buccal  funnel.  This  point  is  cleft  deeply;  the 
incision  being  transverse,  from  right  to  left,  but  obliquely  upwards  (fig.  65).  The 
occipital  division  separates  widely  from  the  mental  one,  with  a gaping  or  snapping 
action,  very  frequently  performed  ; but  with  so  great  a rapidity  and  suddenness,  that 
it  needed  long-continued  observation  to  enable  me  to  understand  the  parts.  The 
structure  is  as  follows. 

94.  Behind  the  occipital  division,  and  from  its  point,  spring  several  arched  setse ; 
and  an  apparatus  of  hooked  teeth  is  visible  within  its  concavity.  The  mental  divi- 
sion (^)  is  slightly  bifid,  with  rounded  points ; between  which,  at  the  moment  of 
gaping,  several  hooked  setse  are  projected,  and  instantly  retracted  (s).  These  setse, 
or  teeth,  are  connected,  by  prolongations  of  their  bases,  which  are  doubly  geniculate 
and  appear  jointed,  with  the  summit  of  the  fulcrum  (g) ; and  must  therefore  be  the 
representatives  of  the  rami.  The  fulcrum  itself  is  a straight  rod,  with  a strongly 
developed  carina  (h),  arcuated  somewhat  in  the  same  way  as  that  of  Notommata 
(lurita  (see  fig.  17). 

95.  The  mallei  consist  each  of  a thin  uncus  (e),  working  on  the  j'atnus,  and  of  a 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


4:vj 

manubrium  (c),  singularly  looped,  but  of  such  extreme  tenuity,  as  to  require  the  most 
delicate  adjustment  of  focus  to  resolve  it.  Indeed,  I have  never  been  able  to  see 
more  than  one  in  a lateral  view;  but  infer  the  existence  of  the  other,  from  the  sym- 
metrical appearance  of  the  apparatus,  in  a dorsal  aspect.  Singular  as  the  form  of 
this  organ  is,  I think  we  can  recognise  in  it  the  three  loops  which  constitute  the  solid 
framework  of  the  manubrium  in  Euchlanis,  &c.  (§  45). 

96.  We  have  now  traced  the  same  common  organs  of  manducation,  through 
various  phases,  from  what  I ventured  to  call  their  normal  development  in  Brachionus 
diad  Euchlanis,  Viewed  generally,  these  modifications  may  be  considered  as  success- 
ive degenerations  of  the  mallei,  and  augmentations  of  the  incus.  I shall  now  return 
to  the  same  starting-point,  and  trace  a chain  of  modifications  in  another  direction ; 
a chain  of  fewer  links,  it  is  true,  but  all  tending  to  the  same  point,  the  degeneration 
and  final  obsolescence  of  the  incus,  and  (in  the  final  stage)  of  the  mallei  also. 

97.  Though  the  types  of  structure,  in  the  manducatory  organs  of  the  species  which 
we  have  now  to  consider,  are  few,  being  not  more  than  three  or  four,  the  species  and 
genera  are  numerous  ; and  they  may  all  be  distinguished,  by  a remarkable  peculiarity, 
from  those  with  which  we  have  been  hitherto  engaged.  They  no  longer  assume  a 
prone  position  when  at  rest,  with  the  venter  towards  the  support,  but  take  an  erect 
posture,  the  body  elevated  in  the  same  line  as  the  foot,  the  tip  of  which  is  the  point 
of  attachment.  Many  of  the  members  of  one  of  the  great  groups,  and  all  of  another, 
inhabit  cylindrical  cases,  made  of  gelatinous  matter,  thrown  off  from  their  own  bodies, 
absurdly  called  “loricae”  by  Ehrenbebg,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  a semblance  of 
unity  to  his  artificial  arrangement,  but  really  having  not  the  slightest  analogy  with  the 
stiff  integument  oi Brachionus,  Euchlanis,  &c.,  which  is  an  organic  part  of  the  animal. 

98.  The  genera  Pterodina  and  Triarthra  may  seem  exceptions  to  this  generaliza- 
tion ; for  the  former  has  a distinct  lorica,  as  has  also  the  allied  genus  which  I have 

Pompholyx  •,  and  Triarthra  has  a posterior  stylet,  which,  with  the  anterior 
pair,  has  been  compared  with  the  pinnse  of  Polyarthra ; while  yet  all  these  display 
modifications  of  the  manducatory  apparatus,  belonging  to  the  type  which  I am  about 
to  describe. 

99.  I am  not  in  this  place  occupied  with  the  principles  of  a new  arrangement  of 
the  Rotifera,  and  shall  therefore  merely  say,  that  the  above  exceptions  are  apparent 
rather  than  actual ; though  they  may  be  considered  as  osculant  groups. 

100.  Dismissing  these,  I come  to  examine  the  manducatory  organs  as  they  appear 
in  the  genera  Triarthra,  Pompholyx,  Pterodina,  (Ecistes,  Limnias,  Melicerta,  Cono- 
chilus,  Megalotrocha , Lacinularia,  and  Tubicolaria.  80  far  as  my  examinations  reach 
(which  include  eight  of  these  ten  genera),  there  is  no  appreciable  variation  in  the 
structure  of  these  organs  in  them  all ; and  in  one  of  the  two,  which  I have  never 
been  so  fortunate  as  to  meet  with,  the  deficieney  has  been  well  supplied  ; since  it  is 
the  species  {Lacinularia  sociaUs)  which  forms  the  subject  of  the  admirable  memoirs  of 
Mr.  Huxley  and  Dr.  Leydig,  already  referred  to  (§  6). 


440  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


101.  Professor  Ehre.nberg  had  simply  described  the  apparatus  as  consisting  of 
teeth,  which,  like  the  arrow  on  a bow,  are  fastened  across  the  jaw*  ; and  M.  Du- 
JARDIN  does  little  more  than  repeat  the  description.  He  says,  “ all  these  animals 
present  a pair  of  jaws,  almost  in  form  of  a stirrup,  composed  of  an  arch  traversed  by 
a bar,  on  which  lean,  by  the  free  extremity,  three  parallel  teeth  springing  from  the 
bow  of  the  stirrup,  which  is  engaged  in  the  fleshy  bulb'f'.” 

102.  Di’.Leydig,  who  complains  of  the  inaccuracy  of  Ehrenberg’s  figures,  describes 
the  apparatus  as  consisting  of  “ two  bent  quadrangular  plates,  across  which  several 
lines  are  stretched  ; the  three  foremost,  which  are  stouter  than  the  rest,  jutting  out 
as  three  teeth.”  He  says  that  the  two  plates  have  a shears-like  figure  ; and  notices 
at  their  union  ‘‘an  apophysis  {Xha  fulcrum) , which  seems  to  enter  into  the  circular 
mass  of  the  gizzard  :J;.” 

103.  Mr.  Huxley,  on  the  other  hand,  saw  the  analogy  of  this  type  with  that  which 
I have  already  considered  ; but  not  with  the  stirrup-like  form  which  is  found  in 
Philodina,  &c.  He  thus  describes  it : “ The  armature  of  the  pharyngeal  bulb 
is  composed  of  four  separate  pieces.  Two  of  these  (which  form  the  incus  of  Mr.  Gosse) 
are  elongated  triangular  prisms,  applied  together  by  their  flat  inner  faces§:  the 
upper  faces  are  rather  concave,  while  the  outer  faces  are  convex ; and  upon  these 
the  two  other  pieces  (the  mallei  of  Mr.  Gosse)  are  articulated.  The  last  are  elongated 
— concave  internally,  convex  externally — and  present  two  clear  spaces  in  their 
interior;  from  their  inner  surface  a thin  curved  plate  projects  inwards.  At  its 
anterior  extremity  this  plate  is  brownish,  and  divided  into  five  or  six  hard  teeth,  with 
slightly  enlarged  extremities.  Posteriorly  the  divisions  become  less  and  less  distinct, 
and  the  plate  takes  quite  the  appearance  of  the  rest  of  the  piece. 

“ This  is  essentially  the  same  structure  as  that  of  the  teeth  of  Notommata 
[^=.Asplanchna~\,  described  by  Mr.  Dalrymple,  and  by  Mr.  Gosse  (on  the  anatomy 
of  Notommata  aurita)  ; and  verp  different  from  the  true  ‘stirrup-shaped'  arma- 
ture'.' 

104.  Professor  Williamson  describes  the  apparatus  with  elaborate  care  as  he  finds 
it  in  Melicerta.  His  remarks  are  too  long  to  quote,  but  they  agree  mainly  with 
what  was  already  known.  He  notices  “two  broad  elongated  plates,”  which  he  calls 
“crushers^'  from  which  “proceed  laterally  numerous  parallel  bars,  somewhat  thick- 
ened at  their  inner  extremities,  where  they  are  attached  to  the  plates  ; whilst  at  their 
opposite  ends  they  are  united  with  others  of  the  same  side  by  a curved  connecting  bar, 
from  the  outer  sides  of  which  are  given  off  various  loops  and  processes. . . . From  the 
upper  extremities  of  the  two  crushers  there  project,  upwards  and  backwards,  two 
slender  prolongations,  united  by  a kind  of  double  hinge-joint  near  their  apex,  where 
they  not  only  play  upon  each  other,  but  also  on  a third  small  central  fixed  point, 

* Infusionsth.  p.  386.  f Ibid.  p.  615.  t Sieb.  and  Koll.  Zeitsch.  1852,  p.  463. 

§ Mr.  Huxley  says,  these  are  “ not  described  byLEYDio;”  but  they  are  his  “bent  quadrangular  plates,”  ut 
supra. 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA.  441 

lodged  in  a little  conglobate  cellular  mass  Professor  Williamson  denies  that  the 
transverse  teeth  move  on  the  plates,  as  affirmed  by  Ehrenberg,  since  they  are  firmly 
united  with  them.  He  further  states,  that  “ the  conglobate  organ  in  which  the  appa- 
ratus is  imbedded  [?‘.  e.  the  mastax~\  is  composed  of  numerous  large  cells,  each  of 
which  contains  a beautiful  nucleus  with  its  nucleolus  and  supposes  that  muscular 
threads  penetrate  it  to  reach  the  dental  apparatus  ■f-.  The  statement  of  the  cellular 
character  of  the  mastax,  and  the  presumption  of  penetrating  muscles,  are  alike  nega- 
tived by  my  observations,  not  only  of  this  species,  but  of  the  whole  range  of  the  Ro- 
TiFERA.  The  able  and  learned  Professor  has  probably  been  misled,  in  the  former 
conclusion,  by  some  overlying  tissues,  perhaps  similar  to  the  salivary  glands  in 
Euchlanis  (see  § 48). 

105.  My  own  observations  on  the  same  species,  published  in  the  same  journal,  did 
not  succeed  in  dispelling  the  obscurity  which  still  rested  on  the  structure ; and  I shall 
therefore  here  merely  allude  to  them,  as  a part  of  the  bibliography  of  the  subject.  It 
appears,  however,  that  though  more  attention  has  been  bestowed  on  this  type  than  on 
any  other  in  the  class,  it  still  needs  solution.  I shall  therefore  attempt  to  give  it  in 
detail,  as  it  appears  in  Limnias  ceratophyUi  (Plate  XVIII.  figs.  66  to  71)- 

106.  The  mastax  consists  (fig.  66,  a)  of  three  subglobose  lobes,  as  usual  (not  four, 
as  stated  by  Leydig,  and  by  Ehrenberg  before  him);  one  on  each  side  appropriated 
to  each  malleus  {h),  and  the  third  descending  towards  the  ventral  aspect,  which 
envelopes  the  incus  {f).  The  mallei  are  more  intimately  united  to  the  rami  of  the 
incus  than  in  the  former  type ; each  uncus  forming,  with  its  ramus,  a well-defined 
mass  of  muscle,  enclosing  the  solid  parts,  and  in  form  approaching  the  quadrature  of 
a globe  (^);  two  flat  faces  opposing  and  working  on  each  other  (fig.  66).  Across 
the  upper  surface  of  the  mass  the  uncus  is  stretched  (fig.  71)  o),  as  three  long  parallel 
fingers,  arched  in  their  common  direction,  and  imbedded  in  the  muscular  substance ; 
their  points  just  reaching  the  opposing  face  of  the  ramus,  and  meeting  the  points  of 
the  opposite  uncus,  when  closed.  The  manubrium  (c)  is  much  disguised,  by  being 
greatly  dilated  transversely,  forming  three  bow-like  loops  of  little  solidity,  to  the 
chord  of  which  the  fingers  are  soldered,  not  articulated.  The  surface  of  the  dense 
muscular  mass  displays  striae  parallel  to  the  fingers,  and,  as  it  were,  continuing  their 
number  towards  the  dorsal  extremity,  becoming  fainter  till  they  are  imperceptible. 
These  strice  do  not  disappear  when  the  muscular  parts  are  dissolved  by  potash  ; and 
hence  I infer  the  existence  of  a delicate  investiture  of  solid  substance,  similar  to  that 
of  the  teeth,  &c.,  enclosing  the  muscular  mass. 

107.  The  incus,  which  cannot  be  separated  from  the  mallei,  thus  consists  of  two 
portions  (g),  corresponding  to  the  rami  in  Brachionus,  &c.,  each  of  which  forms  the 

* These  two  prolongations  are,  as  I conceive,  but  the  lateral  outlines  of  the  fulcrum ; and  the  joint  is  not 
at  the  point  where  they  unite,  as  Professor  Williamson  supposes,  but  at  the  point  of  their  widest  separation, 
whence  the  rami  diverge. 

t Journ.  Micr.  Sci.  i.  (Comm.)  p.  4. 


442  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


lower  part  of  the  quadrantic  mass  above  desciibed.  At  the  ventral  extremity  they 
are  articulated  to  a fulcrum  (A),  which  is  a little  bent  downward.  The  solid 

framework  of  each  ramus  sends  oif,  from  its  inferior  surface,  a slender  curved  pro- 
cess ip),  which  is  connected  with  the  extremity  of  ihe  fulcrum,  and  is  probably  the 
analogue  of  the  alula. 

108.  The  action  of  this  apparatus  is  as  follows  : — The  ciliary  vortices,  produced  by 
tlie  waves  of  the  coronal  disk,  pass  together  through  the  upper  sinus,  and  are  hurled 
in  one  stream  along  the  centre  of  the  face,  nearly  to  the  projecting  chin.  Here  is 
placed  the  orifice  of  the  huccal  funnel,  a perpendicularly  descending  tube  of  con- 
siderable width  (fig.  66),  slightly  funnel-shaped  at  the  top,  the  interior  surface 
of  which  is  strongly  ciliated.  It  descends  straight  upon  the  mastax,  over  the  part 
where  the  unci  unite.  But  just  above  this  point  there  are  two  valves  projecting 
from  the  walls  of  the  tube,  also  well  ciliated.  These  can  be  brought  into  contact, 
or  separated  in  various  degrees,  at  will ; and  being  very  sensitive,  they  regulate  the 
force  of  the  inflowing  current,  and  doubtless  exclude  hurtful  or  useless  substances. 
The  current  now  flows  along  the  two  rami  of  the  incus,  as  already  described  ; and, 
passing  between  their  separated  points,  descends  into  the  oesophagus,  a slender  duct 
opening  beneath  them  {p),  and  leading  into  the  digesting  stomach. 

109.  As  this  current  passes,  the  manducatory  apparatus  acts  upon  the  particles  of 
food  which  it  brings  in  its  course.  The  quadrantic  masses  approach  each  other  and 
recede,  with  a rapid  rolling  movement,  in  the  direction  of  the  curvature  of  the 
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  rami  of  the  incus  open  and  close  their  points,  rise  and 
sink,  and  occasionally  perform  a kind  of  shoveling  action.  The  points  of  the  fingers 
of  the  unci,  meeting  each  other,  doubtless  pierce  and  tear  the  Infusoria  swallowed, 
and  the  striated  faces  of  the  quadrantic  masses  bruise,  squeeze,  and  grind  them 
down. 

no.  When  the  muscular  investiture  is  dissolved  away  by  potash,  the  essential 
identity  of  the  whole  structure  with  that  of  the  type  already  described  becomes 
abundantly  evident.  A comparison  with  Notommata  clavulata,  for  example  (compare 
fig.  71  with  figs.  25  and  26),  will  show  this.  Even  the  mallei,  which  in  some  aspects 
present  difficulty  (figs.  67  and  69),  when  viewed  vertically  are  but  little  changed : 
the  fingers  are  parallel,  instead  of  divergent,  and  the  ansate  character  of  the  manu- 
brium is  lost ; but  three  areas,  enclosed  by  loops  or  carinse  of  solid  substance  (fig.  71), 
reveal  their  true  nature. 

111.  Another  well-marked  and  easily  recognized  family,  in  this  group,  is  that  which 
Ehrenberg  has  named  Philodincea,  the  first  forms  of  Wheel-animals  which  attracted 
the  notice  of  rnicroscopists.  The  buccal  funnel  is  here  rather  long  and  slender,  and 
always  permanent ; the  manducatory  apparatus  having  no  power  of  materially  alter- 
ing its  relative  position  in  the  body,  and  never  being  brought  into  contact  with  the 
exterior. 

112.  Tl.'  mastax  in  Rotifer  macrurus  (figs.  72  to  78),  vvhich  may  be  considered  as 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


443 


a typical  species,  consists  of  the  usual  three  globose  lobes,  of  which  the  two  lateral 
are  somewhat  produced  above,  to  embrace  the  termination  of  the  funnel.  The  dental 
apparatus  differs  very  little  from  the  type  which  we  have  seen  in  Limnias  and  its 
fellows.  The  mallei  and  the  incus  are  soldered  together,  into  two  sub-quadranti-glo- 
bular  masses  (^),  which  appear  to  be  muscular,  but  invested  with  a solid  integument. 
These  contain  the  rami  of  the  incus^  and  are  crossed  by  two  strong  teeth,  which  rise 
from  below  the  exterior  edge  of  the  mass,  and  descend  upon  its  interior  face. 

113.  The  manuhria  are  more  obsolescent  than  in  Limnias-,  but  they  may  still  be 
recognized,  in  a vertical  aspect  (fig.  74),  as  three  loops,  of  which  the  central  one  is 
chiefly  developed  (c);  and  in  a dorsal  aspect  (fig.  72),  as  a translucent,  reniform  lobe, 
descending  on  the  exterior  of  each  quadrant.  Numerous  delicate  striae  cross  the  qua- 
drantic  masses,  on  each  side  of  the  principal  teeth,  and  these  are  permanent  (fig.  74) 
after  potash-treatment.  A very  minute  and  rudimentary /w/crwm  (fig.  75?  h')  is  seen 
in  the  lateral  aspect. 

114.  The  structure  and  action  of  an  apparatus  of  this  type  may  be  made  more 
clear  by  a homely  illustration.  Suppose  an  apple  to  be  divided  longitudinally,  leaving 
the  stalk  attached  to  one  half.  Let  this  now  be  again  split  longitudinally,  so  far  as 
the  stalk,  but  not  actually  separating  either  portion  from  it.  Draw  the  two  portions 
slightly  apart,  and  lay  them  down  on  their  rounded  surfaces  (fig.  76)-  They  now 
represent  the  quadrantic  masses  in  repose,  the  stalk  being  the  f ulcrum,  and  the  upper 
surfaces  being  crossed  by  the  teeth.  By  the  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  which 
they  are  composed,  the  two  segments  are  made  to  turn  on  their  long  axes,  until  the 
points  of  the  teeth  are  brought  into  contact,  and  the  toothed  surfaces  rise  and 
approach  each  other  (fig.  77)-  The  lower  edges,  however,  do  not  separate,  as  the 
upper  edges  approach,  but  the  form  of  the  masses  alters,  becoming  more  lenticu- 
lar ; so  that  when  the  toothed  surfaces  are  brought  into  their  closest  approximation 
(fig.  78),  the  outline  has  a subcircular  figure.  It  is  on  account  of  this  change  of  form, 
that  I presume  the  masses  themselves  to  be  partially  composed  of  muscle. 

115.  In  Philodina  (e.  g.  P.  roseola  and  P.  megalotrocha)  the  quadrants  are  con- 
nected by  an  elastic  ligament,  which  crosses  from  the  interior  face  of  one  to  the  other, 
just  below  the  points  of  the  teeth.  I find  no  trace  of  this  in  Rotifer.  The  teeth  are 
generally  but  two ; in  P.  aculeata,  however,  I find,  as  Ehrenberg  does,  three,  and  he 
indicates  the  same  number  in  P.  macrostyla  and  Monolahis  conica,  species  which  I 
have  not  met  with. 

116.  It  has  been  usual  to  call  the  divisions  of  the  dental  apparatus,  in  this  family, 
“stirrup-shaped;”  but  this  comparison  is  grounded  on  a misapprehension  of  their 
true  form,  which  I have  proved,  by  numberless  examinations,  to  be  that  of  the  qua- 
drature of  a sphere,  as  above  explained. 

117.  It  is  no  less  evident  that  Mr.  Huxley’s  remark,  above  cited,  that  the  jaws  in 
Lacinularia  {=Limnias)  are  “very  different  from  the  true  stirrup-shaped  armature” 
(so-called),  is  founded  on  error;  the  two  forms  bearing  the  very  closest  analogy,  as 

3 N 


MDCCCLVI. 


444  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOxMOLOGlES 

will  appear  by  a comparison  of  the  figures  66  and  72,  while  I have  already  proved  the 
essential  identity  of  the  former  with  the  structure  in  Brachlonus,  See. 

118.  We  are  now  arrived  at  the  most  aberrant  forms  of  the  Rotifera,  the  genera 
Floscularia  and  Stephanoceros.  In  the  former  (figs.  79  to  82),  the  position  of  the  dental 
apparatus  is  even  more  abnormal  than  its  structure.  The  teeth  appear  to  be  enclosed 
in  no  mastax,  and  are  placed  far  down  in  the  abdominal  cavity  ; nearer  to  the  cloaca, 
in  fact,  than  to  the  flower-like  disk.  I will  endeavour  to  explain  this. 

119.  The  whole  of  the  upper  part  of  this  elegant  animal’s  body  is  lined  with  a 
very  sensitive,  contractile,  partially-opake  membrane,  which,  a little  below  the  disk, 
recedes  from  the  walls  of  the  body,  and  forms  a diaphragm  with  a highly  contractile, 
and  versatile  central  orifice.  At  some  distance  lower  down  another  diaphragm  occurs, 
and  the  ample  chambeV  thus  enclosed  forms  a kind  of  crop,  or  receptacle  for  the  cap- 
tured prey.  Below  the  second  diaphragm  is  another  capacious  chamber,  which  we 
must  consider  as  a stomach,  since  digestion  evidently  commences  in  it,  and  it  opens 
into  the  intestine. 

120.  The  mastax,  as  I have  above  stated,  is  wholly  wanting ; the  dental  apparatus, 
which  is  very  small,  evidently  springing  from  the  common  paries  of  the  stomach, 
just  below  the  second  diaphragm.  That  this  absence  of  the  mastax  is  real,  and  not 
illusive,  is  proved  by  the  facts,  that  the  Infusoria  swallowed  pass  into  the  stomach, 
where  they  accumulate  in  its  wide  cavity ; that  the  jaws  are  seen  to  act  on  one  and 
another,  according  as  they  come  within  reach  ; and  that,  after  such  action,  they  pass 
off  again  into  the  same  cavity,  to  undergo  another  mastication,  when  chance  again 
brings  them  within  reach  of  the  teeth. 

121.  From  the  ventral  side  of  the  ample  crop  that  precedes  the  stomach,  there 
springs,  in  F.  ornata,  a perpendicular  membrane,  or  veil  (fig.  79),  extending  partly 
across  the  cavity*.  This  is  free,  except  at  the  vertical  edge,  by  which  it  is  attached 
to  the  side  of  the  chamber ; and  being  ample,  and  of  great  delicacy,  it  continually 
floats  and  waves  from  side  to  side.  At  the  bottom  of  this  veil,  but  on  the  dorsal 
side,  are  placed  the  jaws,  consisting  of  a pair  of  curved,  unjointed,  but  free  mallei, 
with  a membranous  process  beneath  each. 

122.  Each  malleus  (fig.  80)  is  an  uncus  of  two  slender,  arched,  divergent  fingers, 
united  by  a subtile  web-f : the  back  of  each  curves  downwards,  where,  expanding  and 
becoming  membranous,  it  is  connected  with  some  delicate  but  definite  processes 
(figs.  80,  81)  with  rounded  outlines,  which  I should  have  supposed  to  be  muscular 
bulbs,  but  that  they  remain  after  treatment  with  potash.  They  are  probably  analo- 
gous to  the  loops  in  Limnias  and  Rotifer,  representing  the  manubrium. 

* Dr.  Dobie  considers  this  waving  veil,  in  his  Floscularia  cormta,  to  be  a slit  in  the  diaphragm,  fringed  with 
vihratile  cilia,  the  motion  of  which,  as  he  thinks,  gives  rise  to  the  peculiar  serpentine  movement  always  observed 
at  this  point.  (Ann.  Nat.  Hist.  1848.) 

M.  d’Udekem  describes  the  jaw  as  “ a simple  plate,  armed  with  one  sole  tooth.”  (Bull,  de  I’Acad.  Roy. 
de  Belg.  xviii.  43.) 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


445 


123.  Across  the  uncus,  about  midway  between  the  bifurcation  and  the  tip,  on  the 
inferior  surface,  a membrane  orig-inates,  which  projects  transversely  and  perpendicu- 
larly downwards  to  some  distance,  curving-  at  the  bottom  towards  its  fellow  of  the 
opposite  malleus  (fig.  80).  I incline  to  think  this  the  vanishing  representative  of  the 
quadrantic  mass  in  Limnias  and  Rotifer  = the  ramus  of  the  incus. 

124.  The  whole  apparatus  is  very  minute,  and  in  some  specimens  can,  either  not 
at  all,  or  with  much  difficulty,  be  detected  ; so  that  we  may  consider  the  dental  appa- 
ratus of  the  Rotifera  degraded  to  its  lowest  point  in  this  genus. 

125.  Stephanoceros,  the  most  elegant  of  Rotifera,  affords  peculiar  facilities  for 
observation ; since  it  is  by  far  the  largest  animal  in  the  Class,  reaching  to  one-fif- 
teenth of  an  inch  in  height*.  There  are  two  capacious  crops  (each  bounded  by  a dia- 
phragm), of  which  the  lower  seems  to  answer  to  that  of  Floscularia.  The  jaws  are 
placed  in  the  latter,  not  in  the  stomach,  which  is  distinctly  separated  from  it.  They 
are  evidently  imbedded  in  its  dorsal  paries,  working  freely  in  the  cavity,  without  an 
enclosing  mastax'^. 

126.  Ehrenberg’s  figures  of  the  apparatus  seem  more  than  usually  incorrect;  it 
is  but  fair  to  say,  however,  that  he  admits  his  observation  to  be  susceptible  of  doubt. 
Each  malleus  is  an  uncus,  of  three  curved  divergent  fingers  (figs.  84,  85),  whose  ex- 
tremities are  united  by  an  indented  membrane,  like  the  foot  of  a water-fowl.  There 
is  no  distinct  manubrium,  but  the  posterior  part  of  the  uncus  forms  a knob,  which  is 
enclosed  in  a large  muscular  bulb. 

127.  The  incus  consists  of  two  very  mobile  and  widely  separable  rami,  somewhat 
quadranti-globular,  but  much  flattened,  and  each  furnished  with  a lengthened  pro- 
cess, which  unites  with  its  fellow  to  form  the  hinge,  without  fulcrum  (fig.  83).  The 
uncus  is  connected  ivith  the  ramus  by  an  elastic  ligament,  by  which  means  the  latter 
is  stretched  open  vigorously,  while  the  teeth  of  the  malleus  act  on  the  prey  imprisoned 
in  the  crop. 

128.  Thus  I have  shown  that  the  masticatory  apparatus  in  the  whole  class  of 
Rotifera  is  modeled  on  one  common  plan.  The  organs,  indeed,  are  considerably 
modified,  and  sometimes  so  much  disguised  as  to  be  unrecognizable,  on  cursory  exa- 
mination : but  a careful  scrutiny  proves  that  every  modification  (for  I have  omitted 
none,  that  I am  acquainted  with,  in  which  there  is  any  variation  of  importance)  is, 
without  any  violence,  referrible  to  the  common  type. 

129.  This  form  of  the  trophi,  alone,  isolates  the  Rotifera  from  other  animals,  and 
proves,  in  concurrence  with  other  points  of  organization,  that  this  class  is  a very 
natural  and  well-marked  group  ; since  we  find  one  type  of  structure  running  through 
the  whole,  which  is  yet  widely  different  from  that  of  any  other  class  of  animals. 

130.  As  no  group  of  animals,  however,  nor  any  set  of  organs,  is  so  isolated  as  to 

* Ehrenberg  can  only  have  seen  small  specimens,  since  he  mentions  one-third  of  a line  as  the  dimensions 
of  the  species.  I have,  however,  seen  several  of  the  size  mentioned  in  the  text. 

d Ehrenberg  figures  one,  indeed,  of  the  usual  three-lobed  form,  but  I fear  it  is  imaginary. ' 

3 N 2 


446  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


have  no  relations  of  affinity  with  others,  it  is  a subject  of  interest  to  inquire.  What  is 
the  homological  value  of  the  complex  apparatus  we  have  been  considering?  or.  What 
organ  or  set  of  organs  do  they  represent  in  other  classes  ? 

1.31.  It  has  been  usual  to  compare  the  jaws  of  the  Rotifera  with  the  gastric  teeth 
in  the  higher  Crustacea,  but  I do  not  think  there  is  in  them  any  homology  with 
these  appendages.  It  is  true  that  the  great  subcartilaginous  crop  in  Asplanchna 
(fig.  56),  a structure  unparalleled  by  any  other  genus  in  the  whole  class,  presents  a 
curious  similarity,  in  form  and  appearance,  to  the  stomach  of  some  of  the  Decapods, 
particularly  that  of  Cancer  pagurus-,  but  the  resemblance  diminishes  on  examina- 
tion ; and  the  bruising  teeth  of  the  Crab  have  no  more  analogy  with  the  expanding 
jaws  of  the  Asplanchna,  than  with  the  complex  apparatus  of  the  more  normal  Roti- 
fera. The  resemblance  lies  in  the  circumstance  that,  in  each  case,  the  viscus  con- 
sists of  membranous  walls,  stretched,  as  it  were,  over  a subcartilaginous  framework, 
of  a somewhat  cubical  shape.  But  the  positions  of  the  afferent  and  efferent  orifices 
differ  importantly,  in  the  two  viscera,  in  relation  to  the  angles  of  the  framework,  in 
situ  as  well  as  inter  se ; the  pyloric  orifice  in  the  stomach  of  the  Crab  being  situate 
at  the  extremity  most  remote  from  the  cardiac,  while,  in  the  crop  of  the  Asplanchna, 
the  efferent  orifice  is  placed  close  to  the  afferent,  at  the  ventro-anterior  angle. 

1 32.  But  again  ; this  viscus  in  the  Crustacea  is  a true  digestive  stomach  ; whereas 
the  crop  of  Asplanchna  is  merely  a temporary  receptacle,  separated  from  the  stomach 
by  a long  oesophagus : as  there  is  thus  no  homology  between  the  viscera  themselves, 
there  can  be  none  between  their  respective  appendages. 

133.  If  the  manducatory  organs  of  the  Rotifera  were  really  represented  by  the 
gastric  teeth  of  the  Crustacea,  the  small  central  piece  of  the  latter  would,  of  course, 
be  the  incus  of  the  former:  but  this  cannot  be,  since  the  central  piece  of  the  latter  is 
affixed  to  the  dorsal  wall  of  the  viscus ; whereas,  in  Rotifera,  the  incus  springs  from 
the  ventral  or  inferior  side,  its  muscles  forming  the  ventral  lobe  of  the  bulb. 

134.  Once  more;  the  gastric  teeth  are  simple  masses  of  calcareous  matter,  depo- 
sited, in  the  form  of  tubercles,  on  the  interior  of  the  parietes  of  the  stomach,  to  grind 
the  food  as  it  passes  through  the  pylorus  ; whereas,  the  jaws  of  the  Rotifera  are 
complex  organs,  distinctly  articulated,  tied  by  ligaments,  moved  by  their  own  proper 
muscles ; and  their  function  is,  often,  to  seize  prey  without  the  mouth,  and  always  to 
bruise  or  lacerate  it  before  it  enters  the  stomach  at  all. 

135.  Homology  cannot  consist  with  such  diversities  as  these;  and,  therefore,  the 
gastric  teeth  of  the  Crustacea  have  no  true  analogy  with  the  jaws  of  the  Rotifera. 

136.  If  it  should  be  objected  that,  in  Floscularia,  &c.,  we  find  the  jaws  affixed  to 
the  walls  of  the  digesting  stomach,  1 reply,  that  these  are  the  most  aberrant  forms  of 
their  class;  and  that  we  must  not  ground  our  deductions  of  analogy  upon  the  con- 
dition of  organs  that  are  just  vanishing,  or  merging  into  a remotely  diverse  type; 
especially  when  the  comparison  would  tend  to  unite  opposite  ends  of  a series;  as,  in 
the  present  instance,  the  Flosculariadoe  are  undoubtedly  the  lowest  forms  of  Rotifera, 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


447 


looking-  towards  the  Polyzoa  ; whereas,  it  is  in  the  highest  forms  that  we  must  expect 
to  find  affinities  with  the  Arthropoda. 

137.  To  the  Arthropoda  I am  convinced  that  the  Rotifera  belong — the  humblest 
members  of  that  great  group ; though,  as  my  present  business  is  with  one  system 
of  organs  alone,  I am  precluded,  at  this  time,  from  adducing  the  various  reasons 
derived  from  other  parts  of  their  economy,  which  have  guided  me  to  this  conviction. 
I think  that  they  lead,  however,  to  the  Insecta  rather  than  to  the  Crustacea. 

138.  The  dental  organs  in  Rotifera  are  true  mandibulce  and  maxillae,  and  the 
mastax  is  a mouth.  This  is  a startling  proposition,  if  we  look  only  at  Floscularia, 
where  it  is  situated  in  the  midst  of  the  abdominal  cavity,  or  at  the  Philodinadce,  and 
the  Brachionidce,  where  it  is  enclosed  in  the  breast.  But  I have  shown  that  the 
apparatus  is  identical,  in  these  families,  with  that  of  Diglena,  Furcularia,  and  Synchoeta, 
in  which  it  is  terminal  and  protrusile.  And  this  latter  is  the  normal  condition.  I 
have  myself  witnessed  the  protrusion  of  the  jaws  from  the  surface  of  the  body,  in  the 
following  genera : — Furcularia,  Pleurotrocha,  Taphrocampa,  Notommata  clavulata, 
N.  aurita,  N.  petromyzon,  N.  parasita  (all  of  which  represent  different  genera),  Pla- 
giognatha,  Scaridium,  Synchoeta,  Polyarthra,  Diglena,  Asplanchna,  Mastigocerca, 
Monocerca,  Salpina,  Monostyla,  and  Anurcea. 

139.  The  integument  in  the  Rotifera  is  very  flexible,  and,  especially  in  the 
frontal  regions,  is  extremely  invertible.  In  those  genera  in  which  the  buccal  appa- 
ratus can  be  brought  into  contact  with  the  external  water,  it  is  ordinarily,  to  a 
greater  or  less  degree,  retracted  within  the  body,  by  the  inversion  of  the  surrounding 
parts  of  the  exterior ; while,  in  those  genera  in  which  it  is  permanently  enclosed, 
analogy  requires  us  to  consider  this  condition  as  induced  by  a similar  inversion,  but 
of  permanent  duration.  If  we  imagine  the  head  of  a soft-bodied  Insect -larva  retracted 
to  a great  degree  (as  is  done  partially  by  many  Dipterous  larvae),  the  skin  of  the 
thoracic  segments  would  meet  together  in  front,  around  a purse-like  opening,  which 
would  be  the  orifice  of  such  a buccal  funnel  as  exists  in  most  Rotifera.  In  the 
latter,  it  is  the  normal  condition ; in  the  former,  it  is  merely  accidental. 

140.  The  delicacy  and  transparency  of  the  mastax  are,  indeed,  unlike  the  corneous 
and  opaque  mouths  of  Insects,  and  of  most  larvae ; but  its  walls  are  composed  of  the 
same  solid  materials  as  the  teeth  themselves  ; since  they  are  left  after  treatment  with 
potash,  which  dissolves  away  the  muscles*. 

141.  There  is,  then,  no  difficulty,  I think,  in  identifying  the  mallei  with  the  man- 
dibles, and  the  rami  of  the  incus  with  the  maxillae,  of  Insects.  Perhaps  the  unci  of 
the  former  more  strictly  represent  the  mandibles  themselves,  and  the  manubria  the 

* “ In  many  Dipterous  insects  the  head  is  covered  with  the  same  flexible  membranous  skin  with  the  rest  of 
the  body,  from  which  it  is  often  scarcely  to  be  distinguished.  In  these,  except  that  it  contains  the  organs  of 
mandueation,  it  wears  no  more  the  appearance  of  a head  than  any  other  segment  of  the  body.  The  head  of 
these  larvse  is  also  remarkable  for  another  peculiarity ; that  it  is  capable  of  being  extended  or  contracted,  and 
of  assuming  different  forms  at  the  will  of  the  insect”  (Kirby  and  Spence,  Int.  to  Ent.  iii.  113). 


448  MR.  P,  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


cheeks,  into  which  they  are  articulated.  As  in  Insects,  their  usual  form  is  curved, 
with  the  convexity  outwards,  and  the  extremity  variously  notched  or  dentated. 
Their  motion,  as  in  that  great  Class,  is  chiefly  a shears-like  opening  and  shutting,  in 
the  horizontal  plane ; combined  with  a kind  of  rotatory  action,  which,  according  to 
Mr.  Ktrby,  the  mandibles  of  some  insects  possess*.  The  same  excellent  entomo- 
logist enumerates  several  instances,  in  which  the  mandibles  of  Insects  are  not  symme- 
trical, the  one  being  developed  more  than  the  other ; or,  at  least,  differing  from  it  in 
form  -f-: — a circumstance  in  which  these  organs  curiously  agree  with  the  unsymme- 
trical  mallei  in  Mastigocerca,  &c.  89  to  91). 

142.  A glance  at  the  trophi  of  Diglena,  Alhertia,OY  Synchaeta,  is  sufficient  to  show 
that  the  incus  with  its  rami  is  the  homologue  of  the  rnaxillse,  since  they  are  placed, 
in  these  genera,  nearly  in  the  same  plane  as  the  mallei  (=  mandibulee),  and  within 
them.  There  are  not  wanting,  however,  numerous  instances,  among  Insects:|:,  in 
which  the  direction  of  the  maxillae  is  not  parallel  to  that  of  the  mandibles,  but 
inclined  to  it ; as  is  more  generally  the  case  in  the  Rotifera*^. 

143.  The  maxillae  are  much  more  constantly  present,  in  Insects,  than  the  mandibles  ; 
the  latter  being  either  greatly  deteriorated  or  entirely  wanting  in  important  groups, 
as  in  Lepidoptera,  Aphaniptera,  and  some  Diptera ; and  this  agrees  with  the  evanes- 
cence of  the  mallei  in  many  Rotifera,  while  the  incus  is  almost  invariably  present. 

144.  The  rami  of  the  incus,  then,  form  the  maxillae  proper;  but  whether  the 
fulcrum  answers  to  the  two  cardines  (Kirby),  soldered  together,  or  to  the  labium,  I 
am  not  prepared  to  decide.  I incline,  however,  to  the  former  hypothesis  ; since,  in 
Scaridium,  as  we  have  seen  (§  93),  there  appears  to  be  a lower  lip,  though  the 
fulcrum  is  large  and  distinct. 

145.  In  Diglena,  and  its  allies,  the  manducatory  apparatus  approaches  most 
nearly  to  that  of  a predaceous  insect ; the  rami,  in  particular,  being  almost  the 
counterparts  of  the  maxillae  of  a carnivorous  beetle.  The  series  of  bristles,  with 
which  the  inner  surface  is  fringed  (§  80),  aids  the  resemblance.  Asplanchna  also 
presents  an  instructive  example  of  resemblance  in  these  organs.  Here  the  extremity 
is  two-lobed  (fig.  59),  as  in  many  beetles ; while  the  interior  edge  is,  in  A.  priodonta, 
cut  into  numerous  teeth. 

146.  The  lips  {lahrum  and  labium)  seem  to  be  lost  in  all  the  species  which  have 
the  mastax  permanently  inclosed  ; but  in  such  as  can  protrude  the  jaws,  the  upper 
and  lower  margins  of  the  mastax  form  distinct  edges,  more  or  less  moveable  by 
retractation  and  protrusion.  In  some  instances  I have  been  able  to  see  these  margins 
(which  I must  regard  as  representing  the  lips),  or  at  least  one  of  them;  as  in  idyn- 
chceta  ('^  76)5  Polyarthra  ('^  79),  and  Notommata  aurita  (§  52)  ; but,  in  Scaridium, 

* Kirby  and  Spence,  Int.  to  Ent.  iii.  431.  f Ibid,  iii,  432.  J Ibid.  iii.  439. 

§ “ The  mandibles  of  the  larvse  of  Tipulae,  which  are  transverse  and  unguiform,  do  not  act  against  each  other, 
but  against  two  other  fixed,  internally -concave,  and  externally-convex,  and  dentated  pieces”  (Kirby  and 
Spence,  iii.  122). 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


449 


both  are  very  distinet ; the  labriim  being  furnished  with  stiff  arched  setae,  the  labium 
plain,  but  bifid  (§  94). 

147.  I am  not  aware  that  any  trace  exists,  in  the  Rotifera,  of  any  organs,  or  pro- 
cesses, answering  to  palpi,  either  labial  or  maxillary.  I was  at  first  disposed  to  con- 
sider the  processes  at  the  bases  of  the  rami,  which  f have  called  alulae  (§  47),  as 
maxillary  palpi ; but,  as  muscle-bands,  in  many  cases,  are  inserted  into  their 
points,  it  is  manifest  that  they  will  not  bear  this  character. 

148.  To  sum  up  these  observations — we  may  consider  a perfect  mouth  in  the 
Rotifera  as  consisting  of  seven  elements;  viz.  a lahrum,  a pair  of  mallei,  a pair  of 
incus-rami,  a fulcrum,  and  a labium  ; corresponding  homologically  to  the  lahrum,  the 
mandibles,  the  maxillae  (with  their  cardines),  and  the  labium,  of  Insects. 

149.  But,  if  this  parallel  be  truly  drawn,  it  is  interesting  to  trace  the  same  organs 
to  their  extreme  point  of  degradation,  and  to  mark  where  they  disappear.  Their 
minimum  of  development  is  attained  in  Floscularia,  and  Stephanoceros,  which  (not- 
withstanding the  opinion  of  Mr.  Huxley*  to  the  contrary)  do  certainly  lead  to  the 
PoLYzoA.  The  latter,  therefore,  present  the  point  where  the  two  great  divisions  of 
the  Animal  Kingdom,  the  Mollusca  and  the  Articulata,  unite,  in  their  course 
towards  the  true  Polypes. 

150.  Now,  in  one  genus  of  Polyzoa,  there  is  a structure,  which  we  may  com- 
pare with  the  apparatus  in  Rotifera.  The  oval  muscular  bulbs  in  Bowerbankia 
densa,  which  approach  and  recede  in  their  action  on  food,  as  described  by  Dr.  Arthur 
Farre,  in  his  admirable  memoir  on  the  Ciliobrachiate  Polypi 'j-,  appear  to  me  to 
represent  the  quadranti  globular  masses  of  Limnias,  Rotifer,  and  Stephanoceros, 
reduced  to  a lower  condition  of  structure,  and  deprived  of  mallei. 

151.  I do  not  see  that  this  conclusion  in  the  least  involves  (as  Mr.  Huxley  sup- 
poses) the  denial  of  either  the  Molluscous  affinities  of  the  Polyzoa,  or  the  relation- 
ship of  the  Rotifera  with  the  Vermes  ; the  latter  being  clearly  approached  by  another 
road,  through  the  Annelida.  It  would  be  easy  to  show  (were  this  the  suitable 
occasion  for  it)  that  the  Rotifera  link  with  the  latter,  through  Taphrocampa  and 
Chaetonotus;  as  they  do  with  the  Entozoa,  through  Albertia. 

* Journ.  Mic.  Sci.  i.  (Trans.)  p.  16.  t Philosophical  Transactions,  1837,  p.  392. 


450  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  STRUCTURE,  FUNCTIONS,  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


Explanation  of  the  Plates. 


PLATES  XVI.,  XVII.,  XVIII. 

The  figures  of  considerable  portions  of  animals,  are  magnified  220  diameters  ; those 
of  the  details  were  taken  with  a power  of  560  diameters,  but  are  not  drawn  to  scale. 

The  following  letters  of  reference  indicate  the  same  organs,  or  their  representa- 
tives, in  all  the  figures  in  which  they  occur: — 


a.  Mastax. 
h.  Malleus. 

c.  Manubrium. 

d.  Articulation. 

e.  Uncus. 

f.  Incus. 

g.  Ramus. 

h.  Fulcrum. 

i.  Muscle,  connecting  the  uncus  with 

the  ramus. 

y.  Muscle  for  extending  the  malleus. 

k.  Muscle  for  bending  the  malleus. 

l.  Muscle  for  throwing-in  the  manu- 

brium. 


m.  Buccal  funnel. 

n.  Salivary  glands. 

o.  Alula. 

p.  CEsophagus. 

q.  Dorsal  process  of  uncus. 

r.  Labrum. 

s.  Pancreatic  glands. 

Muscular  bands  proceeding  from  the 
u.\  alulae,  helping  to  open  the  rami. 

V.  Domular  structure  in  funnel. 

X.  Eye. 

y.  Ganglion. 

z.  Nervous  chords. 


Fig.  1 . Brachionus  urceolaris : mastax  and  dental  apparatus ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  2.  Brachionus  urceolaris  : jaws  ; viewed  nearly  from  above. 

Fig.  3.  Brachionus  urceolaris : malleus,  flattened  by  pressure. 

Fig.  4.  Brachionus  urceolaris'.  the  same;  as  it  appears  during  life. 

Fig.  5.  Brachionus  urceolaris'.  mastax  and  dental  apparatus;  lateral  aspect. 

Figs.  6,  7,  8.  Brachionus  urceolaris : manubrium  ; illustrating  its  changes  of  position 
during  action. 

Fig.  9.  Brachionus  urceolaris : buccal  funnel,  salivary  glands,  mastax,  and  dental 
apparatus ; dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  10.  Brachionus  ruhens : incus;  lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  11.  Metopidia  acuminata',  showing  the  frontal  plate. 

Fig.  12.  Euchlanis  dejlexa:  buccal  funnel,  mastax,  dental  apparatus,  oesophagus,  and 
salivary  glands ; dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  13.  Euchlanis  dejlexa'.  mastax  and  dental  apparatus,  after  potash-treatment; 
lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  14.  Euchlanis  dejlexa'.  the  same ; frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  15.  Euchlanis  dejlexa'.  the  same;  viewed  dorsally,  and  nearly  frontally. 


OF  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


451 


Fig.  16,  Notommata  aurita-.  mastax,  &c. ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  17.  Notommata  aurita:  the  same ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  18.  Notommata  aurita  \ the  same  ; fronto-ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  19.  Notommata  aurita:  the  same;  frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  20.  Notommata  aurita  : malleus. 

Fig.  21.  Notommata  aurita:  incus,  opened  ; with  labrum. 

Fig.  22.  Notommata  clavulata : ganglion,  with  its  eye  and  nervous  chords,  mastax, 
jaws,  oesophagus,  pancreatic  glands,  and  commencement  of  stomach  ; 
lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  23.  Notommata  clavulata  : mastax,  &c, ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  24.  Notommata  clavulata:  the  same,  opened. 

Fig.  25.  Notommata  clavulata:  mallei  and  incus,  after  potash-treatment;  viewed 
frontally. 

Fig.  26.  Notommata  clavulata : right  malleus. 

Fig.  27.  Notommata  petromyzon:  the  head,  with  the  ganglion,  mastax,  jaws,  (BSo- 
phagus,  stomach,  and  various  muscles. 

Fig.  28.  Notommata  petromyzon:  mastax;  ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  29.  Notommata  petromyzon:  the  same  ; fronto-ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  30.  Notommata  petromyzon  : the  same  ; frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  31.  Notommata  petromyzon:  the  same ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  32.  Notommata  lacinulata : jaws  ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  33.  Notommata  lacinulata:  the  same;  fronto-ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  34.  Notommata  lacinulata:  mastax,  &c.;  lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  35.  Furcularia  gibha:  jaws,  closed  ; latero-ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  36.  Furcularia  gibha:  the  same,  opened. 

Fig.  37.  Furcularia  gibba:  mastax,  &c.;  lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  38.  Notommata  gibba  : the  head  ; dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  39.  Notommata  gibba:  jaws  ; nearly  a ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  40.  Notommata  gibba  : one  ramus  ; designed  from  study  of  various  aspects. 

Fig.  41,  Synchceta  tremula  : mastax  and  jaws  ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  42.  Synchceta  tremula  : the  same,  after  potash-treatment  ; expanded  under 
pressure. 

Fig.  43.  Synchceta  tremula  : jaws  ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  44.  Polyarthra  platyptera  : mastax  ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  45.  Polyarthra  platyptera:  the  same  ; dorsal  aspect ; with  the  oesophagus,  pan- 
creatic glands,  and  stomach. 

Fig.  46.  Polyarthra  platyptera  : mastax  and  jaws  ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  47.  Polyarthra  platyptera:  the  same,  after  potash-treatment ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  48.  Polyarthra  platyptera  : jaws  ; viewed  obliquely. 

Fig.  49.  Polyarthra  platyptera  : the  same  ; frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  50.  Diglena  forcipata  : jaws,  closed  ; ventral  aspect. 

3 o 


MDCCCLVI. 


452  MR.  P.  H.  GOSSE  ON  THE  MANDUCATORY  ORGANS  IN  THE  CLASS  ROTIFERA. 


Fig.  51.  Diglena  forcipata  : the  same,  opened. 

Fig.  52.  Alhertia  vermiculus  : jaws  ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  53.  Albertia  vermiculus : the  same ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  54.  Furcularia  marina : head,  with  the  jaws  protruded. 

Fig.  55.  Furcularia  marina  : jaws. 

Fig.  56.  Asplanchna  priodonta  : the  anterior  third  of  the  animal. 

Fig.  57-  Asplanchna  priodonta  : jaws,  closed  ; frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  58.  Asplanchna  priodonta  : the  same,  opened. 

Fig.  59.  Asplanchna  priodonta  ; right  jaw,  interior  surface  ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  60.  Mastigocerca  carinata : mastax,  &c. ; dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  61.  Mastigocerca  carinata  % the  same ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  62.  Mastigocerca  carinata  : jaws,  after  potash-treatment ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  63.  Monocerca  porcellus  : jaws  ; ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  64.  Scaridium  longicaudum  : the  head  ; showing  the  large  ganglion,  with  the  eye 
pressing  on  the  mastax  ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  65.  Scaridium  longicaudum : the  lips  opened,  and  the  rami  protruded. 

/3,  Rugae  on  mastax. 
y.  Setse  of  labrum. 

Bifid  labium. 

£.  Projectile  setae  of  ramus. 

Fig.  66.  Limnias  ceratophylli : mastax  and  jaws  ; with  the  termination  of  the  buccal 
funnel ; and  the  commencement  of  the  oesophagus  ; dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  67.  Limnias  ceratophylli : the  same  ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  68.  Limnias  ceratophylli : jaws,  after  potash-treatment ; lateral  aspect. 

Fig.  69.  Limnias  ceratophylli ; the  same ; showing  the  elevation  of  the  mallei. 

Fig.  70.  Limnias  ceratophylli'.  the  same  ; obliquely- ventral  aspect. 

Fig.  71.  Limnias  ceratophylli  : the  same  ; frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  72.  Rotifer  macrurus  : mastax,  &c. ; dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  73.  Rotifer  macrurus : jaws,  after  potash-treatment ; fronto-dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  74.  Rotfer  macrurus'.  the  same;  frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  75.  Rotifer  macrurus:  the  same;  lateral  aspect. 

Figs.  76,  77 i 78.  Rotifer  macrurus:  diagrams,  to  illustrate  the  changes  of  form  in  the 
quadrantic  jaws.  Quadrantic  masses. 

Fig.  79.  Floscularia  ornata:  veil,  or  septum,  in  crop. 

Fig.  80.  Floscularia  ornata : jaws  ; dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  81.  Floscularia  ornata:  the  same;  frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  82.  Floscularia  ornata  : the  same,  closed. 

Fig.  83.  Stephanoceros  Eichhornii : jaws  ; dorsal  aspect. 

Fig.  84.  Stephanoceros  Eichhornii : uncus ; frontal  aspect. 

Fig.  85,  Stephanoceros  Eichhornii : the  same ; oblique  aspect. 


[ ] 


XX.  Researches  on  the  Action  of  Sulphuric  Acid  upon  the  Amides  and  Nitriles, 
together  with  Remarks  upon  the  Conjugate  Sulpho-acids.  By  George  B.  Buck- 
ton,  Esq.,  F.L.S.,  F.C.S.,  and  A,  W.  Hofmann,  LL.D.,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.  8fc. 

Received  May  13, — Read  June  12,  1856, 


Ever  since  the  experiments  of  Dumas,  Malaguti  and  Leblanc  on  the  one  hand, 
and  those  of  Kolbe  and  Frankland  on  the  other,  have  established  the  identity  of  the 
hydrocyanic  ethers  with  the  nitriles,  it  has  been  a favourite  problem  with  chemists  to 
reproduce  the  alcohols  from  these  bodies,  the  solution  of  which  would  afford  a passage 
from  an  acid,  Cna  O4,  to  an  alcohol,  C„2_2  Hn2 

We  have  been  likewise  engaged  with  this  question.  The  deportment  of  hydro- 
cyanic acid  (formonitrile)  under  the  influence  of  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  which, 
as  is  well  known,  gives  rise  to  an  evolution  of  carbonic  oxide,  suggested  an  exami- 
nation of  the  other  nitriles  in  a similar  direction.  There  appeared  to  be  a chance  of 
producing  in  this  manner  from  a nitrile,  the  sulphovinic  acid  of  an  alcohol  containing 
two  equivalents  of  carbon  less  than  the  nitrile.  Acetonitrile,  for  instance,  might 
have  been  thus  converted  either  into  sulphate  of  methylammonium  or  into  sulpho- 
methylate  of  ammonium. 

HC2N-I-2HO+H2  8203=200-1- 

Hydrocyanic  acid. 


NH 


S.O3 


Bisulphate  of  ammonium. 


H 


C2  H3 C2N-I-2HO-I-H2S2 08=2C0-|-<^  N/H3 


~v~ 


Acetonitrile,  or  Cyanide  of  methyl. 


I 


C.H3 


1 

)l 


82  O3 


Bisulphate  of  methylammonium. 


or  =200-1- 


NH^I 

C.H3J 


80  Oo 


Methylosulphate  of  ammonium. 


Experiment  has  corroborated  neither  of  these  anticipations.  This  reaction  gives 
rise  to  the  formation  of  a remarkable  conjugate  sulpho-acid,  which  maybe  considered 
as  the  type  of  a most  extensive  class  of  analogous  compounds,  some  isolated  terms 
of  which  have  been  met  with  already  in  previous  investigations. 

Before,  however,  detailing  the  conditions  under  which  these  new  bodies  are  formed, 
it  may  not  be  unacceptable  to  make  a few  statements  regarding  the  most  efficient 

3 o 2 


454 


MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


method  of  procuring  the  nitrile  of  the  methyl-series  in  quantity  and  in  a state  of 
purity. 

Preparation  of  Acetonitrile. 

The  preparation  of  cyanide  of  methyl  (acetonitrile),  by  decomposing  sulphomethy- 
late  of  potassium  with  cyanide  of  potassium,  is  unsatisfactory,  both  as  to  quantity  and 
quality  of  the  product  obtained.  The  presence  of  a minute  amount  of  moisture 
in  the  materials  employed  gives  rise  to  a number  of  secondary  products,  the  chief 
of  which  are,  cyanide  and  carbonate  of  ammonium,  and  a gas  possessing  a highly 
offensive  odour,  which  imparts  to  the  distillate  a smell  not  at  all  due  to  the  nitrile 
itself.  By  far  the  most  advantageous  method  of  preparing  acetonitrile  consists  in 
acting  upon  acetamide  with  anhydrous  phosphoric  acid,  as  proposed  by  M.  Dumas. 

Acetic  ether  is  not  immediately  soluble  in  a moderate  quantity  of  aqueous  ammo- 
nia ; but  after  five  or  six  hours’  contact,  the  layers  at  first  formed  disappear,  and  the 
liquid  becomes  homogeneous. 

If  distillation  be  now  at  once  commenced,  scarcely  a trace  of  acetamide  will  be 
obtained.  The  change,  on  the  other  hand,  is  complete  if  the  mixture  be  exposed  for 
some  hours  to  a temperature  of  120°  or  130°  C, 

We  have  employed  in  this  operation  a wrought-iron  cylinder,  similar  to  that  used 
by  Dr.  Frankland  in  his  researches,  which  had  been  constructed  for  us  by  Mr.  James 
Nasmyth,  who  never  fails  most  kindly  and  liberally  to  lend  the  extraordinary 
resources  of  his  celebrated  establishment  for  scientific  purposes.  Equal  volumes  of 
acetic  ether  and  concentrated  ammonia  were  introduced  into  the  boiler,  the  brass  valve 
of  which  was  protected  from  corrosion  by  a steel  screw  and  leaden  washer.  After  six 
hours’  digestion  the  acetamide  was  separated  by  distillation  with  the  thermometer 
from  the  alcohol  formed,  that  part  only  being  reserved  as  anhydrous  which  had 
passed  over  above  200°.  When  acetamide  is  intimately  mixed  with  about  an  equal 
volume  of  anhydrous  phosphoric  acid  in  a retort,  a powerful  action  commences  im- 
mediately, and  the  nitrile  passes  over  colourless,  but  contaminated  with  acetic  and 
hydrocyanic  acids.  Towards  the  end  of  the  operation  it  is  necessary  to  use  a strong 
heat  to  drive  off  the  last  portions.  The  distillate  is  now  agitated  with  just  sufficient 
aqueous  potash  to  neutralize  the  acids,  when  the  nitrile  floats  on  the  surface,  and 
may  be  removed  for  rectification  over  a fresh  quantity  of  phosphoric  acid,  to  render 
it  perfectly  anhydrous.  Pure  acetonitrile  possesses  an  ethereal  odour,  faintly  recall- 
ing that  of  cyanogen  ; its  aromatic  taste  is  pungent,  but  not  disagreeable.  We 
observed  the  boiling-point  77°-78°,  which  coincides  with  that  observed  by  Dumas. 
It  does  not  appear  to  have  been  pi’eviously  noticed,  that  acetonitrile  burns  with  a 
luminous  flame,  the  edges  of  which  are  beautifully  tinged  with  peach-blossom  colour. 
The  flame  and  odour  of  acetonitrile  unmistakeably  bespeak  the  cyanic  relations  of 
this  compound. 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


455 


Action  of  Sulphuric  Acid  on  Acetonitrile. 

This  body,  when  mixed  with  its  own  volume  of  fuming  sulphuric  acid,  gives  rise 
to  a very  energetic  reaction,  a considerable  amount  of  heat  being  evolved,  which 
causes  much  of  the  nitrile  to  volatilize  and  thus  escape  decomposition.  In  order  to 
avoid  this,  the  operation  is  best  conducted  in  a retort  surrounded  with  cold  water, 
when  a perfect  mixture  can  be  effected,  scarcely  a change  of  colour  becoming  per- 
ceptible. On  application  of  heat  the  mixture  powerfully  intumesces  with  copious 
evolution  of  a gas  which  on  examination  over  mercury  proves  to  be  carbonic  acid, 
without  a trace  of  carbonic  oxide;  at  the  same  time  strong  acetic  acid  passes  into 
the  receiver.  If  the  temperature  be  kept  up  by  the  gas-flame  until  the  effervescence 
almost  entirely  ceases,  the  mass  when  cold  forms  a brown,  tough  and  transparent 
solid,  readily  soluble  in  water  and  in  alcohol.  The  aqueous  solution,  boiled  with  an 
excess  of  carbonate  of  barium,  is  then  passed  through  a hot-water  filter,  when  a mag- 
nificent salt  is  deposited,  in  the  form  of  brilliant  colourless  rectangular  plates  which, 
when  gathered  in  mass,  exhibit  a nacreous  lustre.  This  salt  is  remarkably  stable.  It 
loses  no  weight  at  100°C.,  but  gives  off  water  of  crystallization  somewhat  below  150°. 
At  a temperature  of  220°  the  substance  still  remains  unaltered,  but  when  heated  be- 
yond this  point,  it  commences  to  turn  yellow,  rlisengages  water,  sulphurous  acid  and 
carbonic  oxide,  whilst  sulphur  sublimes.  When  strongly  heated  it  becomes  incan- 
descent, leaving  a residue  of  sulphate  and  sulphite  of  barium.  The  new  salt  may  be 
crystallized  unchanged  from  hydrochloric  acid,  and  may  be  boiled  for  hours  with  con- 
centrated nitric  acid,  without  formation  of  sulphate  of  barium.  It  is  quite  insoluble 
in  alcohol. 

Action  of  Sulphuric  Acid  upon  Acetamide. 

As  acetamide  differs  from  acetonitrile  only  in  containing  two  additional  equivalents 
of  water,  this  compound,  when  heated  with  fuming  sulphuric  acid,  undergoes  a per- 
fectly analogous  transformation. 

From  the  comparative  facility  of  its  preparation,  acetamide  offers  peculiar  advan- 
tages for  procuring  the  new  substance  in  large  quantity.  The  chief  difficulty  which 
presents  itself  consists  in  operating  with  the  right  proportions  of  acid  and  amide. 
Distillation  of  equal  volumes  of  dry  acetamide  and  ordinary  Nordhausen  acid,  for 
instance,  gives  scarcely  a trace  of  anything  but  acetic  acid  and  sulphate  of  ammonia. 
The  most  efficient  proportions  we  found  to  be  two  volumes  of  amide  to  three  volumes 
of  acid.  The  distillation  should  be  pushed  very  far,  in  fact  until  the  product  of 
distillation  is  accompanied  by  sulphurous  acid.  The  solution  of  the  solid  residue 
may  at  once  be  saturated  with  carbonate  of  barium  ; it  will  be  found,  however,  more 
economical  to  treat  the  liquid  with  finely-powdered  Carrara  marble  until  the  free 
acid  be  neutralized,  and  to  reserve  the  pure  carbonate  of  barium,  which  is  so  diffi- 
cult to  wash  thoroughly,  merely  for  decomposing  the  sulphate  of  ammonium  towards 
the  end  of  the  process.  The  liquid  must  be  boiled  with  excess  of  the  carbonate  until 


456  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 

a filtered  sample  ceases  to  give  an  insoluble  precipitate  with  chloride  of  barium.  The 
liquid  thus  obtained  contains  now  in  solution  chiefly  two  ammonium-salts,  one  of 
which  is  scarcely  crystallizable,  whilst  the  other  forms  large  and  regular  rhombic 
crystals,  sometimes  of  an  inch  diameter.  In  addition  to  these  ammonium-salts,  a cer- 
tain quantity  of  barium-  and  even  calcium-salts  are  present  which  it  is  necessary  to 
decompose  by  carbonate  of  ammonium  in  excess  before  an  attempt  is  made  to  effect 
a separation  of  the  two  salts. 

On  adding  a saturated  solution  of  either  chloride  or  acetate  of  barium  to  a mode- 
rately strong  solution  of  the  crystallized  ammonium-salt,  the  liquid  becomes,  in  the 
course  of  a few  minutes,  nearly  solid  from  the  deposition  of  a mass  of  crystals  of  a 
barium-compound  which  may  be  collected  on  a filter  and  well  washed  with  cold 
water  from  the  chloride  of  ammonium  and  excess  of  the  precipitant. 

One  recrystallization  from  boiling  water  furnishes  this  salt  in  a state  of  purity.  It 
in  no  manner  differs  from  the  barium-salt  previously  described  as  procured  from 
acetonitrile.  The  identity  is  moreover  proved  by  the  following  analytical  results  : — ' 

Analysis  of  the  barium-salt  resulting  from  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  upon  aceto- 
nitrile and  acetamide. 

I.  0'7526grm.  of  substance,  dried  at  190°,  gave  0'-5678  grm.  of  sulphate  of  harium, 

II.  0‘5998grm.of  substance,  dried  at  190°,  gave  0’4516  grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium. 

III.  0'6318  grm.  of  substance,  dried  at  170°,  gave  0*4708  grm.  of  sulphate  of  harium. 

IV.  0*6383  grm.  of  substance,  dried  at  180°,  gave  0*4753  grm,  of  sulphate  of  barium. 

V.  0*5918  grm.  of  substance,  burnt  with  chromate  of  lead  in  a current  of  oxygen, 
gave  0*0247  grm.  of  water  and  0*0820  grm.  of  carbonic  acid. 

VI.  0*7644  grm.  of  substance,  burnt  with  chromate  of  lead  in  oxygen,  gave 
0*0440  grm.  of  water  and  0*0975  grm,  of  carbonic  acid. 

VII.  0*7612  grm.  of  substance,  burnt  with  chromate  of  lead  in  oxygen,  gave 
0*0472  grm.  of  water  and  0*0990  grm.  of  carbonic  acid. 

VIII.  0*3272  grm.  of  substance,  burnt  with  chromate  of  lead  in  oxygen,  gave 
0*0224  grm.  of  water  and  0*0502  grm.  of  carbonic  acid. 

IX.  0*4638  grm.  of  substance,  ignited  with  chlorate  of  potassium,  gave  0*7038  grm. 
of  sulphate  of  barium. 

Experiments  I.,  II.,  V.  and  IX.  refer  to  salts  prepared  from  acetonitrile,  the  re- 
mainder to  preparations  from  acetamide. 

Percentage  composition. 

( ^ 
I.  II.  III.  IV.  V.  VI.  VII.  VIII.  IX. 

Barium  . 44*36  44*26  43*81  43*78  

Carbon.  . 3*60  3*52  3*54  4*18 

Hydrogen.  0*46  0*62  0*68  0*76 

Sulphur 


20*83 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


457 


From  these  data  we  calculate  for  the  anhydrous  salt  the  formula 

C H Ba  S2  Oe, 

which  requires  the  following-  numbers  : — 


Theory. 

A 

Mean  of  experiments 

1 

equiv.  of  Carbon  . • 

' 

6 

3*85 

3*71 

1 

equiv.  of  Hydrogen  . 

1 

0*67 

0*63 

1 

equiv.  of  Barium  . . 

. 68*5 

44*05 

44*05 

2 

equivs.  of  Sulphur.  . 

. 32 

20*57 

20*83 

6 

equivs.  of  Oxygen  . 

. 48 

30*86 

30*78 

155*5 

100*00 

100*00 

Considerations  which  we  shall  develope  hereafter,  especially  the  production  of 
similar  compounds  in  analogous  series,  induce  us  to  double  this  expression,  and  to 
represent  the  new  barium-salt  by  the  formula 

Cg  (Ha  Baa)  S4  Oia. 

The  salt,  as  has  been  stated,  retains  water  of  crystallization  at  100®  C.  In  deter 
mining  this  water, — 

I.  0*8414  grm,,  dried  at  100°,  lost  0*0888  grrn.  at  190°  C. 

II.  0*5820  grm.,  dried  over  sulphuric  acid,  lost  0*0613  grm.  at  210°  C. 

These  results  indicate  four  equivalents  of  water : 

Theory.  Experiment. 

A ^ 

1.  II. 

10*37  10*55  10*53 

The  formula  of  the  crystallized  salt  is  therefore 

Ca  (Ha  Baa)  ^4  Oia+4aq. 

We  propose  for  this  substance  the  name  disulphometholate  of  barium,  and  for  the 
acid  the  term  disulphometholic  acid,  without  wishing,  however,  to  express  by  this  term 
any  particular  view  regarding  the  actual  arrangement  of  the  constituent  molecules 
in  the  substance. 

If  the  formula  above  given  be  correct,  disulphometholate  of  barium  is  the  salt  of  a 
bibasic  acid,  the  composition  of  which  would  be  represented  by  the  expression 

Ca  H4S4O12, 

furnishing  salts  of  the  general  formula. 

Acid  salt  . . . Ca(H3M)S4  0i2 

and  Neutral  salt  . . Ca  (Ha  Ma)  S4  Oja. 

The  barium  salt  which  has  been  described  belongs  to  the  second  class. 

We  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  preparing  any  acid  salts.  Disulphometholate  of 
barium  crystallizes  unchanged  from  a hydrochloric  acid  solution. 


458  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


0‘6216  grm.  of  salt  thus  crystallized  gave  0*4636  of  sulphate  of  barium. 

Acid  salt.  Neutral  salt.  Experiment. 

Percentage  of  barium  . . 28*13  44*05  43*85. 

Disulphometholic  Acid. 

To  prepare  this  acid,  the  barium-salt  is  precipitated  by  a small  excess  of  sulphuric 
acid  which  is  again  removed  by  means  of  oxide  of  lead.  Hydrosulphuric  acid  is 
then  passed  through  the  liquid  which  becomes  thus  strongly  acid.  It  may  be  con- 
centrated to  a syrup  without  decomposition,  and  even  carefully  heated  until  white 
fumes  appear.  On  cooling  the  liquid  thus  concentrated  under  the  receiver  of  the 
air-pump,  a crystalline  mass  of  fine  radiated  needles  is  produced,  exceedingly  soluble 
in  water  and  very  deliquescent.  They  have  a pure  acid  taste,  with  somewhat  the 
flavour  of  tartaric  acid.  The  attraction  of  this  acid  for  water  is  so  great,  that  we 
have  failed  in  obtaining  it  in  a solid  condition  by  evaporation  over  sulphuric  acid. 

It  is  not  changed  by  boiling  with  nitric  acid,  and  chlorine  gas  passed  through  the, 
aqueous  solution  does  not  liberate  sulphuric  acid. 

The  corresponding  salts  are  readily  obtained  by  digesting  the  oxides  or  the  car- 
bonates of  the  various  metals  with  solutions  of  the  acid.  The  barium-salt  is  imme- 
diately precipitated  by  adding  chloride  of  barium  to  this  solution.  The  salts  are  all 
soluble  in  water,  but  insoluble  in  alcohol. 


Disulphometholate  of  Silver 

crystallizes  either  in  tufts  of  flat  needles,  or  in  broad  tables  of  considerable  size.  It 
is  produced  when  the  aqueous  solution  of  the  acid  is  neutralized  with  carbonate  or 
oxide  of  silver.  We  had  hoped  to  obtain  crystals  of  sufficient  regularity  for  measure- 
ment of  the  angles ; but  although  they  may  be  easily  produced  of  sufficient  size,  the 
edges  are  mostly  rounded  and  imperfect. 

It  bears  a temperature  of  150°  C.  without  decomposition,  but  blackens  and  froths 
when  strongly  heated,  yielding  sulphur,  sulphurous  acid,  and  metallic  silver.  It  is 
insoluble  in  absolute  alcohol,  but  may  be  crystallized  from  spirits  of  wine. 


I.  0*8066  grm.  at  120°,  by  ignition,  gave  0*4470  grm.  of  silver. 

II.  0*6045  grm.  at  120°,  by  ignition,  gave  0*3345  grm.  of  silver. 

III.  1*0151  grm.  at  120°,  burnt  with  chromate  of  lead,  gave  0*1 110  grm.  of  car- 
bonic acid  and  0*0534  grm.  of  water. 


Percentage  composition.. 


I. 


III. 


55*49 


Silver  . 
Carbon . . 

Hydrogen . 


II. 

55*33 


2*97 

0*58 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


459 


leading  to  the  formula 


CaH,Ag,) 


Theory. 

Mean  of  experiments. 

2 equivs.  of  Carbon  . 

r 

. . 12 

3*07 

2*97 

2 equivs.  of  Hydrogen 

. . 2 

0*51 

0*58 

2 equivs.  of  Silver  . . 

. . 216 

55*37 

55*41 

4 equivs.  of  Sulphur  . 

. . 64 

16*41 

12  equivs.  of  Oxygen  . 

. . 96 

24*64 

390 

100*00 

Disulphometholate  of  Ammonium. 

The  formation  of  this  substance  has  been  already  described.  It  is  sparingly  soluble 
in  cold,  but  very  soluble  in  hot  water;  from  which  it  is  again  deposited  in  colourless 
crystals,  often  an  inch  in  length.  They  are  anhydrous,  decrepitate  when  heated,  and 
bear  a temperature  of  190°  without  being  changed. 

Through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Charles  Brooke  we  are  enabled  to 
give  the  following  angular  measurements  : — 

MM'  97°  45'. 

Mh  131°  15'. 

Mg  92°  50'. 

The  form  belongs  to  the  oblique  prismatic  system,  which  is  in 
fact  nothing  more  than  a hemihedral  form  of  the  right  prismatic 
system. 

When  submitted  to  analysis  this  salt  gave  the  following  results  : — 

I.  0‘7692  grrn.  at  190°,  ignited  with  chromate  of  lead,  gave  0*1501  grm.  of  carbonic 
acid  and  0*3623  grm.  of  water; 

II.  0*5135  grm.  at  150°,  ignited  with  chlorate  of  potassium,  gave  1*1425  grm.  of 
sulphate  of  barium  ; 

III.  0*4508  grm.  at  170°,  ignited  with  soda-lime,  gave  0*9440  grm.  of  chloroplati- 
nate  of  ammonium  ; 

IV.  0*5735  grm.  at  170°,  ignited  with  soda-lime,  gave  1*1770  grm.  of  chloroplati- 
nate  of  ammonium ; 

these  numbers  correspond  to  the  formula 

C2  [H2(NH4)2]  S4O12. 


3 p 


MDCCCLVI. 


460  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


2 equivs.  of  Carbon  . 

( 

. . 12 

Theory. 

— ^ ^ 
571 

Mean  of  experiments. 

5-32 

10  equivs.  of  Hydrogen  . 

. . 10 

476 

5-22 

4 equivs.  of  Sulphur.  . 

. . 64 

30-47 

30-55 

2 equivs.  of  Nitrogen  . 

. . 28 

13-33 

12-98=*^ 

12  equivs.  of  Oxygen 

. . 96 

45'73 

45-93 

210 

100-00 

100-00 

Disulphometholate  of  Potassium 

is  most  readily  obtained  by  adding-  the  crystallized  barium-salt  by  degrees  to  a boil- 
ing solution  of  carbonate  of  potassium^  avoiding  an  excess  of  the  former.  After 
filtration,  the  new  substance  separates  easily  from  excess  of  alkali  in  fine  shining 
needles  or  brilliant  grains,  according  to  the  rapid  or  slow  precipitation  from  its  solu- 
tion. It  is  not  very  soluble  in  cold  water,  one  part  requiring  fourteen  parts  of  water 
at  22°  C.  for  solution. 

Disulphometholate  of  Zinc. 

When  metallic  zinc  is  heated  with  an  aqueous  solution  of  the  acid,  hydrogen  gas  is 
liberated,  and  on  concentration  a syrup  is  formed  which  crystallizes  with  great  dif- 
ficulty. Alcohol  does  not  precipitate  this  salt  from  its  solution. 

Disulphometholate  of  Lead 

forms  small  square  nacreous  plates  not  unlike  those  of  the  barium-compound.  It 
is  very  soluble  in  water. 

Disulphometholate  of  Copper 

is  produced  by  careful  precipitation  of  the  barium-salt  by  sulphate  of  copper.  It 
yields  radiated  needles  or  small  prisms  of  a green  colour.  They  are  insoluble  in 
absolute  alcohol,  but  soluble  in  spirits  of  wine. 

We  have  not  succeeded  in  preparing  the  ethers  of  this  acid.  We  anticipated  that 
they  would  be  formed  by  bringing  together  iodide  of  ethyl  and  disulphometholate  of 
silver.  A strong  solution  of  the  silver-salt  reacts  at  once  on  the  iodide  without 
application  of  heat.  Iodide  of  silver  is  precipitated,  but  the  ether  which  is  formed 
splits  immediately  into  disulphometholic  acid  and  alcohol,  according  to  the  equation 

Ca  (Ha  Aga  )S4  Oiad-2C4  H5  I-j-4HO  = 2Ag  I-1-2C4  Hg  Oa+Ca  H4  S4  Oia. 

* The  mean  of  nitrogen  in  Experiments  III.  and  IV.,  viz.  13‘11  and  12-85.  They  were  made  with  speci- 
mens of  different  preparations. 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


461 


Examination  of  the  mother-liquor  of  Disulphometholate  of  Ammonium. 

Sulphacetate  of  Ammonium  and  Sulphacetate  of  Barium. 

It  has  been  already  noticed  that  another  salt  is  present  in  the  mother-liquid 
obtained  during  the  purification  of  disulphometholate  of  ammonium.  To  procure  this 
substance  in  a state  of  purity  the  mother-liquid  was  concentrated,  and  the  crystals 
of  the  disulphometholate  removed  from  the  thick  syrup  as  completely  as  possible. 

After  a moderate  addition  of  cold  water  the  liquid  was  mixed  with  an  excess  of 
chloride  of  barium,  and  the  whole  allowed  to  stand  for  five  or  six  minutes,  when  it 
was  filtered,  and  the  filtrate  set  apart  for  twenty-four  hours.  At  the  expiration  of 
this  time  a copious  granular  precipitate  had  formed  which  was  well  washed  with 
cold  water  and  then  recrystallized  from  boiling  water,  in  which,  when  once  deposited, 
it  proved  to  be  very  little  soluble. 

This  substance  differs  both  in  its  crystalline  form  and  in  its  reactions  from  the 
disulphometholate.  When  strongly  heated,  it  turns  black  and  burns  away  like  tinder. 
The  residuary  mass,  moistened  with  hydrochloric  acid,  evolves  according  to  the  time 
of  ignition,  hydrosulphuric  and  sulphurous  acid. 

By  analysis,  0*6266  grm.,  dried  at  220°,  gave  0'5287  of  sulphate  of  barium. 

The  percentage  of  barium  resulting  from  this  experiment  agrees  well  with  the 
amount  required  by  the  formula  of  sulphacetate  of  barium.  We  append  the  theo- 
retical and  experimental  percentages  ; — 

Formula.  Barium  calculated.  Barium  found. 

C4  (H2  Ba^)  S2  Oio  49-81  49-60 

'■ Y- ; * 

Sulphacetate  of  barium. 

The  quantity  of  sulphacetate  of  ammonium  produced,  mainly  depends  upon  the 
degree  of  heat  maintained  during  the  reaction  of  sulphuric  acid  upon  acetamide  or 
acetonitrile.  If  the  mixture  be  made  gradually  and  cooled  after  each  addition  of 
acid,  the  elimination  of  carbonic  acid  may  be  entirely  prevented,  and  the  chief  pro- 
duct is  then  sulphacetic  acid.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  heat  be  urged  as  far  as  is 
practicable,  disulphometholic  acid  takes  the  place  of  the  sulphacetic,  carbonic  acid 
being  evolved  at  the  same  time. 

Two  phases  may  therefore  be  traced  in  the  reaetion.  In  the  first,  nascent  acetic 
acid  simply  combines  with  the  elements  of  two  equivalents  of  anhydrous  sulphuric 
acid.  In  the  second  phase  the  acetic  molecule  undergoes  a more  thorough  trans- 
formation, splitting,  as  it  does,  into  carbonic  acid  and  marsh-gas,  the  latter  of  which 
combines  with  the  elements  of  four  equivalents  of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid. 

The  new  acid  may  also  be  regarded  as  sulphacetic  acid,  which,  losing  carbonic  acid, 
has  assimilated  an  equal  number  of  equivalents  of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid. 

The  two  stages  in  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on  acetonitrile  may  be  represented 
by  the  following  equations  : — 


3 p 2 


462  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


C,  H,  N+2HO+2H,  S,  0.=C.  H.  S,  0.,+  |s,  O. 

Acetonitrile,  Sulphacetic  acid. 

C4  H3  N + 3H2  S2  08  = C2  H4  S4  O12+  |S2  O8  + 2CO2. 

^ NT — ’ '' V- ' NH4J 

Acetonitrile.  Disulphometholic 

acid. 

Acetamide  containing  but  two  equivalents  of  water-  moi-e  than  acetoniti-ile,  the  pr  o- 
duction of  sulphacetic  acid  and  disulphometholic  acid  fr-om  this  substance  is  intel- 
ligible by  means  of  the  same  equations. 

The  action  then  of  bases  and  of  acids  upon  acetic  acid  pr-esents  a r-emarkable 
analogy.  Under  the  influence  of  both  agents,  we  may  assume,  it  splits  into  mar-sh- 
gas  and  carbonic  acid ; in  the  fir-st  case,  it  is  the  carbonic  acid  which  is  fixed  by  the 
alkali,  whilst  in  the  latter  the  marsh-gas  retnains  in  combination  with  the  acid. 

The  possibility  of  assuming  the  existence  of  marsh-gas  in  disulphometholic  acid, 
suggested  the  idea  of  endeavouring  to  combine  rnar-sh-gas  directly  with  sulphuric  acid. 
The  dry  gas  obtained  by  the  distillation  of  acetate  of  soda  with  potash-lime  was 
passed  into  a receiver  charged  for  this  purpose  with  anhydr-ous  sulphuric  acid,  but  we 
could  not  detect  any  combination  of  the  two  bodies,  either  at  ordinar-y  temperature 
or  when  the  receiver  was  heated  to  100°  C.  The  sulphuric  acid,  after  treatment  with 
water  and  carbonate  of  barium,  furnished  no  soluble  salt  whatever. 

Although  we  have  thus  been  unable  to  convert  marsh-gas  into  disulphometholic 
acid,  we  have  found  that  this  acid  may  be  readily  transformed  into  marsh-gas. 
When  heated  with  hydrate  of  baryta  the  salts  of  the  acid  yield  marsh-gas,  together 
with  sulphate  and  sulphite  of  barium.  A method  is  thus  indicated  by  which  pro- 
bably all  the  hydrocarbons,  Cn2-2  H„2,  may  be  prepared  from  the  corresponding 
SLilpho-acids  *. 

The  simplicity  of  relation  which  exists  between  sulphacetic  and  disulphometholic 
acid,  left  no  doubt  in  our  mind  regarding  the  convertibility  of  the  former  into  the 
latter.  We  have  established  this  fact  moreover  experimentally.  Sulphacetic  acid, 
prepared  by  the  action  of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid  upon  glacial  acetic  acid,  furnished 
without  difficulty  disulphometholic  acid,  when  again  treated  with  sulphuric  acid.  A 
similar  observation  had  in  fact  been  made  already  by  M.  Melsens.  This  chemist,  in 
his  researches  upon  the  sulphacetates,  appears  in  some  sort  to  have  anticipated  the 
existence  of  the  disulphometholates.  He  remarks  that  he  once  found  in  the  mother- 
liquor  obtained  from  the  preparation  of  sulphacetate  of  silver,  a crystalline  salt  the 
composition  of  which  he  represents  by  the  formula 

C,H.Ag,S,0„. 

* We  are  unable  to  corroborate  M.  Aimee’s  remarks,  that  marsh-gas  is  decomposed  by  sulphuric  acid  into 
water,  carbon,  and  sulphurous  acid.  The  acid  remains  colourless,  and  the  gas  after  the  process  exhibits  its  usual 
properties  unmodified. 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


463 


It  is  evident  that  this  was  nothing  but  the  disulphometholate  of  silver,  but  M.  Mel- 
SENS  does  not  appear  to  have  investigated  the  subject  further,  or  to  have  connected 
the  appearance  of  this  salt  with  the  evolution  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  which  he  likewise 
found  among  the  secondary  products  of  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  upon  acetic  acid. 

The  chemical  character  of  disulphornetholic  acid  is  so  marked,  and  the  reaction 
which  produces  it  so  simple  and  definite,  that  there  could  be  no  doubt  regarding  the 
existence  of  numerous  corresponding  terms  in  homologous  and  even  in  analogous 
series  of  substances.  In  fact  disulphornetholic  acid  may  be  considered  as  the  type  of 
a very  numerous  class  of  bodies  of  similar  composition,  some  of  which  are  actually 
known,  while  a great  many  remain  to  be  discovered. 

We  have  ourselves  traced  the  formation  of  the  homologues  and  analogues  of  disul- 
phometholic  acid  in  several  higher  series  of  bodies,  but  we  have  been  satisfied  in  esta- 
blishing the  existence  of  these  substances,  without  entering  into  a detailed  study  of 
their  properties. 

Ethyl-Series. 

Preparation  of  Propionitrile. 

The  formation  of  cyanide  of  ethyl  (propionitrile)  by  means  of  cyanide  and  sulpho- 
vinate  of  potassium,  has  all  the  disadvantages  above  enumerated  in  the  case  of  cya- 
nide of  methyl.  A large  quantity  of  an  inflammable  gas  of  a highly  offensive  odour 
is  disengaged,  the  annoyance  of  which  may  be  avoided  by  conducting  the  gas  from 
the  receiver  of  the  liquid  into  the  cylinder  of  a wire  gauze  burner,  in  the  air-flame 
of  which  it  is  perfectly  consumed.  In  the  preparation  of  cyanide  of  ethyl  by  means 
of  cyanide  and  sulphovinate  of  potassium,  through  the  intervention  of  unavoidable 
moisture,  a variety  of  different  reactions  appear  to  proceed  side  by  side.  Together 
with  the  formation  of  cyanide  of  ethyl, 

C,H,K,  S,0s+KCy=C,H,Cy-fK,S,03 

I V ^ ; 

Sulphovinate  of  Cyanide  of 

potassium.  ethyl. 

considerable  quantities  of  carbonate  of  ammonium  are  produced,  whilst  an  inflam- 
mable gas  is  largely  generated,  which  is  nothing  but  hydride  of  ethyl.  This  gas  is 
not  absorbed  by  bromine ; it  therefore  cannot  contain  any  ethylene.  It  combines 
with  chlorine,  forming  a gaseous  compound,  burning  with  a green-edged  flame.  This 
is  probably  the  substance  obtained  by  Drs.  Kolbe  and  Frankland  when  treating 
ethyl  with  chlorine  gas,  isomeric  with  chloride  of  ethyl,  C4H5CI.  When  in  contact 
with  excess  of  chlorine  it  yields  an  oily  substance,  and  a crystalline  body  having  the 
properties  and  composition  of  sesquichloride  of  carbon. 

An  analysis  of  the  substance  gave  the  following  numbers  : — 

0‘1130  grm.  gave  0'4100  chloride  of  silver. 

Theory.  Experiment. 

Chlorine  in  C2  CI3  ....  89-87  89*73 


464  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


It  is  from  this  fact  chiefly  that  we  infer  the  identity  of  the  inflammable  gas  generated 
in  the  preparation  of  propionitriie  with  hydride  of  ethyl, 

C,  Hed-  1 2Cl  = C,  Cle+eHCl. 

Hydride  Sesqui- 

of  ethyl.  chloride  of 

carbon. 

The  oily  liquid  observed  obviously  consisted  of  the  intermediate  substitution-terms. 

These  substauces  are  evidently  secondary  products  of  the  decomposition  of  cyanide 
of  ethyl, 

C.  H,  Cy+6HO=^,  }c,  0«, 

Cyanide  of  Hydride  of  '■ y ^ 

ethyl.  ethyl.  Bicarbonate  of 

ammonium. 

Cyanide  of  ammonium  is  likewise  invariably  present,  prussic  acid  being  generated 
by  the  action  of  water  upon  the  cyanide  of  potassium,  while  alcohol  is  reproduced  to 
a very  considerable  extent.  Lastly,  this  process  gives  rise  to  a most  remarkable 
body  with  a most  insupportable  prussic  smell,  the  formation  of  which  we  have  traced 
in  a great  variety  of  reactions.  We  have  not  completed  the  study  of  this  compound. 

The  method  finally  adopted  for  obtaining  propionitriie  in  sufficient  quantity  for  us 
to  experiment  upon  was  that  recommended  by  Dr.  Williamson,  viz.  the  digestion  of 
cyanide  of  potassium  with  iodide  of  ethyl  in  four  volumes  of  alcohol  as  a vehicle. 
The  presence  of  so  much  alcohol,  from  which  the  cyanide  cannot  be  separated  by 
rectification,  on  account  of  the  similarity  of  their  boiling-points,  is  an  evil  which 
unfortunately  involves  a series  of  tedious  processes,  namely,  conversion  of  the  nitrile 
into  propionate  of  potassium,  by  the  action  of  caustic  potassa,  separation  of  the  alcohol 
by  distillation,  preparation  of  propionic  ether,  transformation  of  the  latter  into  pro- 
pionamide  by  the  action  of  ammonia  under  pressure,  action  of  phosphoric  acid  upon 
propionamide  to  form  the  nitrile,  and  ultimately  dehydration  of  the  nitrile  by  means 
of  anhydrous  phosphoric  acid. 

In  preparing  disulphetholic  acid  we  have  almost  invariably  employed  propionamide, 
on  account  of  its  easier  preparation.  We  have  however  established  by  experiment 
that  propionitriie  exhibits  with  sulphuric  acid  exactly  the  same  deportment  as  pro- 
pionamide. To  effect  the  transformation  of  the  propionamide  with  success,  it  is 
necessary  to  employ  this  substance  in  a perfectly  anhydrous  condition.  Unless  this 
point  be  properly  attended  to,  sulphuric  acid  produces  principally  sulphate  of  ammo- 
nium and  propionic  acid  ; for  this  purpose  the  amide  should  be  heated  in  a retort,  and 
that  portion  only  collected  which  passes  over  above  the  temperature  of  210° C. 
Below  this  point  the  amide  retains  sufficient  water  to  prevent  perfect  crystallization. 

On  mixing  equal  volumes  of  melted  amide  and  fuming  sulphuric  acid,  very  con- 
siderable heat  is  disengaged ; the  temperature  must  be  regularly  maintained  until 
carbonic  acid  ceases  to  be  evolved  and  propionic  acid  no  longer  distils  over.  Some 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


465 


experiments  are  necessary  in  order  to  fix  the  quantity  of  acid  required  for  the  con- 
version of  the  propionainide,  since  commercial  Nordhausen  acid  varies  considerably 
in  composition.  If  too  much  acid  be  employed,  the  mixture  is  often  perfectly  carbon- 
ized, whilst  too  little  acid  gives  rise  to  the  formation  of  either  sulphopropionic  or 
propionic  acid. 

If  care  be  taken  to  regulate  the  heat  so  as  just  to  keep  up  the  liberation  of  carbonic 
acid,  the  amount  of  disulphetholic  acid  may  be  considerably  increased. 

The  solid  residue  in  the  retort,  when  cold,  is  dissolved  in  water,  and  treated,  as  in 
the  case  of  disulphometholic  acid,  first  with  carbonate  of  barium  and  subsequently 
with  carbonate  of  ammonium.  On  evaporation  the  liquid  thus  obtained  furnishes 
two  salts,  one  of  which  is  quite  uncrystallizable,  and  must  be  separated  from  the 
other  by  washing  with  weak  spirit.  A crystalline  substance  remains  on  the  filter, 
which,  after  two  or  three  crystallizations  from  hot  water,  is  the  pure 

Disulphetholate  of  Ammonium. 

When  deposited  from  an  aqueous  solution,  this  salt  forms  regular  cubic  crystals  or 
square  prisms,  perfectly  colourless.  It  is  insoluble  in  alcohol  and  in  ether.  In  its 
general  behaviour  this  substance  differs  but  little  from  the  corresponding  salt  of  the 
methyl-series,  the  principal  feature  of  difference  being  a greater  solubility  and  its 
leaving  a carbonaceous  residue  when  strongly  heated. 

Disulphetholate  of  Barium 

crystallizes  with  regularity  in  six-sided  plates,  which  generally  arrange  themselves 
from  centres.  It  is  easily  formed  by  heating  a solution  of  the  ammonium-salt  with 
hydrate  of  baryta  until  every  trace  of  ammonia  is  expelled,  and  then  passing  a current 
of  carbonic  acid  through  the  solution  to  remove  the  excess  of  baryta.  It  is  very 
soluble  in  water,  and  stable  at  a temperature  of  180°,  but  blackens  when  strongly 
heated  in  close  vessels,  ernpyreumatic  vapours  being  at  the  same  time  given  off.  The 
black  residue  burns  with  a sulphur-flame. 

Disulphetholate  of  barium  is  insoluble  in  concentrated  nitric  acid,  which  does  not 
decompose  it.  It  crystallizes  from  the  dilute  acid  without  apparent  change. 

After  fusion  with  chlorate  of  potassium  and  carbonate  of  sodium,  the  filtrate  con- 
tains sulphates  in  solution,  proving  that  there  is  more  sulphur  present  than  is  required 
for  saturating  the  barium  of  the  compound.  By  this  method  the  disulphetholates  can 
be  distinguished  from  the  sulphopropionates  presently  to  be  described. 

0'4490grm.,  at  170°C.,  gave  0*3266  grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium  ; 

0*5045  grm.,  fused  with  chlorate  of  potassium,  gave  0*7229  grm.  of  sulphate  of 
barium  ; 

which  numbers  accord  with  the  formula 

C,(H,  Ba,)  S,  O.,. 


466 


MR.  G.  B,  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


4 equivs.  of  Carbon  . . 

( 

24 

Theory. 

A 

7*38 

Experiment. 

4 equivs.  of  Hydrogen  . 

4 

1*23 

2 equivs.  of  Barium  . . 

. 137 

42*15 

42*36 

4 equivs.  of  Sulphur  . . 

64 

19*69 

19*68 

12  equivs.  of  Oxygen  . . 

96 

29*55 

325 

100*00 

For  the  determination  of  the  water  of  crystallization,  0*5790  grm.,  dried  at  100°,  were 
heated  to  220°  C.,  when  they  lost  0*0347  gi’m.  Two  equivalents  of  water  require  5*24  ; 
found,  5*99.  It  is  probable  that  there  is  a partial  decomposition  of  the  salt  at  this 
high  temperature. 

As  has  been  already  stated,  the  disulphethylates  may  also  be  prepared  from  pro- 
pionitrile.  For  this  purpose  three  parts  of  the  propionitrile  are  distilled  with  two 
parts  of  fuming  sulphuric  acid.  As  the  action  is  very  energetic,  the  mixing  should 
be  effected  by  degrees  in  a moderate-sized  retort.  A barium-salt  was  prepared  the 
properties  of  which  agreed  in  every  respect  with  those  of  the  compound  prepared 
from  propionamide. 

Disulphetholic  Acid 

is  obtained  by  decomposing  the  lead-salt  by  hydrosulphuric  acid.  By  concentration 
it  forms  a thick  syrup,  which  ultimately  solidifies  into  a crystalline  mass.  By  heat 
it  decomposes  with  deposition  of  charcoal  and  production  of  white  fumes. 

Disulphetholate  of  Silver 

may  be  obtained  by  a process  similar  to  that  employed  in  the  case  of  the  disul- 
phometholate.  It  is  crystalline.  When  dry,  it  bears  a considerable  heat  without 
change.  The  solution  blackens  on  ebullition. 

Disulphetholate  of  Lead 

is  very  soluble  in  water.  When  evaporated  over  sulphuric  acid,  the  salt  yields  fine 
prisms  or  minute  quadrangular  laminae.  When  hastily  evaporated  it  produces  a 
tough  gummy  mass. 

Sulphopropionic  Acid. 

As  might  have  been  anticipated  from  the  results  obtained  in  the  methyl-series, 
disulphetholic  acid  is  by  no  means  the  sole  product  of  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid 
upon  propionamide  and  propionitrile.  The  formation  of  this  acid  is  preceded  by  that 
of  another  acid  richer  in  carbon  and  poorer  in  sulphur,  in  one  word,  by  that  of  sulpho- 
propionic acid.  The  uncrystallizable  ammonium-salt,  already  mentioned,  is  in  fact 
the  sulphopropionate  of  ammonium.  Absolute  alcohol  throws  it  down  from  its 
solution  as  a thick  treacly  mass,  with  an  appearance  very  unprepossessing  to  the 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


467 


analyst.  The  dilute  aqueous  solution  was  therefore  boiled  with  carbonate  of  barium 
until  entirely  decomposed^  and  the  filtered  liquid  concentrated  in  a beaker.  At  a 
particular  point  of  the  evaporation,  a quantity  of  sulphopropionate  of  barium  appeared 
in  small  cubic  grains,  which  caused  so  much  “bumping”  as  to  make  it  necessary  to 
evaporate  upon  the  water-bath. 

If  the  concentration  be  arrested  before  the  deposition  of  these  grains,  and  the  liquid 
be  set  aside  for  twenty-four  hours,  it  yields  a plentiful  crop  of  beautiful  silky  crystals, 
arranged  in  spherical  groups. 

After  another  crystallization  from  hot  water,  in  which  the  substance  is  moderately 
soluble,  this  salt  is  sufficiently  pure.  For  analysis  it  was  dried  at  170°. 

0’3636grm.  of  substance  gave  0’2940grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium. 

0'4960grm.  of  substance  gave  0’2138grm.  of  carbonic  acid  and  0‘0672  water. 

The  results  of  this  analysis  agree  with  the  formula  of  sulphopropionate  of  barium, 

CelH.Ba,)  S,0,„. 

Theory.  Experiment. 


6 equivs.  of  Carbon  . . 

36 

12-45 

1 1-75 

4 equivs.  of  Hydrogen  . 

4 

1-38 

1-49 

2 equivs.  of  Barium  . . 

. 137 

47-40 

47-52 

2 equivs.  of  Sulphur  . . 

32 

11-07 

10  equivs.  of  Oxygen  . . 

80 

27-70 

289  100-00 


Propyl-Series. 

From  what  has  been  already  said,  but  few  words  are  necessary  on  the  preparation 
of  disulphopropiolic  and  sulphobutyric  acid.  It  may,  however,  be  stated,  that  buty- 
ramide  boils  at  216°,  and  passes  over  at  that  temperature  in  drops  which  crystallize 
beautifully.  It  has  the  characteristic  sweet  taste  of  the  other  amides  of  the  series, 
and,  like  them,  it  fumes  slightly  in  the  air  when  gently  heated. 

Three  parts  of  butyramide  produce  with  two  parts  of  fuming  sulphuric  acid  a 
horny  mass,  which,  after  removal  of  the  sulphuric  acid  and  saturation  with  ammonia, 
yields  a syrup  wholly  uncrystallizable.  The  ammonium-salts  were  converted  into 
barium-salts,  which  also  possess  but  feeble  powers  of  crystallization. 

M.  Redtenbacher  has  already  pointed  out  how  much  the  solubility  in  water  of 
the  barium-salts  of  the  acids  Cn2H„2  04  augments  as  the  value  of  the  coefficients  pro- 
gressively increases.  A similar  increase  of  solubility  is  observed  with  the  barium- 
salts  of  the  series  of  conjugated  acids  which  form  the  subject  of  this  paper.  The  con- 
trast between  the  almost  insoluble  disulphometholate  and  the  very  soluble  disulpho- 
propiolate  of  barium  is  very  marked. 

MDCCCLVI.  3 Q 


468  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


From  the  extreme  solubility  of  these  salts,  great  difficulty  was  experienced  in  sepa- 
rating them  completely  one  from  the  other.  The  method  adopted  was  that  of  partial 
precipitation  by  alcohol.  To  solutions  moderately  concentrated  and  cold,  sufficient 
absolute  alcohol  was  added  to  produce  a cloud,  permanent  when  rapidly  stirred.  On 
allowing  the  liquid  to  stand  for  an  hour,  a quantity  of  a granular  substance  attached 
itself  to  the  glass  vessel,  which,  after  solution  in  water  and  reprecipitation,  was  dried 
and  decomposed  by  sulphuric  acid. 

0*2336  grm.  at  160°  gave  0*1800  grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium, 
which  corresponds  to  the  formula  for  sulphobutyrate  of  barium, 

C0  Hg  BUa  S2  OiQ. 

The  percentage  required  is — 

Theory.  Found. 


8 equivs.  of  Carbon  . . 

r~ 

. 48 

15*84 



6 equivs.  of  Hydrogen  . 

6 

T98 

2 equivs.  of  Barium  . . 

. 137 

45*21 

45-29 

2 equivs.  of  Sulphur  . . 

32 

10*56 

10  equivs.  of  Oxygen  . . 

. 80 

26*41 

303 

100-00 

We  have  not  been  able  to  procure  the  disulphopropiolate  of  barium  in  a state  of 
purity.  The  alcoholic  liquid  which  remains  after  deposition  of  the  sulphobutyrate 
contains  a considerable  quantity  of  the  salt,  but  so  mixed,  that  we  were  unable  more 
than  proximately  to  isolate  it.  By  continuing  the  process  of  fractional  precipitation, 
and  drying,  and  by  analysing  the  different  samples,  the  quantity  of  barium  present  in 
the  successive  specimens  was  found  to  decrease.  In  three  consecutive  analyses  we 
arrived  at  the  following  percentages  *. — 


43-4, 

42-9, 

41*7. 

The  formula 

Cg 

(Hg  Baa)  S4  O12 

requires  the  following  values : 

Theory, 

A 

Found. 

6 equivs.  of  Carbon  . . 

. ' 36 

10-61 

6 equivs.  of  Hydrogen  . 

6 

177 

2 equivs.  of  Barium  . . 

. 137 

40-41 

41*7 

4 equivs.  of  Sulphur  . . 

64 

18*87 

12  equivs.  of  Oxygen  . . 

. 96 

28*34 

339 

100*00 

This  salt  is  not  so  wholly  uncrystallizable  as 

the  sulphobutyrate. 

By  slov/  evapora 

tion  it  furnishes  very  minute  crystals,  which  under  the  microscope  show  themselves 
as  thin  pearly  plates.  They  appear  best  when  slowly  thrown  down  by  alcohol  from 
the  solution. 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES.  469 

Butyl-Series. 

Our  experiments  in  this  series  have  been  entirely  qualitative.  We  have  been  satis- 
fied to  establish  experimentally  the  analogy  of  the  reactions.  These  reactions,  how- 
ever, become  less  and  less  definite,  and,  owing  to  tbe  still  greater  solubility  of  the 
new  products,  their  separation  is  attended  with  difficulties  almost  insurmountable. 

The  researches  detailed  in  the  preceding  pages  are  quite  sufficient  to  establish  the 
general  character  of  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  upon  the  amides  and  nitriles.  Never- 
theless, since  these  experiments  exclusively  refer  to  the  derivatives  of  several  homolo- 
gous terms  of  the  series  of  fatty  acids,  it  appeared  desirable  to  extend  the  investiga- 
tion to  a nitrile  of  the  analogous  group  of  aromatic  acids.  No  substance  appeared  to 
be  more  appropriate  for  such  an  examination  than  benzonitrile,  or  cyanide  of  phenyl. 

Phenyl-Series, 

Preparation  of  Benzonitrile. 

M.  Fehling  originally  obtained  benzonitrile  by  subjecting  benzoate  of  ammonium 
to  repeated  dry  distillations,  when  the  four  equivalents  of  water  gradually  separated. 
The  process  is  however  objectionable,  on  account  of  the  necessity  of  repeatedly 
returning  by  hand  the  sublimed  salt  to  the  volatilizing  vessel.  We  hoped  to  have 
found  a more  convenient  method,  in  submitting  the  same  salt  to  the  dehydrating 
action  of  chloride  of  zinc ; but  on  rectifying  the  distillate,  we  obtained  only  one- 
third  of  the  product  in  the  form  of  benzonitrile,  the  remaining  portion  being  benzole. 
The  safest,  but  somewhat  lengthened,  process  for  procuring  benzonitrile,  consists  in 
dehydrating  benzamide  with  anhydrous  phosphoric  acid,  the  former  body  having 
been  produced  by  the  action  of  carbonate  of  ammonium  upon  chloride  of  benzoyl,  as 
recommended  by  M.  Gerhardt. 

Action  of  Sulphuric  Acid  upon  Benzonitrile. 

Sulphuric  acid  and  benzonitrile  mix  with  liberation  of  far  less  heat  than  is 
observable  in  the  cases  previously  recounted.  No  gas  is  disengaged  until  the  tem- 
perature is  very  considerably  raised,  when  a portion  of  benzoic  acid  sublimes  in  the 
neck  of  the  retort  and  carbon  is  deposited,  while  sulphurous  acid  is  simultaneously 
disengaged.  The  action  was  continued  for  some  time  after  the  appearance  of  sul- 
phurous acid,  for  the  purpose  of  decomposing  the  sulphobenzoic  acid  which  analogy 
would  lead  us  to  expect  among  the  products  of  the  reaction.  On  cooling,  a semi- 
transparent hard  mass  of  glassy  fracture  remained  in  the  retort.  The  usual  treat- 
ment with  carbonate  of  barium  evolved  ammonia,  showing  the  presence  of  a salt  of 
that  base. 


3 Q 2 


470  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


Sulphohenzoate  of  Barium. 

As  the  filtrate  was  very  dark-coloured,  the  barium-salt  was  again  decomposed  by 
sulphuric  acid,  and  then  boiled  with  excess  of  oxide  of  lead,  filtered  and  treated  by 
hydrosulphuric  acid.  The  sulphide  of  lead  was  found  to  carry  down  with  it  almost 
the  whole  of  the  colouring  matter.  The  acid  liquid  was  then  saturated  with  car- 
bonate of  barium,  a portion  evaporated  nearly  to  dryness  and  treated  with  hydro- 
chloric acid,  when  a salt  crystallized  out  from  the  mother-liquor,  which,  after  wash- 
ing with  water,  was  again  crystallized  until  free  from  hydrochloric  acid. 

Dried  at  200°,  it  gave  a percentage  of  barium  which  coincided  with  that  required 
by  the  acid  sulphohenzoate  of  barium  analysed  by  Mitscherlich  and  Fehling. 

0'4092  grm.  gave  0T768  grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium. 

Formula.  • Theory.  Experiment. 

Ci,(H5Ba)S2  0,o  25-41  25-39 

V . ^ ; 

V 

Acid  sulphohenzoate  of  barium. 

It  was  therefore  obvious  that  the  disulphosalt,  if  present,  was  the  most  soluble, 
and  to  be  found  in  the  filtrate. 

The  remaining  portion  of  the  neutral  solution  of  the  barium-salt  was  therefore  dis- 
solved in  water,  and  about  one-half  of  the  solid  matter  precipitated  by  alcohol,  filtered 
off  and  recrystallized. 

0 3634  grm.,  at  190°,  gave  0-2510  grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium, 
the  percentage  of  barium  in  which  corresponds  to  the  neutral  sulphohenzoate  of 
barium. 

Formula.  Theory.  Experiment. 

C,4  (H4  Ba^)  S2  Oio  40-65  40-58 

' ' . 

Neutral  sulphohenzoate  of  barium. 

Disulphohenzolate  of  Barium. 

It  remained,  therefore,  to  examine  the  salt  last  thrown  down  by  alcohol,  which, 
after  being  purified  again  by  precipitation,  gave  analytical  numbers  characterizing 
the  new  salt,  although  still  in  a state  of  admixture  with  sulphohenzoate  of  barium. 

0-4910  grm.,  at  170°,  gave  O’SlfO  grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium, 
which  percentage  approximates  to  that  of  the  salt  suggested  by  theory. 

Formula.  Theory.  Experiment. 

C,,(H,Ba,)S4  0,,  36-72  3770 

This  analysis  could  leave  no  doubt  regarding  the  nature  of  the  substance  analysed, 
yet  it  was  desirable,  if  possible,  to  prepare  the  new  compound  in  a state  of  purity ; 
and  the  question  presented  itself,  whether  it  could  not  be  more  directly  formed  from 
sulphobenzolic  acid,  C12  Hg  SaOg,  which  is  so  easily  obtained  by  the  action  of  sul- 
phuric acid  upon  benzol.  Success  in  its  preparation  by  this  means  was  of  consider- 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


471 


able  interest,  since  in  this  case  it  would  become  highly  probable  that  all  the  new 
bodies  hitherto  described  in  this  memoir  might  be  prepared,  from  the  analogues  of 
sulphobenzolic  acid  in  their  respective  groups,  by  a simple  assimilation  of  the  elements 
of  sulphuric  acid.  The  method  in  question  is  in  reality  by  far  the  best  adapted  for 
procuring  the  new  acid  in  a state  of  purity,  Sulphobenzolic  acid  obtained  from  the 
lead- or  copper-salt  is  evaporated  on  the  sand  bath  until  the  evolution  of  white  fumes 
proves  that  the  greater  part  of  the  water  has  been  volatilized.  It  is  advisable  to  heat 
the  solution  until  a slight  brown  coloration  indicates  incipient  decomposition.  The 
acid  is  then  introduced  into  a dry  retort,  together  with  an  equal  volume  of  strong 
Nordhausen  acid,  and  the  whole  maintained  at  the  boiling-point  for  two  hours.  The 
liquid  is  then  reduced  by  evaporation  nearly  to  the  original  bulk  of  the  sulphoben- 
zolic acid  employed.  The  new  acid  in  this  stage  has  a very  dark  colour  which 
cannot  be  removed  by  boiling  with  charcoal.  Treatment,  however,  with  an  excess 
of  oxide  of  lead,  and  decomposition  of  the  filtrate  by  hydrosulphuric  acid,  furnishes 
a liquid  which  is  perfectly  colourless. 

When  this  liquid  is  saturated  with  carbonate  of  barium  and  evaporated,  an  appa- 
rently amorphous  mass  is  produced,  which,  however,  under  the  microscope  is 
distinctly  crystalline,  showing  minute  shuttle-shaped  forms  generally  densely  grouped 
together.  This  salt  is  very  stable.  Strongly  heated,  however,  on  platinum  foil,  it 
burns  with  evolution  of  sulphurous  acid. 

0*3930  grrn.,  at  195°,  gave  0*2436  grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium  ; 

0*3046  grm,,  ignited  with  chlorate  of  potassium,  gave  0*3850  grm,  of  sulphate  of 
barium, 

leading  to  the  formula  of  disulphobenzolate  of  barium, 

C.3(H,Ba,)  S,0,,. 


Theory. 

A 

Experiment. 

12  equivs.  of  Carbon  . . 

( 

. 7'2 

19*30 

4 equivs.  of  Hydrogen  . 

4 

1*07 

2 equivs.  of  Barium  . . 

. 137 

36*72 

36*43 

4 equivs.  of  Sulphur  . . 

64 

17*16 

17*35 

12  equivs.  of  Oxygen  . , 

. 96 

25*75 

373 

100*00 

For  comparison,  we  subjoin  the  corresponding  number  for  sulphobenzolate  of 
barium. 


C,2(H5Ba)  S2  Ofi. 


Barium  ....  30*38 
Sulphur  ....  14*19 


The  preceding  researches  establish  in  two  different  groups  of  bodies  the  existence 
of  a series  of  bibasic  acids,  containing  4 equivalents  of  sulphur,  and  which,  irrespect- 


472  MR.  G.  B,  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


ively  of  any  special  view  regarding  their  molecular  arrangement,  may  be  represented 
as  formed  by  the  association  of  the  hydrocarbons  (corresponding  to  marsh-gas)  of  the 
various  groups  with  4 equivalents  of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid;— 

Disulphometholic  acid  . . . . Cg  H4  4SO3 

Disulphetholic  acid  .....  C4  He  4SO3 
Disulphopropiolic  acid  . . . . Ce  Hg  4SO3 

Disulphobenzolic  acid  ....  CJ2H64SO3 

An  acid  of  analogous  composition  exists  in  the  naphthalin-series  ; — = 
Disulphonaphthalic  acid . . . . C20H84SO3, 

which  was  discovered  by  Berzelius  and  subsequently  studied  by  Laurent. 

Many  of  these  substances  may  actually  be  produced  directly  from  the  hydro- 
carbons by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid.  On  the  other  hand,  chemists  are  well 
acquainted  with  the  deportment  of  olefiant  gas  under  the  influence  of  anhydrous 
sulphuric  acid.  The  crystalline  compound  discovered  by  Magnus,  and  described  by 
him  under  the  name  of  Sulphate  of  Carbyl,  whatever  its  constitution  may  be,  can  be 
considered  as  a direct  combination  of  olefiant  gas  with  four  equivalents  of  anhydrous 
sulphuric  acid, 

Sulphate  of  Carbyl  . , , C4H44SO3. 

It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  all  the  other  hydrocarbons  of  the  series  CjnHan, 
propylene,  butylene,  amylene,  &c.,  will  furnish  homologous  substanees. 

Sulphate  of  carbyl,  when  submitted  to  the  action  of  water,  assimilates  two  equiva- 
lents, and  is  converted  into  a bibasic  acid  (ethionic),  C4H44S03-|-2FI0=C4H6024S03, 
which  accordingly  may  be  viewed  as  an  assoeiation  of  alcohol  with  four  equivalents 
of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid.  Terms  analogous  to  ethionic  acid  are  sure  to  be  found 
when  the  study  of  the  homologues  of  sulphate  of  carbyl  shall  be  taken  up  by  ehemists. 

The  production  of  disulpho-compounds  of  perfectly  similar  composition,  from 
substances  belonging  to  such  different  groups  of  bodies  as  the  hydrocarbons,  homolo- 
gous and  analogous  to  marsh-gas,  as  ethylene,  and  as  alcohol,  suggested  the  possibility 
that  the  substanees  observed  might  be  but  individual  examples  of  a far  more  general 
mode  of  formation.  It  became,  in  fact,  probable  that  all  organic  bodies,  capable  of 
uniting  with  the  elements  of  two  equivalents  of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid,  might, 
under  favourable  circumstances,  be  induced  to  assimilate  two  additional  equivalents 
of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid,  and  thus  furnish  terms  belonging  to  the  class  of  disul- 
pho-compounds. 

The  hope  of  arriving  at  a more  general  interpretation  of  our  observations  induced 
us  to  institute  some  further  inquiries,  the  result  of  which  we  will  briefly  append. 

The  first  question  which  naturally  suggested  itself,  was  the  examination  of  the 
deportment  of  the  sulpho-acids  derived  from  acetie,  propionic,  butyric,  benzoic  acid, 
&c.,  under  the  influence  of  an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid.  To  take  acetic  acid  as  an 
illustration.  Is  sulphacetic  acid,  04^1482010=04^14042803,  capable  of  combining 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES.  473 


with  two  additional  equivalents  of  sulphuric  acid  in  order  to  furnish  the  compound 
C4  H4  S4  Oi6=C4  H4  O4  4SO3  ? The  experiments  hitherto  detailed  contain  no  evidence 
against  this  assumption.  It  appeared  to  us  extremely  probable  that  sulphacetic  acid, 
when  submitted  to  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid,  is  converted  into  disulphacetic  acid, 
which,  losing  carbonic  acid,  produces  disulphometholic  acid,  the  deportment  of 
disulphacetic  under  the  influence  of  heat  being  closely  analogous  with  that  of  acetic 
acid, 

C4  H4  O4— 2C02=C3  H4 


Acetic  acid. 


Marsh-gas. 


C4  H4  O4  4S03-2C0,=C3  H4  4SO3 


V 

Supposed 
disulphacetic  acid. 


Disulphometholic 

acid. 


We  have  endeavoured  to  decide  this  question  by  experiment ; but  on  account  of 
the  greater  stability  of  the  benzoic  molecule,  we  have  preferred  to  trace  the  inter- 
mediate acid  in  the  benzoyl-series. 

Sulphobenzoic  acid,  obtained  from  the  acid  barium-salt,  was  evaporated  to  dry- 
ness and  heated  until  it  attained  the  point  of  quiet  fusion.  When  cold,  the  acid  was 
coarsely  powdered,  and  mixed  with  rather  more  than  its  own  bulk  of  crystallized 
sulphuric  acid. 

It  was  then  heated  in  a water-bath  to  a temperature  below  that  at  which  gases  are 
disengaged.  This  appeared  to  be  just  below  85°  C.  The  substances  were  kept  in 
contact  at  this  temperature  for  eight  hours.  Finally,  the  mixture  was  subjected  to 
the  heat  of  boiling  water  for  two  hours  longer ; after  which  it  was  treated  in  the 
usual  way  for  obtaining  the  soluble  barium-salt. 

The  salt  thus  obtained  in  no  manner  differed,  either  in  appearance,  reaction,  or 
composition,  from  sulphobenzoate  of  barium. 

0*3838  grm.  of  salt,  dried  at  165°  C.,  gave  0*2630  grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium, 
corresponding  to  40*28  per  cent,  of  barium. 

For  comparison,  we  append  the  barium -percentages  required  for  the  salts  of  the 
two  acids,  and  the  amounts  found  by  experiment. 

Formula.  Theory.  Formula.  Theory.  Experiment. 

C.4(H4Ba3)S3  0,o  40*65  C,4  (H4  Ba^)  S4  0,6  32*85  40*28 


"V 


Sulphobenzoate  of  barium.  Hypothetical  acid. 

Though  the  above  experiments  have  failed  to  realize  our  hopes  of  producing  disulpho- 
benzoic  acid,  they  by  no  means  disprove  the  existence  of  this  body,  and  the  possibility 
of  producing  it  under  more  favourable  circumstances.  We  insist  upon  this  point,  on 
account  of  the  success  which  has  attended  our  endeavours  to  trace  the  existence  of 
disulpho-acids  in  a perfectly  different  group  of  bodies. 

We  are  indebted  to  M.  Gerhardt  for  the  knowledge  of  a conjugated  sulpho-acid, 
containing  an  organic  base  in  the  place  of  hydrocarbons,  alcohols,  acids,  &c.,  which 


474  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


are  present  in  the  usual  sulpho-acids.  Sulphanilic  acid,  C,2  N S2  Oe,  may  be  viewed 
as  formed  by  the  association  of  one  equivalent  of  aniline  and  two  equivalents  of  an- 
hydrous sulphuric  acid. 

We  were  curious  to  ascertain  whether  this  acid,  by  assimilating  once  more  the 
elements  of  anhydrous  sulphuric  acid,  was  capable  of  becoming  disulphanilic  acid, 

C,2H7NS4  0.2. 

The  existence  of  disulphobenzolic  acid,  C12H6  840,3,  the  barium-salt  of  which  we 
have  described  in  the  preceding  pages,  together  with  the  formation  of  an  interesting 
acid  lately  obtained  by  M.  Kilkenkamp*  in  the  reaction  of  sulphite  of  ammonium 
on  dinitrobenzol,  appeared  to  leave  no  doubt  regarding  the  existence  of  a disulph- 
anilic acid.  In  fact,  M.  Kilkenkamp’s  dithiobenzic  acid,  C12H8N2S4OJ2,  is  most  inti- 
mately connected  with  the  acid  we  were  in  search  of,  as  is  obvious  by  a glance  at  the 
following  Table,  in  which  we  have  placed  a number  of  known  substances  in  juxta- 
position with  bodies,  ideal  at  present,  but  the  existence  of  which  can  no  longer  be 
doubted.  ‘ 


Hydrocarbons  and  substitutes. 

C12  Hs 
Benzol. 


Sulpho-acids  and  substitutes. 

C]2  He  82  Og 

Sulphobenzolic  acid. 


Disulpho-acids  and  substitutes. 

Cj2  Hg  84  0,2 
Disulphobenzolic  acid. 


Nitrobenzol. 


c„{ 

Nitrosulphobenzolic  acid. 


Phenylamine. 

Aniline. 


Phenylsulphamic  acid. 
Sulphanilic  acid. 


Phenyldisulphamic  acid. 
Disulphanilic  acid. 


f 

1 

H4^ 

rH4. 

CJN04 

C,2 

NO4  82  0g 

C.2  NO,  840,2 

IN04J 

1 

.NO4J 

INO4J 

Dinitrobenzol. 

rH4. 

rH4. 

f 

C,2  NH2 

NH2  82  0g 

C,  NH2  840,2 

INH2J 

INH2J 

TNH2J 

Phenyldiamine. 
(Semaniline  ?) 


Dithiobenzic  acid. 
Phenyldisulpho-diamic  acid. 


The  preceding  synopsis,  whilst  it  fixes,  we  believe,  the  correct  position  of  dithio- 
benzic acid  in  the  benzol-series,  exhibits  at  the  same  time  its  close  relation  to  the 
disulphanilic  acid  which  we  endeavoured  to  produce,  and  the  formation  of  which,  it 
may  at  once  be  stated,  succeeded  without  much  difficulty. 


* Annalen  der  Chemie  und  Pharmacie,  Neue  Reihe,  B.  xix.  S.  86. 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


475 


Action  of  Sulphuric  Acid  upon  Aniline. 

In  order  to  prepare  disiilphanilic  acid,  two  parts  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  were  mixed 
with  one  part  of  aniline,  when  heat  was  freely  evolved,  sulphate  of  aniline  being 
thrown  down  at  the  same  time.  On  further  application  of  heat  the  salt  redissolved, 
and  as  the  liquid  reached  the  boiling-point  it  became  very  dark  in  colour,  sulphurous 
acid  being  freely  evolved. 

In  our  first  experiment  the  mixture  was  kept  in  full  ebullition  for  ten  minutes,  and 
then  poured  into  water  after  it  had  partially  cooled.  A confusedly  crystalline  mass 
was  produced  which  was  well  washed  with  cold  water  (in  which  it  is  not  very  soluble), 
and  afterwards  recrystallized  from  hot  water. 

Sulphanilate  of  Silver. 

A portion  of  this  acid  was  digested  with  carbonate  of  silver.  The  crystalline  silver- 
salt,  obtained  by  evaporating  the  solution  at  a low  temperature,  was  dried  at  120'" 
and  ignited. 

0‘3524  grm.  gave  0 1360  grin,  of  reduced  silver,  which  coincides  with  the  theoretical 
percentage  of  sulphanilate  of  silver, 

Ci2  (Hg  Ag)  N S2  Og. 

Theory.  Experiment. 

Silver  ...  38-57  '38-58 

Sulphanilate  of  Barium. 

A barium-salt,  prepared  in  the  usual  way  and  submitted  to  analysis  by  precipitation 
by  sulphuric  acid,  gave  perfectly  analogous  results. 

0-4250  grm.,  at  160°,  gave  0-2060  grm.  sulphate  of  barium, 

corresponding  to  the  formula 

C,2  (IlgBa)  N S2  Og. 

Theory.  Experiment. 

Barium  . . . 28-48  28-40 

These  experiments  proved  that  the  acid  produced  was  nothing  but  M.  Gerhardt’s 
well-known  sulphanilic  acid,  the  reaction  not  having  gone  far  enough  for  the  pro- 
duction of  the  second  acid.  The  treatment  with  sulphuric  acid  was  therefore 
resumed.  Finely  powdered  and  dry  sulphanilic  acid,  mixed  with  strong  fuming  acid 
to  the  consistency  of  a thin  paste,  was  heated  in  an  air-bath  to  a temperature  just 
approaching  that  at  which  sulphurous  acid  is  generated,  to  160°  and  1/0° C.  This 
digestion  was  continued  until  a portion  taken  on  a glass  rod  did  not  solidify  on  cool- 
ing, or  give  any  solid  matter  when  dissolved  in  a small  quantity  of  water,  which 
happened  after  the  lapse  of  seven  hours,  when  the  mass  had  the  consistency  of  treacle. 

MDCCCLVI.  3 R 


476  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


It  was  dissolved  in  cold  water,  and  separated  from  a black,  almost  insoluble  matter, 
which  appeared  to  be  somewhat  crystalline. 

Disulphardlate  of  Barium. 

After  saturating  with  carbonate  of  barium  the  liquid  was  evaporated  to  dryness,  by 
which  treatment  a further  separation  of  the  black  substance  was  effected,  and  the 
barium-salt  was  much  improved  in  colour. 

Jf  the  barium-salt  be  redissolved  and  the  solution  evaporated  on  the  water-bath,  a 
horny  substance  is  formed,  which  on  cooling  splits  by  cracks  in  all  directions ; but  if 
the  evaporation  be  completed  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  a mass  of  microscopic 
crystals  appear,  insoluble  in  alcohol  and  in  ether. 

In  preparing  the  new  barium- salt,  we  have  found  it  convenient  to  precipitate  the 
liquid  gradually  by  alcohol,  and  to  reject,  as  retaining  generally  traces  of  sulphani- 
late,  the  precipitate  first  formed.  Under  all  circumstances  it  is  very  difficult  entirely 
to  lemove  all  colouring  matter  from  the  solutions  of  this  salt,  which  is  usually  of  a 
pale  rose  colour. 

0'4679grm.,  at  200°,  gave  0‘2810grm,  of  sulphate  of  barium; 

0‘3620grm.,  at  190°,  gave  0‘4310grm.  of  sulphate  of  barium, 
which  numbers  agree  well  with  the  formula  of  disulphanilate  of  barium. 


c. 

(H,Ba,)NS. 

12  equivs.  of  Carbon  . . 

( 

. . 72 

Theory, 

A 

18-58 

Experiment. 

5 equivs.  of  Hydrogen  . 

. . 5 

1-28 

2 equivs.  of  Barium 

. . 137 

35-30 

35-30 

1 equiv.  of  Nitrogen 

. . 14 

3-60 

4 equivs.  of  Sulphur 

. . 64 

16-49 

16-32 

12  equivs.  of  Oxygen 

. . 96 

24-75 

388 

100-00 

Disulphanilate  of  barium  blackens  without  inflaming  when  heated  on  foil,  in  which 
respect  it  differs  from  the  sulphanilate,  which  burns  with  a bright  but  smoky  flame. 
Heated  in  close  vessels  it  furnishes  a vapour,  which  sublimes  in  beautiful  crystals, 
probably  of  sulphite  of  aniline,  obtained  under  similar  circumstances  from  sulphanilic 
acid. 

Disulphanilate  of  barium  is  attacked  by  concentrated  nitric  acid  and  gives  a yellow 
liquid,  which  furnishes  on  evaporation  crystals  of  a very  bitter  taste ; sulphate  of 
barium  is  formed  at  the  same  time. 

Disulphanilic  Acid 

is  easily  produced  from  a lead-salt.  This  substance  possesses  a very  acid  and  pungent, 
taste;  it  crystallizes  with  great  difficulty,  but  is  insoluble,  in  alcohol  which  precipi-i 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


477 


tales  strong  solutions  in  white  grains.  This  preeipitation  is  assisted  by  the  addition 
of  a little  ether.  We  have  not  analysed  this  body,  but  we  have  examined  in  addition, 

Dlsulphani late  of  Silver. 

The  liquid  formed  by  neutralizing  a concentrated  solution  of  the  acid  with  car- 
bonate of  silver  is  precipitated  cold  by  the  addition  of  a mixture  of  equal  volumes  of 
alcohol  and  ether.  The  salt  subsides  in  colourless  crystalline  grains;  the  deposition 
is  much  facilitated  by  rapidly  stirring  the  contents  of  the  beaker  with  a glass  rod. 
Disulphanilate  of  silver  crystallizes  by  spontaneous  evaporation  of  the  aqueous  solu- 
tion in  small  laminae  which  blacken  and  deposit  a black  powder  when  boiled  with 
water. 

0 4687  grin.,  dried  at  120°,  gave  0‘2134grm.  of  silver. 

The  formula, 

C,,(H,Ag,)N,S,0,„ 

requires 


Theory. 

Experiment. 

t 

A ^ 

12  equivs.  of  Carbon  . . 

. . 72 

15-40 

5 equivs.  of  Hydrogen  . 

. . 5 

1-07 

2 equivs.  of  Silver  . 

. . 216 

46-25 

45-53* 

1 equiv.  of  Nitrogen 

. . 14 

2-99 

4 equivs.  of  Sulphur 

. . 64 

13-70 

12  equivs.  of  Oxygen 

. . 96 

20-59 

467 

100-00 

The  researches  detailed  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  may  serve  to  characterize 
more  fully  a class  of  compounds  of  which  only  a few  terms,  isolated  and  scattered  in 
very  different  groups,  had  been  previously  observed.  The  only  disulpho-acids  hitherto 
known,  were  Berzelius  and  Laurent’s  disulphonaphthalic  acid  and  Magnus’s 
ethionic  (disulphethylic)  acid,  and  lastly,  dithiobenzic  (phenyl-disulphodiamic)  acid, 
recently  discovered  by  M.  Kilkenkamp.  To  these  this  memoir  adds  five  new  acids 
belonging  to  several  of  the  most  important  series  of  compounds. 

Disulphometholic  acid  . . . H4  S4  0,2. 

Disulphetholic  acid  . . . . C4  Hg  S4  0,2. 

Disulphopropiolic  acid  . . . Cg  Hg  S4  0,2. 

Disulphobenzolic  acid  . . . CjaHg  840,2. 

Disulphanilic  acid  ....  C,2H7NS40,2. 

* Although  this  number  is  rather  low,  it  marks  the  composition  of  the  salt  sufficiently  well,  since  the  acid 
from  which  it  was  formed  was  known  to  contain  traces  of  sulphanilic  acid  ; for  comparison  we  append  the  per- 
centage of  silver  in  sulphanilate  of  silver,  which  is  38‘57. 

3 R 2 


478  MR.  G.  B.  BUCKTON  AND  DR.  A.  W.  HOFMANN’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE 


Our  experiments  point  out  moreover  the  universal  occurrence  and  the  general 
mode  of  formation  of  these  substances.  All  organic  molecules,  particularly  in  the 
nascent  state,  appear  to  be  capable  of  assimilating  the  elements  of  either  two  or  four 
equivalents  of  anhydrous  acid.  Tlie  formation  of  the  two  groups  of  acids  which  are 
thus  produced,  presents  a great  analogy  with  the  production  of  the  nitro-substitutes 
generated  under  the  influence  of  nitric  acid.  All  these  compounds  are  generated 
with  elitnination  of  water.  In  the  action  of  nitric  acid  and  sulphuric  acid  upon  benzol, 
for  instance,  we  have 


Ci2  Hg-j-  HNOg 

Benzol. 


= Ci2H5N()4  +2140. 


^ 

Nitrobenzol 


,2  i4g+2HNOe  =0,2 1+  N2  O3  +4140. 


Dinitrobenzol. 


t^'12  Idg+  I+SaOg — C12H0S2  O5  +2HO. 

v ) K ! 


Benzol. 


Sulphobenzolic  acid. 


C,2 14g+2I42  S2  03=C.2 146  S4  0,2+4H0. 

V. ) ! 


Benzol. 


"V" 


Disulphobenzolic  acid. 


The  analogy  of  these  I’eactions  is  obvious. 

The  action  of  nitric  acid  upon  organic  bodies  is  by  no  means  limited  to  the  produc- 
tion of  nitro-compounds,  corresponding  to  nitrobenzol  and  dinitrobenzol ; frequently 
additional  bodies  are  formed  with  elimination  of  6,  8,  and  in  a few  isolated  cases, 
even  of  10  equivalents  of  water.  It  is  possible  that  analogous  sulpho-compounds 
may  exist ; hitherto,  however,  no  substances  have  been  observed  in  which  the  assimila- 
tion of  sulphuric  acid  has  gone  further  than  in  the  disulpho-acids. 


Appendix. 

During  the  prosecution  of  the  researches  detailed  in  the  preceding  paper,  our 
attention  was  repeatedly  called  to  the  substance  which  M.  Liebig  has  described 
under  the  name  of  metldonic  acid,  and  which  he  obtained  in  the  reaction  of  anhydrous 
sulphuric  acid  upon  dry  ether  at  low  temperatures*.  The  properties  of  the  barium- 
salt  of  this  most  remarkable  acid  very  closely  agree  with  those  which  we  observed  in 
studying  disulpliornetholate  of  barium,  although  both  appeared  different  in  composi- 
tion. We  were  repeatedly  inclined  to  admit  and  to  doubt  the  identity  of  the  two 
substances.  We  have  now  arrived  at  the  conclusion,  that  methionic  and  disnlpho- 
metholic  acid  are  aetually  identical. 

* Liebig,  Annalen  der  Chemie  und  Pharm.  xiii.  32;  xxv.  39.  Ann.  de  Chimie  et  de  Phys.  i.  59.  182. 
Wetiierell,  Ann.  der  Chemie  und  Pharm.  Ixvi.  122. 


ACTION  OF  SULPHURIC  ACID  UPON  THE  AMIDES  AND  NITRILES. 


479 


The  formula  adopted  by  M.  Liebig  for  the  barium-salt  is 

C Hg  Ba  Sa  Og. 

If  we  double  this  formula  we  arrive  at  the  expression 

C.2  Hg  Bag  S4  0,g=C2(H2  Bag)  S4  Oi2-|-4aq, 

whieh  represents  disulphometholate  of  barium  with  4 equivalents  of  water  of  crystal- 
lization. Our  experiments  have  actually  proved  that  this  salt  contains  indeed  4 equi- 
valents of  water,  and  that  this  water  is  retained  at  100°  C.,  the  temperature  at  which 
IVJ.  Liebig  dried  his  salt  before  submitting  it  to  analysis. 

More  recently  M.  Redtenbacher  and  M.  Wetherell  have  investigated  the  same 
barium-salt,  but  neither  of  them  appears  to  have  remarked  the  fact,  that  this  salt  loses 
water  between  100°  and  200°.  M.  Redtenbacher  analysed  a salt  which  M.  Liebig 
had  prepared  himself.  M.  Wetherell  examined  a salt  which  he  obtained  as  a 
secondary  product  in  his  researches  on  sulphate  of  ethyl. 

Although  we  have  no  longer  any  doubt  regarding  the  identity  of  methionic  acid 
and  disulphometholic  acid,  we  should  have  liked  to  offer  a direct  experimental  proof 
of  our  opinion  by  an  analysis  of  the  barium-salt  obtained  either  by  ]M.  Liebig’s  or 
M.  Wetherell’s  process.  We  have  therefore  repeatedly  endeavoured  to  prepare  the 
methionate  of  barium  both  by  M.  Liebig’s  and  M.  Wetherell’s  method.  By  follow- 
ing exactly  the  plan  described  by  these  chemists,  we  have  actually  succeeded  in  obtain- 
ing a salt  possessing  all  the  characters  of  disulphometholate  of  barium.  Unfortunately, 
although  we  worked  upon  rather  a large  scale,  we  did  not  succeed  in  obtaining  by 
either  of  these  processes  a quantity  of  barium-salt  sufficient  for  analysis.  In  both 
processes  the  salt  is  the  product  of  a secondary  reaction. 


May  9th,  1856. 


. ■ . m 

-■I : /•-*>/  ■..'■* 


.' 'MI;; 


«*▼! 


i-lJi.  ■,'■7 


V>;- 


■, ■-■  V '.-’i^vS p-y  i-'.'.-  ■,.:7"‘'  f''*  '■  7- 


■:.X 

' : : i ^X’r  I Ui  f . .’  .X\  . ~'  -Xr'' ^'''■:  • ■ 7 •'  Y'|^j 


; ■ 7 7-,'^:X# 

X- 

7"7  :x-XK'X::XV-^:  7 

■-■  '7 

» ” '■  ■ ^ 

; ' j ' ' ' '.  ’ y;  ! > -J  v .0, 

r/wX  X .- 1a7 

,.li.;.-<  Kil; ' - 

7‘  i.rjX'biilX^X';'  tXJ':;,',;' 

" :.7'y.y,7  '7''7'ail;iJ!iji4 

' . _v  • jt.-f  * 

7.;  X:,M',:  7777:lx^.;l? 

»XX.X>:’:‘-- 

J .’  7 7 ' 7MXa  (;7-i  !• '' 

; ; iViiisiX,-', 

a: ''.  ■ •■. 

^.X‘  "'X-rtm 

■ • ■ ' ■' ‘'‘■>:  77  ' '■  ' f ' 

. •'  ■’ ' ' ■■  •.:': 

i X;,-  7;  ■' 

\ f X * . 

Xyl^>HXXV- 

,7;  X'::;-  , ;■■  f ^Y7,hBW '7XuX;, 

-')  'i'V  ■ ■.^-  ''’ia 


X'"'  c 


■f  !rs»X;'  ^■'  7 :'7 ^"'7  ,y.  //  / - 


^,!J  If-',  • 

/ . 

."’’  ■'  ?,f5U< 


- ^I'  S'!  .■;'*„7X1^;7  ;i’  .,  ; . 7-7  *‘-'X^' -.-V-.'t  .-  , X( , 1 , / 7'7  ■^  J 

fj' ' ■’■777'^^ 'V7'--'>-‘Xf '7.77  s--.'  ’ . "''i  i'/-.-', ^''i'.: ,..  7/''’-.!^  ■7‘*" 


.Xv7  7..'X^'  - 7 i‘;'-:77  ,ir.7jHXx^XXs|»v.:fe'X’7'X''7X^A'7:-r:7 

' X-.',77;7  77>;:-;,:.j57.%k;Xv:’^^  X'- '*  ' 


^a/t  ,i,-  J Hhl<  A'k  ' |.j| 


Jfix  ' ..  ' 7) ,: 


7xiv.s,  -n  77'^;^*7 


>’'A'  '■  ■ I'i'  >‘j-^'''-l 


f M- 


i'v'7'"'  *7' 


'■  , 7 ■'  ■■•  '7''>0,'  ' ^ 7 
■' '■  ‘‘Xi  X 'ir.WX'-'' 


■< ‘ ..v^r 


;■?■•  •’ 


■X' 


■■  ■,  '-,  ,:'  '‘."7^'^'’ '■  w ''Xf 
- ' ■ 


V'  '«. 

>'  ■'•  S '.'  * •,■  •.•  ; 


i.  ■f'f . 


- v ;^||| 

-X’"' 


[ 481  ] 


XXL  Elements  of  a Mathematical  Theory  of  Elasticity. 

[ By  Professor  William  Thomson,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 

Received  April  16, — Read  April  24,  1856. 

PART  I.  ON  STRESSES  AND  STRAINS*. 

Article  I. — Initial  D^nitions  and  Explanations. 

Def.  A STRESS  is  an  equilibrating  application  of  force  to  a body. 

Cor.  The  stress  on  any  part  of  a body  in  equilibrium  will  thus  signify  the  force 
which  it  experiences  from  the  matter  touching  that  part  all  round,  whether  entirely 
homogeneous  with  itself  or  only  so  across  a portion  of  its  bounding  surface, 

Def  A strain  is  any  definite  alteration  of  form  or  dimensions  experienced  by  a 
solid. 

Examples.  Equal  and  opposite  forces  acting  at  the  two  ends  of  a wire  or  rod  of  any  substance 
constitute  a stress  upon  it.  A body  pressed  equally  all  round,  for  instance  any  mass  touched  by 
air  on  all  sides,  experiences  a stress.  A stone  in  a building  experiences  stress  if  it  is  pressed  upon 
by  other  stones,  or  by  any  parts  of  the  structure,  in  contact  with  it.  Any  part  of  a continuous 
solid  mass  simply  resting  on  a fixed  base  experiences  stress  from  the  surrounding  parts  in  conse- 
quence of  their  weight.  The  different  parts  of  a ship  in  a heavy  sea  experience  stresses  from  which 
they  are  exempt  when  the  water  is  smooth. 

If  a rod  of  any  substance  become  either  longer  or  shorter  it  is  said  to  experience  a strain.  If  a 
body  be  uniformly  condensed  in  all  directions  it  experiences  a strain.  If  a stone,  a beam,  or  a mass 
of  metal,  in  a building,  or  in  a piece  of  framework,  becomes  condensed  or  dilated,  in  any  direction, 
or  bent,  or  twisted,  or  distorted  in  any  way,  it  is  said  to  experience  a strain,  to  become  strained,  or 
often  in  common  language,  simply  “ to  strain.”  A ship  is  said  ‘‘  to  strain”  if  in  launching,  or  when 
working  in  a heavy  sea,  the  different  parts  of  it  experience  relative  motions. 

Article  II. — Homogeneous  Stresses  and  Homogeneous  Strains. 

Def.  A stress  is  said  to  be  homogeneous  throughout  a body  when  equal  and 
similar  portions  of  the  body,  with  corresponding  lines  parallel,  experience  equal  and 
parallel  pressures  or  tensions  on  corresponding  elements  of  their  surfaces. 

Cor.  When  a body  is  subjected  to  any  homogeneous  stress,  the  mutual  tension  or 
pressure  between  the  parts  of  it  on  two  sides  of  any  plane  amounts  to  the  same  per 

* These  terms  were  first  definitively  introduced  into  the  Theory  of  Elasticity  by  Rankine,  and  I have  found 
them  very  valuable  in  writing  on  the  subject.  It  will  be  seen  that  I have  deviated  slightly  from  Mr.  Rankine’s 
definition  of  the  word  “ stress,”  as  I have  applied  it  to  the  direct  action  experienced  by  a body  from  the  matter 
around  it,  and  not,  as  proposed  by  him,  to  the  elastic  reaction  of  the  body  equal  and  opposite  to  that  action. 


482 


PROFESSOR.  THOJMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF 


unit  of  surface  as  that  between  the  j3arts  on  the  two  sides  of  any  parallel  plane  ; and 
the  former  tension  or  pressure  is  parallel  to  the  latter. 

A strain  is  said  to  be  homogeneous  throughout  a body,  or  the  body  is  said  to  be 
homogeneously  strained,  when  equal  and  similar  portions  with  corresponding  lines 
paralkd,  experience  equal  and  similar  alterations  of  dimensions. 

Cor.  All  the  particles  of  the  body  in  parallel  planes  remain  in  parallel  planes, 
when  the  body  is  homogeneously  strained  in  any  way. 

'Examples.  x\  long  uniform  rod,  if  pulled  out,  Vv'ill  experience  a uniform  strain,  except  near  its  ends. 
In  a pillar  bearing  a weight  in  comparison  with  which  its  owm  may  be  neglected,  there  will  be  a 
sensible  heterogeneousness  of  the  strain  up  to  the  middle  from  each  end,  because  of  the  circum- 
stances that  prevent  the  ends  from  expanding  laterally  to  the  same  extent  as  the  middle  does. 

A piece  of  cloth  held  in  a plane  and  distorted  so  that  the  warp  and  woof,  instead  of  being  perpen- 
dicular to  one  another,  become  two  sets  of  parallels  cutting  one  another  obliquely,  experiences  a 
homogeneous  strain.  The  strain  is  heterogeneous  as  to  intensity,  from  the  axis  to  the  surface  of  a 
c}dindrical  wire  under  torsion,  and  heterogeneous  as  to  direction  in  different  positions  in  a circle 
round  the  axis. 

Article  OI. — On  the  Distribution  of  Force  in  a Stress. 

Theorem.  In  every  homogeneous  stress  there  is  a system  of  three  rectangular  planes, 
each  of  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  the  mutual  force  between  the 
parts  of  the  body  on  its  two  sides. 

For  let  P(X),  P(Y),  P(Z)  denote  the  components,  parallel  to  X,  Y,  Z,  any  three 
rectangular  lines  of  reference,  of  the  force  experienced  per  unit  of  surface  at  any  por- 
tion of  the  solid  bounded  by  a plane  parallel  to  (Y,  Z)  ; Q(X),  Q(Y),  Q(Z)  the  cor- 
responding components  of  the  force  experienced  by  any  surface  of  the  solid  parallel 
to  (Z,  X) ; and  R(X),  R(Y),  R(Z)  those  of  the  force  at  a surface  parallel  to  (X,  Y). 
Now  by  considering  the  equilibrium  of  a cube  of  the  solid  with  faces  parallel  to  the 
planes  of  reference,  we  see  that  the  couple  of  forces  Q(Z)  on  its  two  faces  perpendi- 
cular to  Y is  balanced  by  the  couple  of  forces  R(Y)  on  the  faces  perpendicular  to 
Z.  Hence  we  must  have 

Q(Z)=R(Y). 

Similarly,  it  is  seen  that 

R(X)  = P(Z), 

and 

P(Y)  =Q(X). 

For  the  sake  of  brevity,  these  pairs  of  equal  quantities,  being  tangential  forces 
respectively  perpendicular  to  X,  Y,  Z,  may  be  denoted  by  T(X),  T(Y),  T(Z). 

Consider  a tetrahedral  portion  of  the  body  (sunonnded  it  may  be  with  continuous 
solid)  contained  within  three  planes  A,  B,  C,  through  a point  O parallel  to  the  planes 
of  the  pairs  of  lines  of  reference,  and  a third  plane  K cutting  these  at  angles  a,  /3,  y 
respectively ; so  that  as  regards  the  areas  of  the  different  sides  we  shall  have 

A = Kcosc{,  B = Kcos|3,  C = Kcosy. 


A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY. 


483 


The  forces  actually  experienced  by  the  sides  A,  B,  C have  nothing  to  balance  them 
except  the  force  actually  experienced  by  K.  Hence  those  three  forces  must  have  a 
single  resultant,  and  the  force  on  K must  be  equal  and  opposite  to  it.  If,  therefore, 
the  force  on  K per  unit  of  surface  be  denoted  by  F,  and  its  direction  cosines  by 
I,  m,  n,  we  liave 

F.K.^  =P(X)A+T(Z)B+T(Y)C, 
F.K.w.=T(Z)A+Q(Y)B+T(X)C, 

F.K.w  =T(Y)A+T(X)B+R(Z)C ; 

and,  by  the  relations  between  the  cases  stated  above,  we  deduce 
F/  =P(X)  cos  a+T  (Z)  cos/3+T(Y)  cos  7, 

Fm=T(Z)  cosa+Q(Y)  cos/3+T(X)  cos  7, 

F«  =T(Y)  cos  a+T(X)  cos /3+B(Z)  cos  7. 

Hence  the  problem  of  finding  (a,  j3,  7),  so  that  the  force  F(/,  w,  n)  may  be  perpen- 
dicular to  it,  will  be  solved  by  substituting  cos  a,  cos  j3,  cos  7 for  /,  m,  n in  these  equa- 
tions. By  the  elimination  of  cos  a,  cos  (3,  cos  7 from  the  three  equations  thus  obtained, 
we  have  the  well-known  cubic  determinantal  equation,  of  which  the  roots,  necessarily 
real,  lead,  when  no  two  of  them  are  equal,  to  one  and  only  one  system  of  three 
rectangular  axes  having  the  stated  property. 

Def.  The  three  lines  thus  proved  to  exist  for  every  possible  homogeneous  stress 
are  called  its  axes.  The  planes  of  their  pairs  are  called  its  normal  planes : the  mutual 
forces  between  parts  of  the  body  separated  by  these  planes,  or  the  forces  on  portions 
of  the  bounding  surface  parallel  to  them,  are  called  the  principal  tensions. 

Cor.  1.  The  Principal  Tensions  of  the  stress  are  the  roots  of  the  determinant  cubic 
referred  to  in  the  demonstration. 

Cor.  2.  If  a stress  be  specified  by  the  notation  P(X),  &c.  as  explained  above,  its 
normal  planes  are  the  principal  planes  of  the  surface  of  the  second  degree  whose 
equation  is 

P(X)X^-i-Q(Y)Y^H-R(Z)Z^-l-2T(X)YZ+2T(Y)ZX-f2T(Z)XY=l ; 

and  its  Principal  Tensions  are  equal  to  the  reciprocals  of  the  squares  of  the  lengths 
of  the  semi -principal-axes  of  the  same  surface  (quantities  which  are  negative  of  course 
for  the  principal  axis  or  axes  which  do  not  cut  the  surface  when  the  surface  is  a 
hyperboloid  of  one  or  of  two  sheets). 

Cor.  3.  The  ellipsoid  whose  equation  referred  to  the  Rectangular  axes  of  a stress,  is 
( 1 ~2eF)X^-}-  (1  -2eG)  Y^+  ( 1 - 2eH)Z^=  1 , 

where  F,  G,  H denote  the  Principal  Tensions,  and  e any  infinitely  small  quantity, 
represents  the  stress,  in  the  following  manner: — 

From  any  point  P in  the  surface  of  the  ellipsoid  draw  a line  in  the  tangent  plane 

3 s 


MDCCCLVI. 


484 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF 


half-way  to  the  point  where  this  plane  is  cut  by  a perpendicular  to  it  through  the 
centre ; and  from  the  end  of  the  first-mentioned  line  draw  a radial  line  to  meet  the 
surface  of  a sphere  of  unit  radius  concentric  with  the  ellipsoid.  The  tension  at  this 
point  of  the  surface  of  a sphere  of  the  solid  is  in  the  line  from  it  to  the  point  P;  and 
its  amount  per  unit  of  surface  is  equal  to  the  length  of  that  infinitely  small  line, 
divided  by  e. 

Article  IV. — On  the  Distrihution  of  Displacement  in  a Strain. 

Prop.  In  every  homogeneous  strain  any  part  of  the  solid  bounded  by  an  ellipsoid, 
remains  bounded  by  an  ellipsoid. 

For  all  particles  of  the  solid  in  a plane  remain  in  a plane,  and  two  parallel  planes 
remain  parallel.  Consequently  every  system  of  conjugate  diametral  planes  of  an 
ellipsoid  of  the  solid  retain  the  property  of  conjugate  diametral  planes  with  reference 
to  the  altered  curve  surface  containing  the  same  particles.  This  altered  surface  is 
therefore  an  ellipsoid. 

Prop.  There  is  a single  system  (and  only  a single  system,  except  in  the  cases  of 
symmetry)  of  three  rectangular  planes  for  every  homogeneous  strain,  which  remain 
at  right  angles  to  one  another  in  the  altered  solid. 

Def.  These  three  planes  are  called  the  normal  planes  of  the  strain,  or  simply  the 
strain-normals.  Their  lines  of  intersection  are  called  the  axes  of  the  strain. 

Remark.  The  preceding  propositions  and  definitions  are  applicable,  to  whatever 
extent  the  body  may  be  strained. 

Prop.  If  a body,  while  experiencing  an  infinitely  small  strain,  be  held  with  one 
point  fixed  and  the  normal  planes  of  the  strain  parallel  to  three  fixed  rectangular 
planes  through  the  point,  O ; a sphere  of  the  solid  of  unit  radius  having  this  point 
for  its  centre  becomes,  when  strained,  an  ellipsoid  whose  equation,  referred  to  the 
strain-normals  through  O,  is 

( 1 — 2x)X" -f- ( 1 — 23/)  Y" + ( 1 - 22  )Z"  = 1 , 

\(x,y,z  denote  the  elongations  of  the  solid  per  unit  of  length,  in  the  directions 
respectively  perpendicular  to  these  three  planes  ; and  the  position,  on  the  surface  of 
this  ellipsoid,  attained  by  any  particular  point  of  the  solid,  is  such  that  if  a line  be 
drawn  in  the  tangent  plane,  half-way  to  the  point  of  intersection  of  this  plane  with  a 
perpendicular  from  the  centre,  a radial  line  drawn  through  its  extremity  cuts  the 
primitive  spherical  surface  in  the  primitive  position  of  that  point. 

Cor.  For  every  stress,  there  is  a certain  infinitely  small  strain,  and  conversely,  for 
every  infinitely  small  strain,  there  is  a certain  stress,  so  related  that  if,  while  the 
strain  is  being  acquired,  the  centre  and  the  strain-normals  through  it  are  held  fixed, 
the  absolute  displacements  of  particles  belonging  to  a spherical  surface  of  the  solid 
represent,  in  intensity  (according  to  a definite  convention  as  to  units  for  the  repre- 
sentation ol  force  by  lines),  and  in  direction,  the  force  (reckoned  as  to  intensity,  in 


A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY. 


485 


amount  per  unit  of  area)  experienced  by  the  enclosed  sphere  of  the  solid,  at  the 
different  parts  of  its  surface,  when  subjected  to  the  stress. 

Def.  A stress  and  an  infinitely  small  strain  so  related  are  said  to  be  of  the  same 
type ; and  the  ellipsoid,  by  means  of  which  the  distribution  of  force  over  the  surface 
of  a sphere  of  unit  radius  is  represented  in  one  case  and  the  displacements  of  particles 
from  the  spherical  surface  are  shown  in  the  other,  may  be  called  the  geometrical 
type  of  either. 

Article  V. — Conditions  of  Perfect  Concurrence  between  Stresses  and  Sti'ains. 

Def  Two  stresses  are  said  to  be  coincident  in  direction,  or  to  be  perfectly  con- 
current, when  they  only  differ  in  absolute  magnitude.  The  same  relative  designations 
are  applied  to  two  strains  differing  from  one  another  only  in  absolute  magnitude. 

Cor.  If  two  stresses  or  two  strains  differ  by  one  being  reverse  to  the  other,  they 
!nay  be  said  to  be  negatively  coincident  in  direction ; or  to  be  directly  opposed  or 
directly  contrary  to  one  another. 

Def.  When  a homogeneous  stress  is  such  that  the  normal  component  of  the  mutual 
force  between  the  parts  of  the  body  on  the  two  sides  of  any  plane  whatever  through 
it  is  proportional  to  the  augmentation  of  distance  between  the  same  plane  and 
another  parallel  to  it  and  initially  at  unity  of  distance,  due  to  a certain  strain  expe- 
rienced by  the  same  body,  the  stress  and  the  strain  are  said  to  be  perfectly  concur- 
rent ; also  to  be  coincident  in  direction.  The  body  is  said  to  be  yielding  directly  to  a 
stress  applied  to  it,  when  it  is  acquiring  a strain  thus  related  to  the  stress ; and  in 
the  same  circumstances,  the  stress  is  said  to  be  working  directly  on  the  body,  or  to 
be  acting  in  the  same  direction  as  the  strain. 

Cor.  1.  Perfectly  concurrent  stresses  and  strains  are  of  the  same  type. 

Cor.  2.  If  a strain  is  of  the  same  type  as  a stress,  its  reverse  will  be  said  to  be 
negatively  of  the  same  type,  or  to  be  directly  opposed  to  the  strain.  A body  is  said 
to  be  working  directly  against  a stress  applied  to  it  when  it  is  acquiring  a strain 
directly  opposed  to  the  stress  ; and  in  the  same  circumstances,  the  matter  round  the 
body  is  said  to  be  yielding  directly  to  the  reactive  stress  of  the  body  upon  it. 

Article  VI. — Orthogonal  Stresses  and  Strains. 

Def.  1.  A stress  is  said  to  act  right  across  a strain,  or  to  act  orthogonally  to  a 
strain,  or  to  be  orthogonal  to  a strain,  if  work  is  neither  done  upon  nor  by  the  body 
in  virtue  of  the  action  of  the  stress  upon  it  while  it  is  acquiring  the  strain. 

fle/.  2.  Two  stresses  are  said  to  be  orthogonal  when  either  coincides  in  direction 
with  a strain  orthogonal  to  the  other. 

Def  3.  T 'wo  strains  are  said  to  be  orthogonal  when  either  coincides  in  direction 
with  a stress  orthogonal  to  the  other. 

Examples. — (1)  A uniform  cubical  compression,  and  any  strain  involving  no  alteration  of  volume, 
are  orthogonal  to  one  another. 


3 s 2 


486 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF 


(2)  A simple  extension  or  contraction  in  parallel  lines  unaccompanied  by  any  transverse  extension 
or  contraction,  that  is,  “ a simple  longitudinal  strain,”  is  orthogonal  to  any  similar  strain  in  lines  at 
right  angles  to  those  parallels. 

(3)  A simple  longitudinal  strain  is  orthogonal  to  a simple  tangential  strain*”  in  which  the 
sliding  is  parallel  to  its  direction  or  at  right  angles  to  it. 

(4)  Two  infinitely  small  simple  tangential  strains  in  the  same  plane  fj  with  their  directions  of 
sliding  mutually  inclined  at  an  angle  of  45°,  are  orthogonal  to  one  another. 

(5)  An  infinitely  small  simple  tangential  strain  is  orthogonal  to  every  infinitely  small  simple  tan- 
gential strain,  in  a plane  either  parallel  to  its  plane  of  sliding  or  perpendicular  to  its  line  of  sliding. 

Article  VII. — Comjjosition  and  Resolution  of  Stresses  and  of  Strains. 

Any  number  of  simultaneously  applied  hoinog-eneous  stresses  are  equivalent  to  a 
single  homogeneous  stress  which  is  called  their  resultant.  Any  number  of  super- 
imposed hoinogeneous  strains  are  equivalent  to  a single  homogeneous  resultant  strain. 
Infinitely  small  strains  may  be  independently  superimposed  ; and  in  what  follows  it 
will  be  uniformly  understood  that  the  strains  spoken  of  are  infinitely  small,  unless 
the  contrary  is  stated. 

Examples. — (1)  A strain  consisting  simply  of  elongation  in  one  set  of  parallel  lines,  and  a strain 
consisting  of  equal  contraction  in  a direction  at  right  angles  to  it,  applied  together,  constitute  a 
single  strain,  of  the  kind  whieh  that  described  in  Example  (3)  of  the  preceding  article  is  when  infi- 
nitely small,  and  is  called  a plane  distortion,  or  a simple  distortion.  It  is  also  sometimes  called  a 
simple  tangential  strain,  and  when  so  considered,  its  plane  of  sliding  may  be  regarded  as  either  of 
the  planes  biseeting  the  angles  between  planes  normal  to  the  lines  of  the  component  longitudinal 
strains. 

(2)  Any  two  simple  distortions  in  one  plane  may  be  reduced  to  a single  simple  distortion  in  the 
same  plane. 

(3)  Two  simple  distortions  not  in  the  same  plane  have  for  their  resultant  a strain  which  is  a 
distortion  unaccompanied  by  change  of  volume,  and  which  may  be  called  a compound  distortion. 

(4)  Three  equal  longitudinal  elongations  or  condensations  in  three  directions  at  right  angles  to 
one  another,  are  equivalent  to  a single  dilatation  or  condensation  equal  in  all  directions.  The  single 
stress  equivalent  to  three  equal  tensions  or  pressures  in  directions  at  right  angles  to  one  another  is 
a negative  or  positive  pressure  equal  in  all  directions. 

(5)  If  a certain  stress  or  infinitely  small  strain  be  defined  (Art.  III.  Cor.  3,  or  Art.  IV.)  by  the 
ellipsoid 

(l+A)X2  + (i+B)YV(l+C)Z2  + DYZ  + EZX-fFXY=]., 
and  another  stress  or  infinitely  small  strain  by  the  ellipsoid 

( 1 + A')X2  -f  ( 1 -p  B')  Y2  -f  ( 14-  C')Z2  -f-  D' YZ  + E'ZX  -t-  F'X  Y = 1 , 
where  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  &c.  are  all  infinitely  small,  their  resultant  stress  or  strain  is  that  repre- 


* That  is,  a homogeneous  strain  in  which  all  the  particles  in  one  plane  remain  fixed,  and  other  particles  are 
only  displaced  parallel  to  this  plane. 

[ “ The  plane  of  a simple  tangential  strain,”  or  the  plane  of  distortion  in  a simple  tangential  strain,  is  a 
plane  perpendicular  to  that  of  the  particles  supposed  to  be  held  fixed,  and  parallel  to  the  lines  of  displacement 
of  the  others. 


A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY. 


487 


sented  by  the  ellipsoid 

(1  + A + A')X2  + (1  + B + B')  Y2  + (1  + C + C')Z2  + (D  + D')  YZ  + (E  + E')ZX  + (F  + F')X  Y = 1 . 

Article  VII 1. — Specification  of  Sir  aim  and  Stresses. 

Prop.  Six  stresses  or  six  strains  of  six  distinct  arbitrarily  chosen  types  niay  be 
determined  to  fulfil  the  condition  of  having  a given  stress  or  a given  sti’ain  for  their 
resultant,  provided  those  six  types  are  so  chosen  that  a strain  belonging  to  any  one 
of  them  cannot  be  the  resultant  of  any  strains  whatever  belonging  to  the  others. 

For,  just  six  independent  parameters  being  required  to  expi-ess  any  stress  or  strain 
whatever,  the  resultant  of  any  set  of  stresses  or  strains  may  be  made  identical  with 
a given  stress  or  strain  by  fulfilling  six  equations  among  the  parameters  which  they 
involve;  and  therefore  the  magnitudes  of  six  stresses  or  strains  !)elonging  to  the  six 
arbitrarily  chosen  types  may  be  determined,  if  their  resultant  be  assumed  to  be  iden- 
tical with  the  given  stress  oi-  strain. 

Cor.  Any  stress  or  strain  may  be  numerically  specified  in  terms  of  numbers 
expressing  the  amounts  of  six  stresses  or  strains  of  six  arbitrarily  chosen  types  which 
have  it  for  their  resultant. 

Types  arbitrarily  chosen  for  this  purpose  will  be  called  types  of  reference.  The 
specifying  elements  of  a stress  or  strain  will  be  called  its  components  according  to 
the  types  of  reference.  The  specifying  elements  of  a strain  may  also  be  called  its 
coordinates,  with  reference  to  the  chosen  types. 

Examples. — (1)  Six  strains  in  each  of  which  one  of  the  six  edges  of  a tetrahedron  of  the  solid  is 
elongated  while  the  others  remain  unchanged,  may  be  used  as  types  of  reference  for  the  specification 
of  any  kind  of  strain  or  stress.  The  ellipsoid  representing  any  one  of  those  six  types  will  have  its 
two  circular  sections  parallel  to  the  faces  of  the  tetrahedron  which  do  not  contain  the  stretched  side. 

(2)  Six  strains  consisting,  any  one  of  them,  of  an  infinitely  small  alteration  either  of  one  of  the 
three  edges,  or  of  one  of  the  three  angles  between  the  faces,  of  a parallelepiped  of  the  solid,  while 
the  other  five  angles  and  edges  remain  unchanged,  may  be  taken  as  types  of  reference,  for  the 
specification  of  either  stresses  or  strains.  In  some  cases,  as  for  instance  in  expressing  the  probable 
elastic  properties  of  a crystal  of  Iceland  spar,  it  may  be  convenient  to  use  an  oblique  parallelepiped 
for  such  a system  of  types  of  reference;  but  more  frequently  it  will  be  convenient  to  adopt  a system 
of  types  related  to  the  deformations  of  a cube  of  the  solid,  in  the  manner  described. 

(3)  If  AX2  + BY2  + CZ2  + DYZ-fEZX  + FXY=1 

be  the  equation  of  the  surface  of  a portion  of  the  solid  referred  to  oblique  or  rectangular  coordi- 
nates, we  may  take  the  six  strains,  in  any  one  of  which  the  same  portion  of  the  solid  becomes 
altered  in  shape  to  a surface  whose  equation  differs  from  the  preceding  only  in  having  one  of  the  six 
coefficients  altered  by  an  infinitely  small  quantity,  as  six  types  of  reference  for  specifying  stresses 
and  strains  in  general. 

Article  IX. — Orthogonal  Types  of  Reference. 

Def.  A normal  system  of  types  of  reference  is  one  in  which  the  strains  or  stresses 
of  the  different  types  are  all  six  mutually  orthogonal  (fifteen  conditions).  A normal 


488 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF 


system  of  types  of  reference  may  also  be  called  an  orthogonal  system.  The  elements 
specifying,  with  reference  to  such  a system,  any  stress  or  strain,  will  be  called  ortho- 
gonal components  or  orthogonal  coordinates. 

Examples. — (1)  The  six  types  described  in  Example  (2)  of  Article  VIII.  are  clearly  orthogonal,  if 
the  parallelepiped  referred  to  is  rectangular.  Three  of  these  are  simple  longitudinal  extensions, 
parallel  to  the  three  sets  of  rectangular  edges  of  the  parallelepiped.  The  remaining  three  are  plane 
distortions  parallel  to  the  faces,  their  axes  bisecting  the  angles  between  the  edges.  They  constitute 
the  system  of  types  of  reference  uniformly  used  hitherto  by  writers  on  the  theory  of  elasticity. 

(2)  The  six  strains  in  which  a spherical  portion  of  the  solid  is  changed  into  ellipsoids  having  the 
following  equations — (1  -H  A)X^-1- Y2  + Z^=  1 

X2  + (1  + B)Y2  + Z2=1 
. X2  + Y2  + (1  + C)Z2=1 
X2  + Y2  + Z2  + DYZ=1 
X2  + Y2  + Z2  + EZX  = 1 
X2  + Y2  + Z2  + FXY=1, 

are  of  the  same  kind  as  those  considered  in  the  preceding  example,  and  therefore  constitute  a nor- 
mal system  of  types  of  reference.  The  resultant  of  the  strains  specified,  according  to  those  equa- 
tions, by  the  elements  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  is  a strain  in  which  the  sphere  becomes  an  ellipsoid  whose 
equation  (see  above,  Art.  VII.  Ex.  (5))  is 

( 1 + A)X2 -h  ( l-f  B)  Y2 -h  ( 1 -F  C)Z2  + D YZ  + EZX  + FXY  = 1 . 

(.3)  * A uniform  cubical  compression  (L),  three  simple  distortions  having  their  planes  at  right 
angles  to  one  another  and  their  axesf  bisecting  the  angles  between  the  lines  of  intersection  of  these 
planes  (11.)  (III.)  (IV.),  any  simple  or  compound  distortion  consisting  of  a combination  of  longi- 
tudinal strains  parallel  to  those  lines  of  intersection  (V.),  and  the  distortion  (VI.),  constituted  from 
the  same  elements  which  is  orthogonal  to  the  last,  afford  a system  of  six  mutually  orthogonal  types 
which  will  be  used  as  types  of  reference  below  in  expressing  the  elasticity  of  cubically  isotropic  solids. 

Article  X. — On  the  Measurement  of  Strains  and  Stresses. 

Def.  Strains  of  any  types  are  said  to  be  to  one  another  in  the  same  ratios  as 
stresses  of  the  same  types  respectively,  when  any  particular  plane  of  the  solid 
acquires  relatively  to  another  plane  parallel  to  it,  motions  in  virtue  of  those  strains 
which  are  to  one  another  in  the  same  ratios  as  the  normal  components  of  the  forces 
between  the  parts  of  the  solid  on  the  two  sides  of  either  plane  due  to  the  respective 
stresses. 

Def.  T he  magnitude  of  a stress  and  of  a strain  of  the  same  type,  are  quantities 
which,  multiplied  one  by  the  other,  give  the  work  done  on  unity  of  volume  of  a body 
acted  on  by  the  stress  while  acquiring  the  strain. 

This  example,  as  well  as  (7)  of  Art.  X.,  (5)  of  XL,  and  the  example  of  Art.  XII.,  have  been  inserted  to 
prepare  for  an  application  of  the  theory  of  Principal  Elasticities  to  cubically  and  spherically  isotropic  bodies, 
added  to  the  Second  Part  of  this  paper  since  the  date  of  its  communication. 

t The  “ axes  of  a simple  distortion”  are  the  lines  of  its  two  component  longitudinal  strains. 


A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY. 


489 


Cor.  1.  If  x,y,  I,  n,  ^ denote  orthogonal  components  of  a certain  strain,  and  if 
P,  Q,  R,  S,  T,  U denote  components,  of  the  same  type  respectively,  of  a stress  applied 
to  a body  while  acquiring  that  strain,  the  work  done  upon  it  per  unit  of  its  volume 

Pj7+Q^+R2  + Si+T;}+U^. 

Cor.  2.  The  condition  that  two  strains  or  stresses  specified  by  (a;,  y,  z,  ?,  n-,  0 and 
{x\y',  z',  I',  ^')  in  terms  of  a normal  system  of  types  of  reference,  may  be  ortho- 

gonal to  one  another,  is 

xx'  -\-yy'  -f  2 z' + II' + '/iri' + = 0 . 

Cor.  3.  The  magnitude  of  the  resultant  of  two,  three,  four,  five,  or  six  mutually 
orthogonal  strains  or  stresses  is  equal  to  the  square  root  of  the  sura  of  their  squares. 
For  if  P,  Q,  &c.  denote  several  orthogonal  stresses,  and  F the  magnitude  of  their 
resultant ; and  x,  y,  &c.  a set  of  proportional  strains  of  the  same  types  respectively, 
and  r the  magnitude  of  the  single  equivalent  strain,  the  resultant  stress  and  strain 
will  be  of  one  type,  and  therefore  the  work  done  by  the  resultant  stress  will  be  Fr. 
But  the  amounts  done  by  the  several  components  will  be  Pj?,  Qy,  &c.,  and  therefore 

Fr=Pa;+Qj/+&c. 

Now  we  have,  to  express  the  proportionality  of  the  stresses  and  strains, 

X y r 

Each  member  must  be  equal  to 

-f  &c. 

Vx  -f-  Qiy  -I-  &c.  ’ 

and  also  equal  to 

Vx  -f-  Q,y  -1-  &c. 
x'^  + y'^-^  &c. 

F P2-4-Q,2  I 

Hence  - = which  gives  F^=:P^+Q^+&c., 

F Fr 

and  ^~x^+~y‘^'+^c  ’ gives  r'^=x^ -^y'^ 

Cor.  4.  A definite  stress  of  some  particular  type  chosen  arbitrarily  may  be  called 
unity  ; and  then  the  numerical  reckoning  of  all  strains  and  stresses  becomes  perfectly 
definite. 

l^ef.  A uniform  pressure  or  tension  in  parallel  lines,  amounting  in  intensity  to  the 
unit  of  force  per  unit  of  area  normal  to  it,  will  be  called  a stress  of  unit  magnitude, 
and  will  be  reckoned  as  positive  when  it  is  tension,  and  negative  when  pressure. 

Examples. — (1)  Hence  the  magnitude  of  a simple  longitudinal  strain,  in  which  lines  of  the  body 
parallel  to  a certain  direction  experience  elongation  to  an  extent  bearing  the  ratio  x to  their  original 
dimensions,  must  be  called  x. 

(2)  The  magnitude  of  the  single  stress  equivalent  to  three  simple  pressures  in  directions  at  right 
angles  to  one  another  each  unity  is  — ; a uniform  compression  in  all  directions  of  unity  per  unit 

of  surface,  is  a negative  stress  equal  to  -v/S  in  absolute  value. 


490 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF 


(3)  A uniform  dilatation  in  all  directions,  in  which  lineal  dimensions  are  augmented  in  the  ratio 

1:1+^’,  is  a strain  equal  in  magnitude  to  ^v'3;  or  a uniform  “cubic  expansion”  E is  a strain 

, E 

equal  to 


(4)  A stress  compounded  of  a uniform  unit  pressure  in  one  direction  and  an  equal  tension  in  a 
direction  at  right  angles  to  it,  or  which  is  the  same  thing,  a stress  compounded  of  two  balancing 
couples  of  unit  tangential  pressures  in  planes  at  angles  of  45°  to  the  direction  of  those  forces  and  at 
right  angles  to  one  another,  amounts  in  magnitude  to  2. 

(5)  A strain  compounded  of  a simple  longitudinal  extension,  x,  and  a simple  longitudinal  con- 
densation of  equal  absolute  value,  in  a direction  perpendicular  to  it,  is  a strain  of  magnitude  x\/2’, 
or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  (if  — a simple  distortion  such  that  the  relative  motion  of  two  planes 
at  unit  distances  parallel  to  either  of  the  planes  bisecting  the  angles  between  the  two  planes  men- 
tioned above  is  a motion  tr,  parallel  to  themselves,  is  a strain  amounting  in  magnitude  to 

(6)  If  a strain  be  such  that  a sphere  of  unit  radius  in  the  body  becomes  an  ellipsoid  whose  equa- 
tion is 

( 1 - A)X2  + (1  - B)  Y2  + (1  - C)Z2-  D YZ  - EZX  - FXY  = 1, 


the  values  of  the  component  strains  corresponding,  as  explained  in  Example  (2)  of  Art.  IX.,  to  the 
different  coefficients  respectively,  are 


iA,  IB,  W, 


D E F 
2^2’  2V'2’  2v'2' 


For  the  components  corresponding  to  A,  B,  C are  simple  longitudinal  strains,  in  which  diameters 
of  the  sphere  along  the  axes  of  coordinates  become  elongated  from  2,  to  2 + A,  2 -f  B,  2 -f  C respect- 
ively : D is  a distortion  in  which  diameters  in  the  plane  YOZ,  bisecting  the  angles  YOZ  and  Y'OZ, 
become  I'espectively  elongated  and  contracted  from  2 to  2-j-|D,  and  from  2 to  2 — AD;  and  so  for 
the  others.  Hence,  if  we  take  x,  y,  z,  0,  rj,  ^ to  denote  the  magnitudes  of  six  component  strains, 
according  to  the  orthogonal  system  of  types  described  in  Examples  (1)  and  (2)  of  Art.  IX.,  the 
resultant  strain  equivalent  to  them  will  be  one  in  which  a sphere  of  radius  1 in  the  solid  becomes  an 
ellipsoid  whose  equation  is 

(l-2x)X^+{l-  2y)  Y2  + (1  - 2z)Z^-2  ^2(0YZ  + riZX  + ?XY)  = 1, 
and  its  magnitude  will  be 

V {x'^  + y"^  + z'^  + + Yf‘  + 

(7)  The  specifications,  according  to  the  system  of  reference  used  in  the  preceding  Example,  of 
unit  strains  belonging  to  the  six  orthogonal  types  defined  in  Example  (3)  of  Art.  IX.,  are  respectively 
as  follows : — 


X 

y 

z 

■n 

r 

(I-) 

1 

Vs 

1 

Vs 

1 

VS 

0 

0 

0 

(II.) 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

(III.) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

(IV.) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

(V.) 

1 

m 

n 

0 

0 

0 

(VI.) 

1 

V 

wl 

n' 

0 

0 

0 

A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY. 


491 


where  I,  m,  n,  V,  m',  n'  denote  quantities  fulfilling  the  following  conditions 

P +7rP  +jp 

I -\-m  +n  =0, 

W +mm'  -{-nn'  = 0, 


nr 


-f-  n'^  = 1 


(8)  If 


I'  +m'  +n'  =0. 

(1  - 2eP)X2  + (1  - 2eQ)  Y2  + ( 1 ~ 2eR)Z2  - 2e  ^/2{SYZ  + TZX  + UXY)  = 1 


and 


be  the  equation  of  the  ellipsoid  representing  a certain  stress,  the  amount  of  work  done  by  this  stress, 
if  applied  to  a body  while  acquiring  the  strain  represented  by  the  equation  in  the  preceding  example, 

P^  + Q2/  + R^  + S?  + T^  + U?. 

Cor.  Hence,  if  the  variables  X,  Y,  Z be  transformed  to  any  other  set  (X',  Y',  Z')  fulfilling  the  con- 
dition of  being  the  coordinates  of  the  same  point,  referred  to  another  system  of  rectangular  axes, 
the  coefficients  x,  y,  z.  See.,  y^,  z^,  &c.  in  two  homogeneous  quadratic  functions  of  three  variables, 

(1  - 2a?) X2  -j-  (1  - 2y)  Y2  -h  ( 1 - 2^) Z2 - 2 v/2  YZ  + >iZX  + ?X Y) 

{l-2x,)X^  + {l-  2y,)Y^  + ( 1 - 2z,)Z^  - 2V2  (?,YZ  + >,^ZX  -f  ^^X  Y), 
and  the  corresponding  coefficients  x',  y',  z',  Sec.,  x^,  y],  z\.  Sec.  will  be  so  related  that 
ay'a?'  -j-  y'y!  + + Wt  + + »)»?/  + ??/  i 

or  the  function  + + + + + of  the  coefficients  is  an  “invariant”  for  linear  transforma- 

tions fulfilling  the  conditions  of  transformation  from  one  to  another  set  of  rectangular  axes.  Since 
x + y-\-z  and  a?,  -{-  -f  are  clearly  invariants  also,  it  follows  that  AA^  -f  -|-  CC,  -f  2DD;  -|-  2EE,  -H  2FF, 
is  an  invariant  function  of  the  coefficients  of  the  twm  quadratics 

AX^  + BY2  -p  CZ^  + 2DYZ  q-  2EZX  -f  2FXY 
and  A;X2  -f  B^Y2  -f-  C^Z^  + 2D^YZ  -|-  2E^ZX  -p  2F,X  Y, 

which  it  is  easily  proved  to  be  by  direct  transformation. 

Article  XI. — On  Imperfect  Concurrences  of  two  Stress  or  Strain-types. 

Def.  The  concurrence  of  any  stresses  or  strains  of  two  stated  types,  is  the  propor- 
tion which  the  work  done  when  a body  of  unit  volume  experiences  a stress  of  either 
type  while  acquiring  a strain  of  the  other,  bears  to  the  product  of  the  numbers 
measuring  the  stress  and  strain  respectively. 

Cor.  1.  In  orthogonal  resolution  of  a stress  or  strain,  its  component  of  any  stated 
type  is  equal  to  its  own  amount  multiplied  by  its  concurrence  with  that  type;  or  the 
stress  or  strain  of  a stated  type  which,  along  with  another  or  others  orthogonal  to  it 
have  a given  stress  or  strain  for  their  resultant,  is  equal  to  the  amount  of  the  given 
stress  or  strain  reduced  in  the  ratio  of  its  concurrence  with  that  stated  type. 

Cor.  2.  The  concurrence  of  two  coincident  stresses  or  strains  is  unity;  or  a per- 
fect concurrence  is  numerically  equal  to  unity. 

Cor.  3.  The  concurrence  of  two  orthogonal  stresses  and  strains  is  zero. 

Cor.  4.  The  concurrence  of  two  directly  opposed  stresses  or  strains  is  —1. 

3 T 


MDCCCLVI. 


492 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF 


Cor.  5.  Ifa’,  j/,  z,  are  orthogonal  components  of  any  strain  or  stress,  r,  its 

concurrences  with  the  types  of  reference  are  respectively 

X y z ^ ^ 

— ? — ? -?  —5  — J — ? 

Z'  Z'  Z'  y* 

where 

r = ( +3/^ -|- ^ . 

Cor.  6.  The  mutual  concurrence  of  two  stresses  or  strains  is 

mm'  -]-  nn!  4“  4-  H" 

if  (/,  m,  71,  X,  fjb,  v)  denote  the  concurrences  of  one  of  them  with  six  orthogonal  types 
of  reference,  and  (/',  m',  w',  V,  (jJ,  v')  those  of  the  other. 

Cor.  7-  The  most  convenient  6:joeci^cof/ow  q/” « ^3/joe  for  strains  or  stresses,  being 
in  general  a statement  of  the  components,  according  to  the  types  of  reference,  of  a 
unit  strain  or  stress  of  the  type  to  be  specified,  becomes  a statement  of  its  concurrences 
with  the  types  of  reference  when  these  are  orthogonal. 

Examples. — (1)  The  mutual  concurrence  of  two  simple  longitudinal  strains  or  stresses,  inclined  to 
one  another  at  an  angle  S,  is  cos®  d. 

(2)  The  mutual  concurrence  of  two  simple  distortions  in  the  same  plane,  whose  axes  are  inclined 
at  an  angle  $ to  one  another,  is  cos®  fl  — sin®5,  or  2 sin  (45°  — fl)  cos  (45°  — S). 

Hence  the  components  of  a simple  distortion,  8,  along  two  rectangular  axes  in  its  plane,  and  two 
others  bisecting  the  angle  between  these  taken  as  axes  of  component  simple  distortions,  are 

8 (cos®  $ — sin®  fl)  and  8 . 2 sin  5 cos  9 

respectively,  if  9 be  the  angle  between  the  axis  of  elongation  in  the  given  distortion  and  in  the  first 
component  type. 

(3)  The  mutual  concurrence  of  a simple  longitudinal  strain  and  a simple  distortion  is 

V 2. cos  « cos  /3, 

if  « and  /3  be  the  angles  at  which  the  direction  of  the  longitudinal  strain  is  inclined  to  the  line 
bisecting  the  angles  between  the  axes  of  the  distortion ; it  is  also  equal  to 

X 

^ (cos®<p-  cos®  4/), 

if  <p  and  4/  denote  the  angles  at  which  the  direction  of  the  longitudinal  strain  is  inclined  to  the  axis 
of  the  distortion. 

(4)  The  mutual  concurrence  of  a simple  longitudinal  strain  and  of  a uniform  dilatation  is 

\ O 

(5)  The  specifying  elements  exhibited  in  Example  (7)  of  the  preceding  article,  are  the  concur- 
rences of  the  new  system  of  orthogonal  types  described  in  Example  (3)  of  Art.  IX.,  with  the  ordi- 
nary system,  Examples  (1)  and  (2),  Art.  IX. 

Article  XII. — 0)vthe  Transformation  of  Types  of  Reference  for  Stresses  or  Strains. 

To  transform  the  specification  {x,  y,  z,  f,  ??,  tf)  of  a stress  or  strain  with  reference 
to  one  system  of  types  into  ( <3? j j *^25  *^35  *^55  ) with  reference  to  another  system  of 

types.  Let  (a„  />,,  c,,  ey,f,  gj  be  the  components,  according  to  the  original  system, 


A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY. 


493 


of  a unit  strain  of  the  first  type  of  the  new  system  ; let  (a.^,  c^,  g^)  be  the  cor- 

responding specification  of  the  second  type  of  the  new  systen) ; and  so  on.  Then  we 
have,  for  the  required  formulse  of  transformation, 

X = -f  + a 5^  5 + «6'^’6 , 

+ ^2^2+ ^3^3+  b^x^+b,x,-\-bQXe, 


^ — glX,  -\-g^X^  +^3^3  +g4A’4  ■ 

Example.  The  transforming  equations  to  pass  from  a specification  {x,  y,  z,  yj,  in  terms  of  the 
system  of  reference  used  in  Examples  (6)  and  (7),  Art.  X.,  to  a specification  cr,  rj,  ot,  co  in  terms 
of  the  new  system  described  in  Example  (3)  of  Art.  IX.,  and  specified  in  Example  (7)  of  Art.  X., 
are  as  follows  : — 


y — + m'co, 


Z — -f  w. 


where,  as  before  stated,  I,  m,  n,  V,  m',  n’  are  quantities  fulfilling  the  conditions 

P =1, 

I -\-m  -fra  =0, 

Z'^-frai'"^  -fra'^  = l, 

V -f rai'  -fra'  =0, 

//'  -f  mm'  -f  rara'  = 0. 


PART  II.  ON  THE  MECHANICAL  CONDITIONS  OF  RELATION  BETWEEN  STRESSES  AND 
STRAINS,  EXPERIENCED  BY  AN  ELASTIC  SOLID. 

Article  XIIL — Interpretation  of  the  Differential  Equation  of  Energy. 

In  a paper  on  the  Thermo-elastic  Properties  of  Matter,  published  in  the  first  Number 
of  the  Quarterly  Mathematical  Journal  (April  1855),  it  was  proved  from  general 
principles  in  the  theory  of  the  Transformation  of  Energy,  that  the  amount  of  work 
{w)  required  to  reduce  an  elastic  solid,  kept  at  a constant  temperature,  from  one 
stated  condition  of  internal  strain  to  another,  depends  solely  on  tliese  two  condi- 
tions, and  not  at  all  on  the  cycle  of  varied  states  through  which  tl)e  body  may  have 
been  made  to  pass  in  effecting  the  change,  provided  always  there  has  been  no  failure 
in  the  elasticity  under  any  of  the  strains  it  has  experienced.  Thus  for  a homogeneous 
solid  homogeneously  strained,  it  appears  that  w is  a function  of  six  independent  vari- 
ables X,  y,  z,  I,  71,  by  which  the  condition  of  the  solid  as  to  strain  is  specified. 
Hence  to  strain  the  body  to  the  infinitely  small  extent  expressed  by  the  variation  from 
{x,  y,  z,  I,  fi,  to  (x-}-flfT,  y-fdy,  z-fdz,  the  work  required  to  be 

done  upon  it  is 

dw  , dw  , dw  , , dw  , dw  , , dw 

3 T 2 


494 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF 


The  stress  whieh  must  be  applied  to  its  surface  to  keep  the  body  in  equilibrium  in 
the  state  {x,  y,  z,  f],  Q must  therefore  be  such  that  it  would  do  this  amount  of  work 
if  the  body,  under  its  action,  were  to  acquire  the  arbitrary  strain  dx,  dy,  dz,  dl,  dn,  d^; 
that  is,  it  must  be  the  resultant  of  six  stresses;  one  orthogonal  to  the  five  strains 

dy,  dz,  d^,  dr],  d^,  and  of  such  a magnitude  as  to  do  the  work  ^dx  when  the  body 
acquires  the  strain  dx ; a second  orthogonal  to  dx,  dz,  d^,  drj,  d^,  and  of  such  a mag- 
nitude as  to  do  the  work  '^dy  when  the  body  acquires  the  strain  dy  ; and  so  on.  If 

a,  b,  c,f,  g,  h denote  the  respective  concurrences  of  these  six  stresses,  with  the  types 
of  reference  used  in  the  specification  {x,  y,  z,  |,  n,  Q of  the  strains,  the  amounts  of  the 
six  stresses  which  fulfil  those  conditions  will  (Art.  XI.)  be  given  by  the  equations 


1 dw 
a dx’ 

Q 

1 div 
~b  dy’ 

„ 1 dw 

-7-  ? 

c az 

1 dw 

fW 

T: 

1 dw 
~9  df]  ’ 

\ dw  ^ 

^—hTxf 

and  the  types  of  these  component  stresses  are  determined  by  being  orthogonal  to  the 
fives,  of  the  six  strain-types  wanting  the  first,  the  second,  &c.  respectively. 

Cor.  If  the  types  of  reference  used  in  expressing  the  strain  of  the  body  constitute 
an  orthogonal  system,  the  types  of  the  component  stresses  will  coincide  with  them, 
and  each  of  the  concurrences  will  be  unity.  Hence  the  equations  of  equilibrium  of 
an  elastic  solid  referred  to  six  orthogonal  types  are  simply 


11 

,,  dw 

II 

^1  S' 

1 

_ dw 

11 

II 

Article  XIV. — Reduction  of  the  Potential  Function,  and  of  the  Equations  of 
Equilibrium,  of  an  Elastic  Solid  to  their  simplest  Forms. 

If  the  condition  of  the  body  from  which  the  work  denoted  by  w is  reckoned  be 
that  of  equilibrium  under  no  stress  from  without,  and  x,y,  z,  |,  rj,  ^ be  chosen  each 
zero  for  this  condition,  we  shall  have,  by  Maclaurin’s  theorem, 

w—Wfx,  y,  z,  I,  n,  (:^)  + llfx,y,  z,  rj,  ^)-l-&c., 
where  Hg,  H3,  &c.  denote  homogeneous  functions  of  the  second  order,  third  order, 
&c.  respectivelv.  Hence  &c.  will  each  be  a linear  function  of  the  strain- 

dx  dy 

coor<linates,  together  with  functions  of  higher  orders  derived  from  H3,  &c.  But  ex- 
perience  shows  that  within  the  elastic  limits,  the  stresses  are  very  nearly  if  not  quite 
|)roportional  to  the  strains  they  are  capable  of  producing;  and  therefore  H3,  &c. 
may  be  neglected,  and  we  have  simply 

w=U.,{x,  y,  z,  I,  ri,  Q. 


A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY, 


495 


Now  in  general  there  will  be  21  terms,  with  independent  coefficients,  in  this  function  ; 
but  by  a choice  of  types  of  reference,  that  is,  by  a linear  transformation  of  the  inde- 
pendent variables,  we  may,  in  an  infinite  variety  of  ways,  reduce  it  to  the  form 

m;= C^^H- Ff -f  0;?"+ 

The  equations  of  equilibrium  then  become 


the  simplest  possible  form  under  which  they  can  be  presented.  The  interpretation 
is  expressed  as  follows. 

Prop.  An  infinite  number  of  systems  of  six  types  of  strains  or  stresses  exist  in  any 
given  elastic  solid  such  that,  if  a strain  of  anyone  of  those  types  be  impressed  on  the 
body,  the  elastic  reaction  is  balanced  by  a stress  orthogonal  to  the  five  others  of  the 
same  system. 


Article  XV. — On  the  Six  Principal  Strains  of  an  Elastic  Solid. 

To  reduce  the  twenty-one  coefficients  of  the  quadratic  terms  in  the  expression  for 
the  potential  energy  to  six  by  a linear  transformation,  we  have  only  fifteen  equations 
to  satisfy ; while  we  have  thirty  disposable  transforming  coefficients,  there  being  five 
independent  elements  to  specify  a type,  and  six  types  to  be  changed.  Any  further 
condition  expressible  by  just  fifteen  independent  equations  may  be  satisfied  and  makes 
the  transformation  determinate.  Now  the  condition  that  six  strains  may  be  mutually 
orthogonal,  is  expressible  by  just  as  many  equations  as  there  are  of  different  pairs  of 
six  things ; that  is  fifteen.  The  well-known  algebraic  theory  of  the  linear  trans- 
formation of  quadratic  functions  shows  for  the  case  of  six  variables,  (1)  that  the  six 
coefficients  in  the  reduced  form  are  the  roots  of  a “determinant”  of  the  sixth  degree 
necessarily  real;  (2)  that  this  multiplicity  of  roots  leads  determinately  to  one,  and 
only  one  system  of  six  types  fulfilling  the  prescribed  conditions  unless  two  or  more  of 
the  roots  are  equal  to  one  another,  when  there  will  be  an  infinite  number  of  solutions 
and  definite  degrees  of  isotropy  among  them  ; and  (3)  that  there  is  no  equality 
between  any  of  the  six  roots  of  the  determinant  in  general,  when  there  are  twenty- 
one  independent  coefficients  in  the  given  quadratic. 

Prop.  Hence  a single  system  of  six  mutually  orthogonal  types  may  be  determined 
for  any  homogeneous  elastic  solid,  so  that  its  potential  energy  when  homogeneously 
strained  in  any  way  is  expressed  by  the  sum  of  the  products  of  the  squares  of  the 
components  of  the  strain,  according  to  those  types,  respectively  multiplied  by  six 
determinate  coefficients. 

Def.  The  six  strain-types  thus  determined  are  called  the  Six  Principal  Strain  types 
of  the  body. 


496 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF 


The  concurrences  of  the  stress-components  used  in  interpreting  the  differential 
equation  of  energy  with  the  types  of  the  strain-coordinates  in  terms  of  which  the 
potential  of  elasticity  is  expressed,  being  perfect  when  these  constitute  an  orthogonal 
system,  each  of  the  quantities  denoted  above  by  a,  b,  c,f,  g,  h,  is  unity  when  the  six 
principal  strain-types  are  chosen  for  the  coordinates.  The  equations  of  equilibrium 
of  an  elastic  solid  may  therefore  be  expressetl  as  follows; — 

P=A.r,  Q=B?/,  R=:C%, 

S=F|,  T = Gn,  U = H^, 

where  x,  y,  z,  rj,  ^ denote  strains  belonging  to  the  six  Principal  Types,  and  P,  Q, 
K,  S,  T,  U the  components  according  to  tlie  same  types,  of  the  stress  required  to 
hold  the  body  in  equilibrium  when  in  the  condition  of  having  those  strains.  The 
amount  of  work  that  must  be  spent  upon  it  per  unit  of  its  volume,  to  bring  it  to 
this  state  from  an  unconstrained  condition,  is  given  by  the  equation 

w; = 1 -h  -f  W -h  H . 

Def.  The  coefficients  A,  B,  C,  F,  G,  H are  called  the  six  principal  Elasticities  of 
the  body. 

T!ie  equations  of  equilibrium  express  the  following  propositions; — 

Prop.  If  a body  be  strained  according  to  any  one  of  its  six  Principal  Types,  the 
stress  required  to  hold  it  so  is  directly  concurrent  with  the  strain. 

Examples  inserted  September  16,  1856. 

4 ) If  a solid  be  cubically  isotropic  in  its  elastic  properties,  as  crystals  of  the  cubical  class  pro- 
bably are,  any  portion  of  it  will,  when  subjected  to  a uniform  positive  or  negative  normal  pressure 
all  round  its  surface,  experience  a uniform  condensation  or  dilatation  in  all  directions.  Hence  a 
uniform  condensation  is  one  of  its  six  Principal  Strains.  Three  plane  distortions  with  axes  bisect- 
ing the  angles  between  the  edges  of  the  cube  of  symmetry  are  clearly  also  principal  strains,  and 
since  the  three  corresponding  principal  elasticities  are  ecpial  to  one  another,  any  strain  whatever 
compounded  of  these  three  is  a principal  strain.  Lastly,  a plane  distortion  whose  axes  coincide 
with  any  two  edges  of  the  cube,  being  clearly  a principal  distortion,  and  the  principal  elasticities 
corresponding  to  the  three  distortions  of  this  kind  being  equal  to  one  another,  any  distortion  com- 
pounded of  them  is  also  a principal  distortion. 

Hence  the  system  of  orthogonal  types  treated  of  in  Examples  (3)  Art.  IX.,  and  (7)  Art.  X.,  or 
any  system  in  which,  for  (11.),  (Ill,),  and  (IV,),  any  three  orthogonal  strains  compounded  of  them 
are  substituted,  constitutes  a system  of  six  Pi'incipal  Strains  in  a solid  cubically  isotropic.  There 
are  only  three  distinct  Principal  Elasticities  for  such  a body,  and  these  are  (A)  its  cubic  com- 
pressibility, (B)  its  rigidity  against  diagonal  distortion  in  any  of  its  principal  planes  (three  equal 
elasticities),  and  (C)  its  rigidity  against  rectangular  distortions  of  a cube  of  symmetry  (two  equal 
elasticities). 

(2)  In  a perfectly  isotropic  solid,  the  rigidity  against  all  distortions  is  equal.  Hence  the 
rigidity  (B)  against  diagonal  distortion  must  be  equal  to  the  rigidity  (C)  against  rectangular  distor- 
tion, in  a cube;  and  it  is  easily  seen  that  if  this  condition  is  fulfilled  for  one  set  of  three  rectangular 
planes  for  which  a substance  is  isotropic,  the  isotropy  must  be  complete.  The  conditions  of  perfect 


A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY. 


497 


or  spherical  isotropy  are  therefore  expressed  in  terms  of  the  conditions  referred  to  in  the  preceding 
example,  with  the  farther  condition,  B = C. 

A uniform  condensation  in  all  directions,  and  any  system  whatever  of  five  orthogonal  distortions, 
constitute  a system  of  six  Principal  Strains  in  a spherically  isotropic  solid.  Its  Principal  Elasticities 
are  simply  its  Cubical  Compressibility  and  its  Rigidity. 

Prop.  Unless  some  of  the  six  Principal  Elasticities  be  equal  to  one  another,  the 
stress  required  to  keep  the  body  strained  otherwise  than  according  to  one  or  other  of 
six  distinct  types  is  oblique  to  the  strain. 

Prop.  The  stress  required  to  maintain  a given  amount  of  strain  is  a maximum  or 
minimum  if  of  one  of  the  six  Principal  Types. 

Cor.  If  A be  the  greatest  and  H the  least  of  the  six  quantities  A,  B,  C,  F,  G,  H,  the 
principal  type  to  which  the  first  corresponds  is  that  of  a strain  reijulring  a greater  stress 
to  maintain  itAhixei  any  other  strain  of  equal  amount ; and  the  principal  type  to  which 
the  last  corresponds  is  that  of  a strain  which  is  maintained  by  a less  stress  than  any 
other  strain  of  equal  amount  in  the  same  body.  The  stresses  corresponding  to  the 
four  other  principal  strain-types  have  each  the  double,  maximum  and  minimum, 
property  in  a determinate  way. 

Prop.  If  a body  be  strained  in  a direction  of  which  the  concurrences  with  the 
principal  strain-types  are  /,  w,  n,  X,  g,  v,  and  to  an  amount  equal  to  r,  the  stress 
required  to  maintain  it  in  this  state  will  be  equal  to  fir,  where 

fl  = -P  B W + C V -f  4-  Gy + 

and  will  be  of  a type  of  which  the  concurrences  with  the  principal  types  are  respectively 

Al  B/n  Qn  Fx  Gpu  Hv 

n’  IT’  xF’  H’  IT' 

Prop.  A homogeneously  strained  elastic  solid,  crystalline  or  non-crystalline,  subject 
to  magnetic  force  or  free  from  magnetic  force,  has  neither  any  right-handed  or  left- 
handed,  nor  any  dipolar,  properties  dependent  on  elastic  forces  simply  proportional 
to  strains. 

Cor.  1.  The  elastic  forces  concerned  in  the  luminiferous  vibrations  of  a solid  or 
fluid  mediunj  possessing  the  “right-  or  left-handed  isotropic  axial  property,”  or  the 
completely  “ isotropic  rotatory  property,”  (such  as  quartz  crystal,  right-  or  left-handed 
tartaric  acid,  solution  of  sugar,)  or  the  dipolar  axial  rotatory  property  discovered  by 
Faraday  in  his  heavy  glass  and  other  transparent  bodies,  solid  and  fluid,  in  the 
magnetic  field,  either  depend  on  the  heterogeneousness  or  on  the  magnitude  of  the 
strains  experienced. 

Hence  as  they  do  not  depend  on  the  magnitude  of  the  strain,  they  do  depend  on 
its  heterogeneousness  through  the  portion  of  the  medium  containing  a wave. 

Cor.  2.  There  cannot  possibly  be  any  characteristic  of  elastic  forces  simply  propor- 
tional to  the  strains  in  a homogeneous  body,  corresponding  to  certain  peculiarities 
of  crystalline  form  which  have  been  observed ; for  instance  corresponding  to  the 


‘ 498  PROF.  THOMSON’S  ELEMENTS  OF  A MATHEMATICAL  THEORY  OF  ELASTICITY. 


plagiedral  faces,  discovered  by  Sir  John  Herschel  to  indicate  the  optical  character, 
whether  right-handed  or  left-handed,  in  different  specimens  of  quartz  crystal,  or  cor- 
responding to  the  distinguishing  charaeteristics  of  the  crystals  of  the  right-handed 
and  left-handed  tartaric  acids,  obtained  by  M.  Pasteur  from  racemic  acid,  or  corre- 
sponding to  the  dipolar  characteristics  of  form  said  to  have  been  discovered  in  elee- 
tric  crystals. 

Article  XVL — Application  of  Conclusions  to  Natural  Crystals. 

In  a paper  on  the  Thermo-elastic  Properties  of  Matter,  which  I hope  to  be  able 
before  long  to  lay  before  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  I intend  to  demonstrate 
that  a body,  homogeneous  when  regarded  on  a large  scale,  may  be  constructed  to 
have  twenty-one  arbitrarily  prescribed  values  for  the  coefficients  in  the  expression  for 
its  potential  energy  in  terms  of  any  prescribed  system  of  strain  coordinates.  This 
proposition  was  first  enunciated  in  the  paper  on  the  Thermo-elastie  Properties  of 
Solids,  published  last  April  in  the  Quarterly  Mathematical  Journal  alluded  to  above. 
We  may  infer  the  following. 

Prop.  A solid  may  be  constructed  to  have  arbitrarily  prescribed  values  for  its  six 
Principal  Elasticities  and  an  arbitrary  orthogonal  system  of  six  strains,  specified  by 
fifteen  elements,  for  its  principal  strain-types;  having,  for  instance,  five  arbitrarily 
chosen  systems  of  three  rectangular  axes,  for  the  normal  axes  of  five  of  the  principal 
strains,  and  those  of  the  sixth  consequently  in  general  distinct  from  all  the  others. 

Cor.  There  is  no  reason  for  believing  that  natural  crystals  do  not  exist  for  which 
there  are  six  unequal  Principal  Elasticities,  and  six  distinct  strain-types  for  which 
the  three  normal  axes  constitute  six  distinct  sets  of  three  principal  rectangular  axes 
of  elasticity. 

It  would  be  easy  to  add  arbitrary  illustrative  examples  regarding  Principal  Elasti- 
cities, and  to  investigate  the  principal  strain- types  and  the  equations  of  elastic  force 
referred  to  them  or  to  other  natural  types,  for  a body  possessing  the  kind  of  symmetry 
as  to  elastic  forces  that  is  possessed  by  a crystal  of  Iceland  spar  or  by  a crystal  of 
the  cubical  class  (which  may  be  included  with  the  former  in  an  investigation  on  a 
very  obvious  plan). 


[ 499  ] 


XXII.  On  the  Lunar-Diurnal  Magnetic  Variation  at  Toronto. 

By  Major-General  Edward  Sabine,  R.A.,  D.C.L.,  Treas.  V.P.R.S. 


Received  June  13, — Read  June  19,  1856. 

In  fulfilment  of  an  intention  expressed  to  the  Royal  Society  in  November  1853*,  I 
have  now  the  honour  to  submit  to  the  Society  the  results  of  an  investigation  into  the 
Moon’s  diurnal  influence  on  the  horizontal  and  vertical  components  of  the  magnetic 
force  at  Toronto,  and  the  consequent  deduction  of  the  Lunar-diurnal  Variations  of 
the  Inclination  and  of  the  Total  Force  at  that  Station. 

The  processes  to  which  the  observations  of  the  Bifilar  and  of  the  Vertical  force 
Magnetometers,  as  received  from  Toronto,  were  subjected  after  their  arrival  at  Wool- 
wich, with  a view  to  this  and  to  other  investigations,  have  been  already  partially 
described  in  a communication  presented  to  the  Society  in  a former  part  of  the  present 
Session'!'.  The  processes  there  described  had  reference  particularly  to  the  reduction 
of  the  observations  to  a uniform  temperature  of  the  magnets  employed  to  measure 
the  variations  of  the  respective  components  of  the  force, — to  the  elimination  of  the 
larger  disturbances, — to  the  formation  of  normal  values  (omitting  the  disturbances) 
for  each  of  the  components  at  every  hour  of  mean  solar  time  for  periods  usually  of  a 
month’s  duration, — and  to  the  deduction  of  the  solar-diurnal  variation  in  different 
years  and  different  months,  after  the  larger  disturbances  had  been  eliminated. 

The  investigation  regarding  the  Moon’s  influence  was  commenced  by  marking 
every  observation  in  small  figures  on  the  face  of  the  monthly  tables  with  the  lunar 
hour  to  which  each  observation  most  nearly  corresponded.  This  was  done  in  the 
manner  described  in  the  second  and  third  pages  of  Art.  XIX.  in  the  Philosophical 
Transactions  of  1853,  when  treating  of  a similar  process  in  the  case  of  the  Magnetic 
Declination.  A fresh  set  of  monthly  tables  were  then  prepared  for  every  month  in 
each  of  the  five  years,  in  which  tables  were  entered  the  differences,  each  under  the 
lunar  hour  to  which  it  most  nearly  corresponded,  between  the  several  observations 
and  their  corresponding  normals.  By  this  proceeding  the  diurnal  and  other  varia- 
tions depending  on  the  time  of  the  solar  year,  and  on  the  hour  of  the  solar  day,  were 
in  great  part  at  least  eliminated.  The  differences  were  marked  with  a + or  a — 
sign,  according  as  the  amount  of  the  force  at  the  time  of  the  observation  was  greater 
or  less  than  the  monthly  normal  at  the  same  hour.  The  mean  was  then  taken  in 
every  month  of  every  lunar  hour  (attending  to  the  signs),  and  the  monthly  means 
were  collected  into  yearly  means.  The  lunar  hour  to  which  each  observation  most 

* Philosophical  Transactions,  1853,  Art.  XIX.  t Ibid.  1856,  Art.  XVI. 

MDCCCLVI.  3 U 


500 


MAJOR-GENEHAL  SAJBINE  ON  THE  LUNAR-DIURNAL 


nearly  corresponded  was  marked  by  myself,  and  the  differences  from  the  normals  and 
their  arrangement  in  tables  exhibiting  the  lunar-diurnal  influence  were  prepared, 
under  the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Magrath,  by  the  Non-commissioned  Officers  of  the 
Royal  Artillery  employed  in  the  Woolwich  Office.  The  total  number  of  observations 
in  the  five  years,  after  the  separation  of  the  larger  disturbances,  was, — of  the  Bifilar, 
34303  ; and  of  the  Vertical  Force  Magnetometer,  31773.  The  lunar  influence  at  the 
different  lunar  hours  is  shown  in  the  tables  in  decimals  of  a scale  division;  the  value 
of  a scale  division  of  the  Bifilar  being  *000087  parts  of  the  horizontal  force,  and  of  the 
vertical  force  magnetometer  *000065  parts  of  the  vertical  force. 


Horizontal  Force. — Table  I.  exhibits,  in  columns  2 to  6,  the  mean  horary  variation 
of  the  horizontal  force  at  the  different  lunar  hours  in  each  of  the  five  years  ending 
June  30  ; and  in  column  7?  the  mean  of  the  five  years. 

Table  I. 


Lunar 

hours. 

111  the  year  ending  30th  June. 

Mean  of  the 
five  years. 

Lunar 

lioiirs. 

1844. 

1845. 

1846. 

1847. 

1848. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

0 

-(-0-44 

— 0-05 

-I-O-IO 

+ 0-70 

-0-07 

+ 0'22 

0 

1 

+ 0-48 

+ 0-01 

-|-0'09 

-I-0-70 

+ 0-68 

+ 0-39 

1 

2 

+ 0-68 

+ 0-59 

-l-O-ll 

+ 0-29 

-I-0-42 

+ 0-42 

2 

3 

-i-0'42 

+ 0-48 

+ 0-71 

+ 0-30 

-I-0-08 

-f-0-44 

3 

4 

-I-0-58 

-f  0-28 

-t-O-22 

+ 0-09 

+ 0-19 

+ 0-27 

4 

5 

+ 0-16 

+ 0-68 

+ 0-21 

+ 0-43 

-hO-74 

-I-0-44 

3 

6 

— 0-23 

+ M1 

— 0-03 

+ 0-09 

-hO-43 

-I-0-27 

6 

7 

-0-13 

+ 0-72 

-0-20 

-0-23 

+ 0*21 

+ 0-07 

7 

8 

-0-16 

+ 0-59 

— 0*31 

—0-24 

-0*19 

-0-06 

8 

9 

-0-12 

+ 0-28 

-0-23 

-0-79 

-I-0-24 

— 0-12 

9 

10  1 

— 0-43 

+ 0-20 

— 0-10 

-0*62 

+ 0*23 

— 0-14 

10 

11 

— 0”02 

+ 0-32 

-1-0-36 

+ 0-39 

— 0-22 

+ 0-17 

11 

12 

-0-28 

+ 0-37 

+ 0-15 

— 0-03 

— 0*31 

— 0‘02 

12 

13 

-)-0-ll 

+ 0-64 

+ 0-11 

+ 0-23 

+ 0-47 

+ 0-31 

13 

14 

-I-0-06 

+ 0-84 

-l-0']8 

-0-09 

-HO-40 

-I-0-28 

14 

13 

-LO-06 

+ 0-04 

+ 0*23 

— 0-06 

+ 0-73 

+ 0-20 

15 

16 

0-00 

-0-01 

-hO-13 

-i-  0-32 

-I-0-28 

+ 0-14 

16 

17 

— 0-17 

-I-0-48 

-0-47 

0-00 

+ 0-33 

+ 0-03 

17 

18 

— 0*08 

-0-19 

— 0-13 

-0-24 

— 0-47 

— 0-22 

18 

19 

-0*21 

— 0-13 

— 0-33 

— 0-34 

-0-80 

— 0-40 

19 

20 

-0-19 

— 0-70 

— 0-11 

— 0-33 

— 1-33 

-0*38 

20 

21 

-0-19 

— 0-82 

— 0-31 

-0-09 

-1-07 

— 0-30 

21 

22 

— 0-28 

— 0-44 

-0-22 

+ 0-09 

-0-63 

-0*30 

22 

23 

— 0-08 

— 0-46 

-0-15 

+ 0-34 

— 0-18 

— 0-11 

23 

We  may  represent  the  values  in  column  7 of  this  Table  (or  the  variation  of  the 
horizontal  force  at  the  several  lunar  hours  on  the  average  of  the  five  years  of  observa- 
tion) by  the  first  terms  of  the  usual  formula  for  periodical  functions,  viz. 

A^=Ao-l-Ai  cos  a+Bi  sin  a-{- Ag  cos  2a-}- Ba  sin  2a. 

By  substituting  in  this  formula  the  numerical  values  of  the  coefficients  obtained  from 
the  numbers  in  eolumn  7,  it  becomes 

A^=  -l-*05  — *024  cos  a-|-'214  sin  a-l-'0775  cos  2a-l-*323  sin  2a, 


MAGNETIC  VARIATION  AT  TORONTO. 


501 


or  the  more  convenient  equivalent  expression, 

A^=+-05  + -215  sin  (a+353°-6)+-3324  sin  (2a+  13°-5), 
the  coefficients  being  decimals  of  a scale-division,  and  a reckoned  in  liours,  multi- 
plied by  15°,  from  the  time  of  the  Moon’s  superior  culmination.  By  this  formula  is 
obtained  the  curve  which  is  shown  by  the  stronger  line  in  fig.  1 of  the  accompanying 
Plate  XIX.;  and  for  the  purpose  of  showing  the  degree  of  confidence  to  which  this 
curve  is  entitled,  as  an  approximate  representation  of  the  variation  produced  in  the  hori- 
zontal force  by  the  moon  in  the  course  of  a lunar  day,  the  variation  in  the  different 
years  in  columns  2 to  6 of  Table  I.  have  been  so  combined  as  to  form  two  separate 
means,  one  representing  the  columns  headed  1844,  1845  and  1 846,  and  a second  repre- 
senting the  columns  headed  1846,  1847  and  1848;  the  years  1844  and  1845  having 
double  weight  assigned  to  them  in  the  first  mean,  and  1847  and  1848  double  weight 
in  the  second  mean.  The  formulae  representing  these  separate  means  are, — 

for  1844  to  1846,  A^= -h'088  + -243  sin  (rt-i-347°'6)-l-'277  sin  (2a-l-4°-4), 
for  1846  to  1848,  A^=+'013  + -J92  sin  (rt-|-355°-0)-h-395  sin  (2a-l- 19°-2). 

The  curves  respectively  computed  by  these  formulae  are  shown  by  the  fainter  lines 
in  fig.  ],  in  which  the  stronger  line  has  been  already  noticed  as  derived  from  the 
mean  of  the  five  years. 


Vertical  Force. — Table  II.  exhibits  in  columns  2 to  6 the  mean  horary  variation  of 
the  Vertical  Force  at  the  different  lunar  hours  in  each  of  the  five  years  ending  June  30  ; 
and  in  column  7,  the  mean  variation  in  the  five  years. 


Table  II. 


Lunar 

hours. 

III  the  year  ending  June  30. 

! 

Mean  of  the 

1 five  years. 

Lunar 

hours. 

1844. 

1845. 

1846. 

1847. 

1848. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

0 

-I-0-08 

+ 0-02 

— 0-02 

-0-03 

+ 0-03 

+ 0-02 

0 

1 

+ 0-09 

— 0-03 

+ 0-06 

0-00 

+ 0-02 

+ 0-03 

1 

2 

+ 0-02 

— 0-07 

-0-16 

-0-09 

— 0-18 

— 0-10 

2 

3 

— 0-11 

0-00 

-0-07 

+ 0-18 

— 006 

+ 0-01 

3 

4 

-0*09 

— 0-01 

— 0-01 

+ 0-13 

+ 0-08 

+ 0-02 

4 

5 

+ 0-01 

— 0-02 

-0-09 

+ 0-07 

+ 0-02 

0-00 

5 

6 

— 0-12 

— 0-12 

+ 0-09 

+ 0-01 

-0-05 

-0-04 

6 

7 

— 0-06 

— 0-24 

+ 0-08 

— 0-18 

— 0-02 

— 0-08 

7 

8 

-I-0-03 

— 0-22 

+ 0-03 

— 0-15 

—0-17 

— 0-10 

8 

9 

— 0*04 

— 0-10 

-0-10 

+ 0-02 

-0-07 

— 0-06 

9 i 

10 

— 0-13 

-0-10 

-0-10 

+ 0-08 

-0-11 

-0-07 

10  1 

11 

— 0-14 

+ 0-03 

— 0-03 

+ 0-02 

-0-14 

-0-05 

11  I 

12 

-0-08 

+ 0-12 

-0-10 

+ 0-01 

— 0-20 

— 0-05 

12 

13 

-I-0-14 

+ 0-03 

+ 0-08 

+ 0-10 

-0-16 

+ 0-04 

13  i 

14 

4-0-03 

+ 0-10 

+ 0-04 

+ 0-03 

-0-09 

4-0-02 

14 

15 

4-0-08 

+ 0-15 

+ 0-06 

+ 0-02 

+ 0-04 

+ 0-07 

15  : 

16 

4-0-11 

+ 0-18 

+ 0-08 

+ 0-12 

+ 0-06 

+ 0-11 

16  1 

17 

+ 0-17 

+ 0-09  . 

4-0-04 

+ 0-04 

+ 0-12 

+ 0-09 

17 

18 

+ 0-19 

+ 0-09 

+ 0-18 

-0-03 

+ 0-02 

+ 0-09 

18 

19 

+ 0-11 

+ 0-05 

0-00 

0-00 

+ 0-12 

+ 0-06 

19 

20 

+ 0-14 

+ 0-01 

+ 0-01 

-0-14 

+ 0-08 

+ 0-02 

20 

21 

+ 0-11 

-0-07 

-0-17 

— 0-13 

+ 0-05 

-0-04 

21 

22 

+ 0-08 

+ 0-04 

— 0-21 

— 0-07 

+ 0-07 

-0-02 

22 

23 

+ 0-11 

+ 0-04 

-0-18 

— 0-13 

-0-03 

— 0-06 

23 

3 u 2 


502 


MAJOR-GENERAL  SABINE  ON  THE  LUNAR-DIURNAL 


I’he  curves  obtained  from  the  values  comprised  in  this  Table  are  represented  to  the 
eye  in  fig-.  2,  the  fainter  lines  corresponding  to  the  variations  in  the  separate  periods 
1844  to  1846,  and  1846  to  1848,  and  the  stronger  line  to  the  mean  of  the  whole 
period  of  five  years.  The  formulae  by  which  these  curves  have  been  computed  are  as 
follows : — 

1844  to  1846,  A^=  + -006  — •092sin  (a+0°-5)+-036sin  (2a-f  345°T), 

1846  to  1848,  -OH  — •028sm  (a+354°-5)  -l--058 sin  (2a+31675), 

1844  to  1848,  A,=  --005  — •058sin(a+2°)  + -()48sin(2a+330°). 

The  coefficients  are  decimals  of  a scale-division,  and  a is  reckoned  in  hours  (muiti- 
plied  by  15°)  from  the  epoch  of  the  moon’s  superior  culmination. 


Inclination  and  Total  Force. — ^The  lunar-diurnal  variations  of  the  Inclination  and 
of  the  Total  force  are  derived  from  those  of  the  horizontal  and  vertical  components 
of  the  force  by  the  formulae 


A^=sin 


'COS 


Y ■ 


■■X 


Aip  2 , • 9 

— — cos^  ^ ^ + siffi  ^ 


§ being  the  Inclination,  <p  the  Total  force,  X its  horizontal  and  Y its  vertical  compo- 
nents. The  variation  of  the  Inclination  is  expressed  in  seconds  of  arc,  the  + sign 
implying  an  increase  of  the  dip  of  the  north  end  of  the  magnet.  The  variation  of 
the  Total  force  is  expressed  in  parts  of  the  total  force  at  Toronto,  of  which  force  the 
approximate  absolute  value  is  !3’9  in  British  units. 

Table  III.  presents  the  variations  of  the  Inclination  and  of  the  Total  Force  pro- 
duced by  the  moon  at  the  different  hours  of  the  lunar  day,  derived  from  the  observed 
variations  of  the  horizontal  and  vertical  components  of  the  force  by  the  formulae 
above  stated. 

Table  HI. 


Lunar 

hours. 

Lunar-diurnal 

variation 

Lunar 

hours. 

Lunar-diurnal 

variation 

Lunar 

hours. 

Lunar- diurnal 
variation 

of  the 
Inclination. 

of  the 

Total  Force. 

of  the 
Inclination. 

of  the 

Total  Force. 

of  the 
Inclination. 

of  the 

Total  Force. 

Parts  of  the 

Parts  of  the 

Parts  of  the 

,, 

Force. 

Force. 

Force. 

0 

-0-56 

-•0000013 

8 

-t-6-05 

— ‘0000031 

16 

— 6-22 

-t- -0000063 

1 

— 1-44 

-1- -0000004 

9 

+ 0-17 

-•0000058 

17 

+ 0-37 

-f -0000053 

2 

-2-07 

-f -0000019 

10 

0-00 

— •0000050 

18 

-f  1-31 

-{-•0000033 

3 

-2-26 

-f -0000026 

11 

-0-32 

— •0000034 

19 

+ 1-92 

-1- -0000006 

4 

-2-05 

+ -0000021 

12 

-0-75 

— •0000010 

20 

-f  2-14 

— •0000020 

5 

-1-61 

+-0000008 

13 

— 1-07 

-|-•0000021 

21 

+ 1-93 

-•0000031 

6 

-0-97 

— •0000012 

14 

— 1-08 

■f -0000044 

22 

-f  1-33 

—•0000033 

-0-33 

-•0000034 

15 

-0-76 

-1- -0000060 

23 

-f  0-42 

— •0000026 

'I'he  values  contained  in  this  'fable  are  represented  to  the  eye  by  the  stronger  lines 
in  figs.  3 and  4;  the  two  fainter  lines  in  each  of  these  figures  exhibiting  the  values 


MAGNETIC  VARIATION  AT  TORONTO. 


503 


derived  from  the  two  half-periods,  viz.  1844  to  1846,  and  1846  to  1848;  the  year 
ending  June  30,  1846  having  single  weight,  and  the  years  ending  June  30,  1844  and 
184.5  in  the  one  case,  and  the  years  ending  June  30,  1847  and  1848  in  the  other  case, 
having  double  weight  in  the  respective  combinations. 

Declination. — To  complete  the  view  of  the  Moon’s  diurnal  influence  on  the  mag- 
netic elements  at  Toronto,  a recalculation  has  been  made  of  the  lunar-diurnal  varia- 
tion of  the  declination,  using  the  more  perfect  normals  derived  by  the  exclusion  of  all 
disturbances  equaling  or  exceeding  five  minutes  of  arc*.  Table  IV.  contains  the 
horary  variation  of  the  declination  at  the  different  hours  of  the  lunar  day  in  each  of 
the  six  years,  from  July  1,  1842  to  June  30,  1848,  and  in  the  eighth  column  the  mean 
variation  in  the  six  years. 


Table  IV. 


One  scale-division  ==0'‘72!. 


Lunar 

hours. 

In  the  year  ending  June  30. 

Mean  of  the 
six  years. 

Lunar 

hours. 

1843. 

1844. 

1845. 

1846. 

1847. 

1848. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9- 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

sc.  div. 

0 

— 0-20 

-0*42 

— 0*45 

-0*40 

— 0*46 

-0*37 

-0*38 

0 

I 

-0‘11 

-0*31 

-0*18 

-0*37 

-0*64 

-0*29 

— 0*32 

1 

2 

-0-08 

-0*28 

+ 0*04 

-0*28 

-0*39 

— 0*31 

-0*22 

2 

3 

-0*09 

— 0*08 

-0*07 

0*00 

— 0*36 

— 0*13 

-0-12 

3 

4 

4-0*26 

+ 0*09 

+ 0*31 

+ 0*08 

+ 0*13 

+ 0*28 

+ 0*19 

4 

5 

-1-0-39 

+ 0*09 

+ 0*42 

4-0*52 

+ 0*20 

+ 0*45 

+ 0*35 

5 

6 

-h0*66 

+ 0*40 

+ 0*23 

+ 0*77 

+ 0*15 

+ 0*48 

+ 0*45 

6 

7 

-1-0-51 

+ 0*29 

+ 0*47 

+ 0*56 

+ 0*31 

+ 0*29 

+ 0*40 

7 

8 

+ 0*17 

+ 0*26 

4-0*08 

+ 0*50 

+ 0*09 

+ 0*10 

+ 0*20 

8 

9 

— 0*14 

+ 0*21 

— 0*31 

+ 0*31 

— 0*23 

+ 0*35 

+ 0*03 

9 

10 

-0*36 

— 0*24 

— 0*57 

— 0*22 

-0*40 

-p0*04 

-0*29 

10 

11 

-0*51 

— 0*33 

-0*66 

-0*54 

-0*24 

-0*49 

-0*46 

11 

12 

-0*59 

-0*48 

-0*51 

-0*51 

-0*52 

-0*22 

-0*47 

12 

13 

-0*37 

— 0*27 

— 0*45 

— 0*34 

-0*29 

— 0*44 

-0*36 

13 

14 

-0*17 

-0*31 

— 0*24 

-0*32 

+ 0*07 

— 0*15 

-0*19 

14 

15 

-1-0-07 

— 0*14 

+ 0*04 

-0*12 

+ 0*52 

-0*10 

+ 0*04 

15 

16 

-i-0*12 

+ 0*22 

+ 0*31 

+ 0*14 

+ 0*43 

4-0*20 

+ 0*24 

16 

17 

+ 0*37 

+ 0*45 

+ 0*51 

+ 0*16 

+ 0*55 

+ 0*49 

+ 0*42 

17 

18 

4-  0*43 

+ 0*74 

-p0*65 

+ 0*39 

+ 0*47 

+ 0*58 

+ 0*54 

18 

19 

-f0*26 

+ 0*25 

+ 0*52 

+ 0*21 

+ 0*55 

+ 0*39 

+ 0*36 

19 

. 20 

-h0*29 

+ 0*15 

4-0*35 

+ 0*20 

+ 0*22 

4-0*05 

+ 0*21 

20 

21 

4-0*08 

+ 0*15 

+ 0*10 

— 0*15 

-0*21 

-0*30 

-0*06 

21 

22 

-0*26 

— 0*05 

— 0*04 

-0*23 

— 0*42 

- 0*42 

— 0*24 

22 

23 

-0*29 

-0*37 

-0*33 

— 0*25 

-0*31 

-0*34 

-0*32 

23 

i 

If  we  represent  the  mean  of  the  six  years  (column  8)  by  the  usual  formula  of  sines 
and  cosines,  we  have  the  coefficients  of  the  several  terms  of  the  complete  foruiula  as 
follows  ; the  coefficients  are  expressed  in  seconds  of  arc,  and  a is  counted  in  hours 
(multiplied  by  15°)  from  the  time  of  the  Moon’s  upper  culmination  : — 


* Philosophical  Transactions,  1856,  Art.  XIX. 


504 


MAJOR-GENERAL  SABINE  ON  THE  LUNAR-DIURNAI 


Table  V. 


Arguments  ... 

Constant 

cos  a 

sin  a 

cos  2a 

sin  2a 

cos  3a 

sin  3a 

cos  4a 

sin  4 a 

cos  5a 

sin  5a 

cos  6a 

sin  6a 

f 

Ao  = 

Ai  = 

Bi  = 

k^  = 

B2  = 

Ag^ 

B3  = 

A4  = 

B4  = 

A5  = 

B5  = 

Be  = 

Coefficients  .i 

// 

00 

4 0-20 

// 

-1-03 

-19-18 

+0-45 

// 

+ 1-84 

it 

-0-32 

// 

+ 1-21 

+0-59 

+0-61 

-0-48 

// 

-0-22 

+0-57 

Arguments  ... 

cos  7a 

sin  7a 

cos  8a 

sin  8a 

cos  9a 

sin  9a 

cos  10a 

sin  10a 

cos  11a 

sin  11a 

cos  12a 

1 

A;  = 

B;  = 

^8  = 

B8  = 

Ag  = 

B9  = 

Aio= 

Bio= 

kii  — 

B„  = 

Ai2  = 

Coefficients  < 

-0-56 

+0-08 

+0-16 

-0-03 

-0-91 

-0-39 

-0-50 

// 

-0-42 

+0-49 

+0-28 

-0-29 

The  coefficient  of  principal  magnitude  is  A2=  — 19"’18,  whose  argument  is  cos  a. 
The  same  coefficient,  calculated  for  the  different  years,  is  as  follows; — 

Year  ending  June  30,  1843  — 19'35 
Year  ending  June  30,  1844  — 17‘61 
Year  ending  June  30,  1845  — 21'05 
Year  ending  June  30,  1846  — 20’22 
Year  ending  June  30,  1847  — 19‘04 
Year  ending  June  30,  1848  — 18'53 

And  from  the  tnean  of  the  six  years  . . . —19’ 18 

Whence  we  obtain  the  probable  error  of  — 19"'18,  being  the  value  of  A2  derived  from 
the  mean  of  the  six  years=  + 0"‘34. 

With  the  two  first  terms  of  this  formula,  viz. 

A^=0"'0-|-0"‘20  cos  a— 1"'03  sin  a— 19"*  18  cos  2a+0"‘45  sin  2a, 
or  its  more  convenient  equivalent, 

A,=0"-0-l"-05  sin  (a-f348°  52')-f  19"-186  sin  (2a+271°  21'), 
we  obtain  the  deflections  of  the  north  end  of  the  magnet  at  the  several  lunar  hours 
as  follows : — 


Table  VI. 


Lunar 

hours. 

Deflections. 

Lunar 

hours. 

Deflections. 

Lunar 

hours. 

Deflections. 

Lunar- 

hours. 

Deflections. 

22 

9’29  to  the  East 

4 

9'19  to  the  West 

10 

10-67  to  the  East 

16 

10-77  to  the  West 

23 

15-92 

5 

15-89 

11 

17-30 

17 

17-78 

0 

18-95 

6 

18-14 

12 

19-38 

18 

20-21 

1 

16-46 

7 

15-34 

13 

16-31 

19 

17-43 

2 

9-54 

8 

8-20 

14 

8-86 

20 

10-19 

3 

0-14 

9 

0-42  to  the  East 

15 

1-04  to  the  West 

21 

0-42 

Comparing  these  values  with  the  actual  deflections,  we  find  the  probable  error  at 
each  observation  hour  +l"-37. 


MAGNETIC  VARIATION  AT  TORONTO. 


505 


In  fig.  5 the  darker  line  represents  the  defleetions  in  Table  VI.,  constituting  the 
lunar-diurnal  variation  derived  from  the  mean  of  the  six  years  ; and,  for  the  purpose 
of  showing  the  accordance  of  the  results  when  the  whole  period  of  six  years  is  divided 
into  three  portions,  each  consisting  of  two  years,  viz.  July  1842  to  June  1844,  July 
1844  to  June  1846,  and  July  1846  to  June  1848,  the  curves  for  each  of  those  periods 
have  been  computed  by  the  subjoined  formulae,  obtained  from  the  values  in  Table  IV., 
and  are  represented  by  the  fainter  lines  in  fig.  5.  The  formulae  are, — 

1842  to  1844  A^=+0"-41— 2"-09sin  (a+291°)— 18"T  sin  (2a4-87°7), 

1844  to  1846  A^=+0"-30+3"-04sin  (a  + 78°7)+20"-6sin  (2a  + 270°T), 

1846  to  1848  A^=— 0"-58  — 5"-23sin(a+53°-5)  + 18"-9sin  (2a+276°T). 

The  number  of  hourly  observations  employed  in  the  investigation  of  which  this 
paper  contains  the  results,  is,  of  the  Declination  40543 ; of  the  Horizontal  Force 
34303;  and  of  the  Vertical  Force  31773;  making  in  the  whole  106,619  observations. 

General  Conclusions. — The  three  magnetic  elements  concur  in  showing  that  the 
moon  exercises  a sensible  magnetic  influence  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  producing 
in  every  lunar  day  a Variation  in  each  of  the  three  elements,  which  is  distinctly  ap- 
preciable by  the  instruments  employed  in  the  Observatories  established  to  carry  out 
the  system  of  observations  recommended  by  the  Ptoyal  Society,  when  due  care  has 
been  taken  in  conducting  the  observations,  and  suitable  methods  are  adopted  for 
elaborating  the  results. 

The  Variation  in  each  of  the  three  elements  constitutes  a double  progression  in  each 
lunar  day:  the  declination  has  two  easterly  and  two  westerly  maxima  in  the  interval 
between  two  successive  passages  of  the  moon  over  the  astronomical  meridian ; and 
the  inclination  and  the  total  force  have  each  two  maxima  and  two  minima  due  to  the 
moon’s  action  in  the  same  interval ; the  variation  passing  in  every  case  four  times 
through  zero  in  the  lunar  day.  The  easterly  maxima  of  the  horizontal  deflection 
of  the  north  end  of  the  magnet  synchronise  with  the  moon’s  superior  and  inferior 
passages  of  the  meridian;  the  westerly  maxima  with  the  lunar  hours  of  6 and  18. 
The  maxima  of  the  increased  magnetic  force  due  to  tiie  moon’s  action  occui‘  about 
the  lunar  hours  of  3 and  16,  and  the  minima  about  the  hours  of  9 and  20.  The 
maxima  of  the  inclination,  i.  e.  of  the  dip  of  the  north  end  of  the  magnet,  occur  about 
the  lunar  hours  of  3 and  14,  and  the  minima  about  9 and  20.  The  extent  of  the 
Variation  in  the  lunar  day,  or  the  range  between  the  extremes  that  are  widest  apart, 
is  in  the  Declination  38"’33,  in  the  Inclination  4"'4,  and  in  the  total  Force  *000012 
parts  of  the  whole  terrestrial  magnetic  force  at  Toronto.  These  are  the  values  derived 
from  the  whole  period  of  observation,  i.  e.  from  six  years  of  the  Declination  and  from 
five  years  of  the  Inclination  and  total  Force.  When  the  whole  period  is  subdivided 
into  two  half-periods,  the  hours  of  maxima  and  minima  and  the  extent  of  the  range 
accord  with  the  results  of  the  whole  period  in  each  of  the  three  elements,  with  slight 


506 


ON  THE  LUNAR-DIURNAL  MAGNETIC  VARIATION  AT  TORONTO. 


and  wholly  insignificant  exceptions.  The  reality  of  the  variations  is  thus  attested 
no  less  by  the  accordance  of  the  results  when  the  whole  period  during  which  the 
phenomena  were  observed  is  subdivided  into  separate  and  independent  portions,  than 
by  the  systematic  character  which  the  Variation  is  seen  to  possess  when  the  strictly 
independent  results  at  the  several  lunar  hours  are  brought  together  and  exhibited 
continuously. 

As  it  happens  that  in  the  declination  the  variation  lesulting  from  the  moon’s  action 
is  greater,  relatively  to  the  instrumental  means  for  measuring  it,  than  either  in  the 
inclination  or  in  the  total  force,  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  we  have  a better 
opportunity  of  judging  of  the  particular  nature  and  character  of  the  noon’s  mag- 
netic influence,  by  studying  the  effects  produced  on  the  declination  than  those  pro- 
duced on  either  of  the  other  elements. 

Referring  to  the  Table  (Table  IV.  p.  503)  which  exhibits  the  coefficients  of  all  the 
twelve  terms  in  the  formula  of  sines  and  cosines  by  which  the  results  of  observation 
are  strictly  represented,  we  perceive  that  the  coefficient  of  the  cosine  of  twice  the 
hour-angle  is  not  only  the  one  of  greatest  account,  but  is  in  fact  the  only  one  which 
we  can  with  confidence  regard  as  possessed  of  a substantial  value.  All  the  other 
coefficients  are,  without  exception,  not  only  extremely  small  in  comparison  with  the 
one  above  noticed,  but  are  so  small,  that  they  may  well  be  supposed  to  represent  such 
small  deviations  from  a natural  law  as  may  well  be  ascribed  to  errors  which  cannot 
wholly  be  extinguished  in  averages  derived  from  not  more  than  six  years  of  observa- 
tion. On  the  other  hand,  the  coefficient  in  the  second  term  has  a value  far  beyond 
any  explanation  resting  on  the  supposition  of  errors  of  observation.  The  probable 
error  at  any  single  hour  is  l"’37,  whilst  the  range  of  the  variation  is  not  less  than  38". 
Whilst,  therefore,  the  general  result  of  this  investigation  is  to  establish  conclusively 
the  existence  of  a lunar-magnetic  influence  sensible  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  the 
lunar-diurnal  variation  which  is  thus  manifested  appears  to  be  consistent  with  the 
hypothesis  that  the  moon’s  magnetism  may  be,  in  great  part  at  least  if  not  wholly, 
derived  by  induction  from  the  magnetism  of  the  earth. 

It  is  further  observable,  that  in  the  lunar-diurnal  variation  there  is  no  appearance 
of  the  decennial  period  which  constitutes  so  marked  a feature  in  the  solar-diurnal 
variations. 


[ 507  ] 


XXIII.  Account  of  the  Construction  of  a Standard  Barometer,  and  Description  of  the 
Apparatus  and  Processes  employed  in  the  Verification  of  Barometers  at  the  Kew 
Observatory . By  John  Welsh.  Communicated  by  J.  P.  Gassiot,  Esq.,  F.R.S., 
Chairman  of  the  Kew  Observatory  Committee  of  the  British  Association. 


Received  May  22, — Read  June  19,  1856. 


I.  Standard  Barometer. 

In  the  course  of  the  years  1853-54  several  attempts  were  made,  under  the  super- 
intendence of  the  Kew  Committee,  to  prepare,  by  the  usual  method  of  boiling,  a 
barometer  tube  of  large  dimensions.  Mr.  Negretti,  to  whom  was  entrusted  the 
preparation  of  the  tube,  succeeded  repeatedly  in  boiling,  apparently  satisfactorily, 
tubes  of  fully  1 inch  internal  diameter.  Many  of  these  however  broke  spontaneously 
before  they  could  be  mounted,  some  of  them  within  a few  hours  and  others  after  an 
interval  of  several  days.  Two  or  three  tubes  were  ultimately  erected,  but  their  con- 
dition was  not  satisfactory.  The  adhesion  of  the  mercury  to  the  glass  was  so  great, 
that  in  a falling  barometer  the  convexity  of  the  top  Of  the  column  was  destroyed,  and 
the  surface  of  the  mercury  assumed  even  a concave  form.  After  a few  days,  rings 
of  dirt  or  other  impurity  were  formed  on  the  glass  near  the  top  of  the  column,  which 
soon  increased  to  such  a degree  as  entirely  to  interfere  with  observation.  The 
mercury  employed  in  filling  the  tubes  had  been  previously  treated  for  some  weeks 
with  dilute  nitric  acid,  and  afterwards  kept  in  bottles  under  strong  sulphuric  acid, 
being  well  washed  with  water  and  dried  by  repeated  filtering  before  use.  Dr.  W.  A. 
Miller  examined  specimens  of  the  mercury  and  could  detect  no  impurity  in  it. 

Suspecting  that  some  injurious  effect  might  have  been  produced  upon  the  mercury  or 
upon  the  glass  by  the  great  heat  to  which  the  tube  was  necessarily  exposed  in  boiling 
so  large  a mass  of  mercury,  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  difficulty  might  be  removed 
by  another  method  of  filling  the  tube,  which  I shall  now  describe. 

The  tube  was  in  the  first  place  prepared  as  follows.  To  its  upper  end  was  attached 
a capillary  tube,  ADEF  (see  Plate  XX.  fig.  1),  bent  as  in  the  figure,  having  its  bore 
much  contracted  at  the  apex  D,  with  a small  bulb  blown  at  E,  being  finally  drawn 
out  to  a fine  point  at  F and  there  sealed.  To  the  lower  end  of  the  large  tube  was 
attached  10  inches  of  a smaller  tube,  BCG,  having  a bore  of  0*3  inch,  and  to  that  again 
was  added  about  6 inches  of  capillary  tube,  GH.  A bulb  of  three-fourths  of  an  inch 
was  blown  at  G,  and  the  smaller  tube  finally  bent  into  a syphon  form  at  B.  The  end 
H of  the  capillary  tube  was  now  connected  with  a good  air-pump,  and  the  air  very 
slowly  extracted,  at  the  same  time  that  the  whole  tube  was  strongly  heated  by  passing 

3 x 


MDCGCLVI. 


508 


MR,  WELSH  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  A STANDARD 


a larg-e  spirit  flame  along-  it.  When  the  air  had  been  as  well  as  possible  extracted,  and 
whilst  the  pump  was  still  in  action,  and  the  heat  still  applied,  the  capillary  tube,  GH, 
was  sealed  at  I by  a blowpipe  flame.  When  the  tube  had  cooled,  it  was  placed  at  a 
small  inclination  with  the  end  F in  a vessel  containing  mercury  which  had  been  pre- 
viously boiled.  The  point  F was  broken  off  under  the  mercury,  which  then  rose  in 
the  tube  by  atmospheric  pressure.  The  mercury  continued  to  rise  until  the  bulb  at 
G was  more  than  half-filled,  the  remaining  space  being  occupied  by  the  air  which 
the  pump  had  failed  to  extract.  It  was  estimated  from  the  amount  of  space  thus  left 
unoccupied  by  the  mercury,  that  the  pressure  of  the  residual  air  in  the  tube,  when 
cold,  must  have  been  less  than  0-05  inch.  The  basin  of  mercury  was  then  with- 
drawn from  beneath  the  tube,  leaving  the  point  F exposed,  the  small  tube  remain- 
ing quite  filled  with  mercury.  The  blowpipe  was  then  applied  at  F and  the  opening 
sealed.  When  the  glass  at  F had  cooled  the  tube  was  placed  erect,  the  mercury 
separating  at  the  contracted  part  D,  leaving  the  tube  from  D to  F filled,  or  very 
nearly  so,  and  from  D to  A empty.  The  tube  was  now  sealed  at  K,  the  portion 
KDEF  being  removed.  Finally,  the  lower  end  of  the  tube  was  broken  under  mer- 
cury at  C,  leaving  about  an  inch  of  the  syphon. 

The  earlier  tubes  filled  by  this  process  were  not  satisfactory ; there  being,  as  in 
those  previously  prepared  by  boiling,  a considerable  adhesion  of  the  mercury  to  the 
glass,  with  the  formation,  after  a few  days,  of  rings  of  dirt : so  similar  indeed  was  the 
appearance  of  these  tubes  to  that  of  the  boiled  tubes,  that  1 was  led  to  believe  that 
the  evil  in  both  cases  was  due  to  the  same  cause.  Being  satisfied  that  there  was  no 
impurity  in  the  mercury,  which,  besides  having  been  cleaned  with  nitric  acid,  had 
before  these  last  experiments  been  redistilled  ; and  suspecting  that  the  evil  might 
have  been  owing  to  imperfect  cleaning  of  the  tubes,  which  had  only  been  wiped  out 
by  the  glassblower  in  the  usual  way ; I had  fresh  tubes  made  under  my  own  inspec- 
tion and  sealed  at  the  glass-works  immediately  after  being  drawn.  Greater  care  was 
also  taken  by  the  glassblower  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  moisture  during  the  sub- 
sequent operations  witli  the  blowpipe.  These  tulies,  however,  still  showed  the  same 
imperfection,  though  in  a less  degree.  About  this  time  I had  the  advantage  of  con- 
sulting Mr.  John  Auie  of  Edinburgh,  who  informed  me  that  he  had  also  experienced 
the  same  inconvenience,  and  that  he  had  removed  it  by  thoroughly  cleaning  the 
tubes  by  sponging  with  whiting  and  spirits  of  wine.  Following  his  directions,  I had 
the  satisfaction  of  finding  the  tubes  when  filled  almost  wholly  free  from  the  imper- 
fections mentioned.  A tube  of  IT  inch  internal  diameter,  prepared  in  July  1855  by 
the  process  above  described,  is  at  this  time  in  as  good  condition  as  when  first  erected. 
The  top  of  the  column  presents  a good  convexity  in  all  states  of  the  barometer,  with 
only  a very  slight  trace  of  dirt.  No  appearance  of  air-specks  can  be  detected,  except 
a few  very  minute  ones  near  the  lower  end  of  the  tube,  whieh  have  existed  since  the 
commencement,  and  were  produced  by  the  temporary  entanglement  of  a small  air- 
bubble  at  the  shoulder  L of  the  tube  in  the  operation  of  filling.  These  specks  have 


BAROMETER,  ETC.  AT  THE  KEW  OBSERVATORY. 


509 


not  increased  in  number,  nor  shown  any  tendency  to  rise.  A portion  of  the  syphon 
being  retained  at  the  lower  end  of  the  tube,  it  is  highly  improbable  that  any  air  can 
now  enter,  the  mouth  of  the  syphon  being  cut  off  from  communication  with  the 
external  air  by  the  mercury  in  the  cistern.  The  tube  extends  to  about  9 inches  above 
the  mean  height  of  the  mercury. 

The  tube  is  supported  over  a glass  cistern  in  a strong  brass  frame,  secured  by 
brackets  to  the  wall  of  the  old  mural  quadrant  of  the  Observatory,  the  height  of  the 
mercury  being  measured  by  a Cathetometer  fixed  to  the  same  wall,  at  a distance  of 
5 feet.  A conical  point,  at  the  lower  end  of  a short  rod  of  steel,  is  adjusted  by  a 
screw  to  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  the  cistern  (see  Plate  XX.  fig.  2).  At  the 
upper  end  of  the  steel  rod,  and  above  the  level  of  the  glass  cistern,  is  a fine  mark, 
whose  distance  from  the  conical  point  has  been  found,  by  comparison  with  the  Kew 
Standard  Scale,  to  be  3'515  inches.  When  an  observation  is  made,  the  lower  point 
is  adjusted  to  exaet  contact  with  the  mereury  in  the  cistern;  the  telescope  of  the 
Cathetometer  is  then  levelled,  and  its  horizontal  wire  made  to  bisect  the  mark  on  the 
upper  end  of  the  steel  rod,  the  scale  reading  of  the  Cathetometer  being  noted.  The 
teleseope  is  then  raised,  again  levelled,  and  the  wire  made  a tangent  to  the  surface 
of  the  mercury  in  the  tube,  the  Cathetometer  scale  reading  being  again  observed : 
the  difference  between  the  two  readings  of  the  Cathetometer  scale,  added  to  the 
length  of  the  steel  rod,  is  the  height  of  the  column  of  mercury.  Besides  the  rod 
terminating  in  the  conical  point,  a second  adjusting  rod  is  provided,  whose  lower 
extremity  is  a straight  edge : no  difference  could  be  detected  between  the  results 
from  the  two  methods  of  adjustment.  In  order  to  avoid  the  inconvenience  of  light 
being  reflected  into  the  telescope  from  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube,  a 
moveable  screen  is  provided,  the  upper  part  of  which  is  black  and  the  lower  part 
oiled  paper,  which  is  so  adjusted  as  to  shut  off  all  light  which  comes  from  a higher 
level  than  the  top  of  the  mercurial  column:  the  surface  of  the  mercury  thus  presents 
in  the  telescope  a well-defined  dark  outline.  A window  behind  the  barometer  gives 
a good  illumination  to  the  paper  screen,  a lamp  being  required  at  night.  A thermo- 
meter whose  bulb  is  within  the  mercury  of  the  cistern  gives  its  temperature,  and,  the 
scale  of  the  Cathetometer  being  of  brass,  the  usual  tables  can  be  employed  for  the 
temperature  correction ; the  difference  in  the  expansion  of  steel  and  brass  being 
insignificant  for  the  length  of  the  short  adjusting  rod.  The  variations  of  the  tempe- 
rature of  the  room  are  not  rapid,  so  that  no  sensible  error  arises  from  assuming  the 
temperature  of  the  Cathetometer  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  mercury.  The  cistern 
of  the  Standard  Barometer  is  33*9  feet  above  the  mean  level  of  the  sea,  being  9T  feet 
above  the  Ordnance  bench-mark  on  the  north-east  corner  of  the  Observatory,  whose 
elevation  is  stated  by  Lieut.-Colonel  James  to  be  24'83  feet. 

Observations  of  this  barometer  being  too  troublesome  when  an  extensive  series  is 
required,  a Standard,  by  Newman,  No.  34,  having  a tube  of  0‘55  inch,  which  has  been 
repeatedly  compared  with  the  great  Kew  Standard,  is  employed  for  ordinary  use ; 

3x2 


510 


MR.  WELSH  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  A STANDARD 


its  index-correction  (which,  inclusive  of  capillary  action,  =+0‘003inch)  being  first 
applied  to  the  observed  readings. 

Comparisons,  by  means  of  two  portable  barometers  by  AniE,  London,  were  made 
during  last  summer  between  the  Kew  Standard  and  that  of  the  Observatory  of  Paris. 
The  result  of  these  comparisons  was,  that  the  Kew  Standard  reads  higher  than  the 
Paris  Standard  by  0 001  inch,  no  correction  being  applied  to  either  instrument  on 
account  of  capillary  action. 

II.  f^erification  of  Barometers. 

In  the  best  barometers  of  the  present  day,  a provision  is  made  for  adjusting  the 
surface  of  the  mercury  in  the  cistern  to  the  zero  of  the  scale  at  each  observation. 
Supposing  the  tube  to  be  in  good  order,  which  is  easily  ascertained  by  mere  inspec- 
tion, the  only  source  of  error  in  such  instruments  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  scale. 
The  graduation  of  the  scales  of  all  carefully  made  barometers  is  performed  by  means 
of  a dividing  engine,  and  is  not  likely  to  be  inaccurate  to  any  sensible  extent  within 
the  ordinary  range  of  the  mercury.  If,  however,  the  barometer  is  intended  to  be  used 
at  considerable  elevations,  or  if  it  should  otherwise  be  considered  desirable  to  examine 
the  graduation,  the  error  of  the  divisions  can  be  readily  obtained  by  measurement 
with  the  Cathetometer.  It  frequently  happens,  however,  that  the  point  to  which 
the  level  of  the  mercury  is  adjusted  is  not  the  true  zero  of  the  scale.  The  error 
arising  from  this  source  is  of  course  constant  for  all  heights  of  the  barometer.  As 
the  capillary  action  of  the  tube  is  also  supposed  to  be  constant  for  the  same  baro- 
meter, and  as  it  is  seldom  possible  to  determine  its  true  amount,  it  is  better  to  con- 
sider it  in  connexion  with  the  zero-error.  This  is  the  more  advisable,  since  a 
reference  of  the  zero-point  in  a completed  barometer  to  any  point  of  the  scale  is 
rendered  difficult  and  uncertain  by  the  circumstance,  that  it  can  only  be  viewed 
through  the  glass  of  the  cistern,  which,  from  its  irregularity,  may  considerably  affect 
its  apparent  position.  It  is  therefore  the  practice  to  suspend  the  barometer  to  be 
examined  beside  the  Standard  ; to  make  a sufficient  number  of  simultaneous  observa- 
tions of  the  two  instruments ; and  to  adopt  the  mean  difference  of  their  indications 
as  a single  constant  correction  for  the  combined  effects  of  zero-error  and  capillary 
action. 

In  many  portable  barometers,  and  in  nearly  all  marine  barometers,  there  is  no 
means  of  adjusting  the  mercury  in  the  cistern  to  a constant  level : it  becomes  there- 
fore necessary  to  determine  the  correction  for  “ Capacity,”  or  the  variation  in  the 
zero-point  corresponding  to  different  heights  of  the  column  of  mercury.  The  amount 
of  this  correction  may  be  determined  during  the  construction  of  the  instrument;  or, 
by  reducing  in  the  required  proportion  the  lengths  of  the  divisions,  it  may  be  allowed 
for  in  graduating  the  scale;  as  has  been  done  in  the  marine  barometers  made  under 
the  supervision  of  the  Kew  Committee  by  Mr.  P.  Adie  of  London.  In  order  to  test 
the  accuracy  of  this  correction,  it  is  necessary  to  compare  the  barometer  at  two  con- 


BAROMETER,  ETC,  AT  THE  KEW  OBSERVATORY. 


511 


siderably  different  pressures  with  a standard  instrument,  that  is,  with  one  in  which 
the  mercury  is  adjustable  at  each  observation  to  a constant  zero-point.  This  is  done 
by  placing-  the  barometer  and  a standard  within  a receiver  provided  with  the  means 
of  altering  at  pleasure  the  pressure  of  the  enclosed  air. 

The  Receiver  is  of  cast  iron,  its  horizontal  section  being  rectangular  (Plate  XX. 
figs.  3 & 4j:  it  is  39  inches  high,  12  inches  by  6^  at  its  lower  end,  tapering  to  10 
inches  by  4^  at  the  upper  end;  there  being  room  for  three  marine  barometers  besides 
the  Standard.  Windows  of  strong  plate  glass,  each  11|  inches  high  and  9^  inches 
wide,  let  into  both  sides  of  the  receiver,  admit  of  the  barometers  being  observed  by 
a Cathetometer.  Smaller  windows  below,  each  3 inches  square,  show  the  cistern  of 
the  Standard  Barometer,  the  mercury  in  which  is  adjusted  to  a constant  level  by  a 
screw  passing  through  a stuffing-box  in  the  base  of  the  receiver.  The  barometers 
to  be  verified  are  suspended  by  a girnbal  arrangement  from  the  upper  end  of  the 
receiver,  a massive  lid  closing  the  opening  at  the  top  by  which  they  are  introduced. 
An  opening  in  the  base,  furnished  with  a stopcock,  is  connected  by  a flexible  tube 
with  a pump  which  regulates  the  pressure  of  the  enclosed  air.  This  pump  consists 
of  a single  barrel  and  piston : there  being  openings  at  both  ends  of  the  barrel,  the 
valves  are  so  arranged  that,  when  the  flexible  tube  is  attached  to  the  lower  opening, 
air  is  extracted  from  the  receiver,  and  when  with  the  upper,  air  is  forced  in.  The 
receiver  is  supported  by  an  iron  bracket,  securely  fixed  to  the  quadrant  wall  about 
10  feet  from  the  great  Standard  Barometer.  The  Cathetometer,  being  between  the 
receiver  and  the  Standard  Barometer,  can  be  used  at  pleasure  for  either.  The  adjust- 
able barometer  used  in  the  receiver  for  comparison  with  the  marine  barometers,  has  a 
tube  0'35  in  diameter,  there  being  a contraction  in  the  tube  of  the  same  kind  and  to 
about  the  same  degree  as  in  the  ordinary  marine  barometers  made  by  Mr.  Adie. 
This  apparatus  for  the  verification  of  marine  barometers  has  (with  the  exception  of 
the  adjustable  barometer,  which  is  by  Mr.  Adie)  been  entirely  constructed  in  the 
Observatory  by  Mr.  Robert  Beckley  the  Mechanical  Assistant,  who  has  executed  the 
work  in  a most  satisfactory  manner,  and  who  has  shown  much  ingenuity  in  arranging 
the  mechanical  details,  so  as  to  afford  the  utmost  exactness  in  observation  and  con- 
venience in  manipulation. 

The  mode  of  observation  is  the  following: — Supposing  air  to  have  been  extracted 
from  the  receiver  until  the  barometers  stand  at  about  27  inches,  sufficient  time  having 
elapsed  to  allow  the  mercury  to  come  to  a state  of  rest,  and  the  zero  of  the  Standard 
having  been  adjusted,  the  height  of  the  mercury  in  each  of  the  barometers  is  observed 
by  the  Cathetometer.  Air  is  then  admitted  until  the  mercury  stands  at  about  31 
inches,  when  the  same  operation  is  repeated.  The  length  of  the  graduated  scale  of 
the  barometer  under  comparison  is  then  measured  by  the  Cathetometer.  If  A,  a 
be  the  Cathetometer  readings,  at  the  higher  pressure,  of  the  Standard  and  marine 
barometers  repectively ; B,  h those  for  the  lower  pressure  ; and  if  L be  the  measured 
length  of  one  inch  of  the  scale  of  the  marine  barometer,  then  the  Correction  for  Capa- 


512 


MR.  WELSH  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  A STANDARD 


city  for  one  inch  =L— In  order  to  avoid  the  error  which  might  otherwise 

arise  from  the  different  capillary  actions  of  the  Standard  tube  and  that  of  the  marine 
barometer,  it  is  the  practice  to  make  these  comparisons  only  in  the  forenoon,  when 
the  temperature  of  the  room  and  consequently  the  pressure  of  the  air  within  the 
receiver  is  slowly  increasing. 

Besides  the  determination  of  the  Capacity  correction,  a series  of  simultaneous 
observations  are  made  of  the  marine  barometer  and  the  Standard  “Newman  34,”  for 
the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  correction  for  zero-error.  From  twenty  to  thirty  com- 
parisons are  usually  made,  care  being  taken  that  there  shall  be  as  nearly  as  possible 
an  equal  number  of  observations  with  the  barometer  rising  and  falling ; this  being 
necessary  in  order  to  eliminate  the  retardation  produced  in  the  movements  of  the 
mercury  by  the  contraction  of  the  tube  combined  with  the  capillary  action.  The 
final  corrections  at  different  heights  of  the  mercury  are  thus  deduced,  from  the  data 
now  obtained ; — Let  H be  the  height  (corrected  for  zero-error)  of  Newman  34,  h the 
corresponding  height  of  the  marine  barometer ; T the  temperature  of  Newman  34, 
and  t that  of  the  marine  barometer;  K being  the  “Capacity”  correction:  the  correc- 
tion corresponding  to  any  height  /^o  of  the  marine  barometer  is 

H— A+K(^o-^)  + (^-T)xO*0027. 

Each  barometer,  when  it  leaves  the  Observatory,  is  accompanied  by  a statement  of 
its  corrections,  of  which  the  following  is  a specimen  : — 


“Corrections  to  the  Scale  Readings  of  Marine  Barometer,  B.  T.,  No.  231, 

by  Adie,  London. 


in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

At  27-5 

At  28-0 

At  28-5 

At  29-0 

At  29-5 

At  30-0 

At  30-5 

At  31-0 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

in. 

-1- 0-001 

0-000 

— 0-001 

— 0-001 

— 0-002 

— 0-003 

— 0-004 

— 0-005 

“ When  the  sign  of  the  correction  is  -f,  the  quantity  is  to  be  added  to  the  observed 
reading  ; and  when  — , to  he  subtracted  from  it.  The  corrections  given  above  include 
those  for  Index-error,  Capacity,  and  Capillarity.” 

III.  Cathetometer. 

The  Cathetometer  hitherto  employed  was  made  by  Mr.  Oertling,  of  London,  on 
the  plan  of  that  used  in  the  experiments  of  M.  Regnault.  It  was  originally 
mounted  on  an  independent  support,  but  this  was  found  to  be  too  unsteady  for  exact 
observation.  It  was  accordingly  removed  from  its  support,  and  mounted  between 
brackets  attached  to  the  quadrant  wall.  The  scale  of  this  instrument  has  been  com- 
pared with  the  Kew  Standard  Scale,  both  in  the  horizontal  and  vertical  positions  ; in 
the  former,  by  observation  of  both  scales  by  fixed  micrometer  microscopes,  and  in 


BAROMETER,  ETC.  AT  THE  KEVE  OBSERVATORY. 


513 


the  latter  position,  in  measuring-  by  the  Cathetometer  the  divisions  of  the  Standard 
Scale  placed  vertically  at  a distance  of  five  feet.  In  the  horizontal  position  there 
appeared  to  be  no  appreciable  error  in  the  graduation  of  the  Cathetometer,  but 
when  vertical  its  scale  was  found  to  be  somewhat  too  long,  the  measurement  of  a 
length  of  30  inches  requiring  a correction  of  -|-0’003  inch.  Besides  this  discrepancy, 
which  is  probably  due  to  irregular  flexure  of  the  bar  and  to  imperfect  fitting  of  the 
sliding  frame  which  carries  the  telescope  and  level,  the  manipulation  of  the  instru- 
ment is  exceedingly  inconvenient  and  troublesome,  and  requires  much  care  and 
patience.  It  is  believed,  however,  that,  when  the  requisite  care  and  time  are  be- 
stowed, the  measurements,  after  allowing  for  the  correction  mentioned,  are  accurate. 

A new  Cathetometer  is  at  present  being  construeted  by  Mr.  Beckley  at  the  Obser- 
vatory, which  promises  greater  accuracy  and  convenience.  This  instrument  is  very 
nearly  completed,  and  will  be  described  in  a subsequent  communication. 


■i 


’ -v;:;:- C;::’ 


1 


■'a 


'i  4.  '• 


- _ ';'  ■ ''-■^  . ,.  ^ , , ■«> 
4 ? i ) ^ii.  * ' . ' 'f 


'iiu  r / . 

>,  li' 


-iri 

,■  j 


:!!;  ;k'. 

V-  ‘ •. 


"■  :% 

...  ■ ;iV.  r kHV^-f  'i'n 

^ •■  , ^ 'v-.  ',  - ■ : ,:'o  ' : . ■ti'iV,^  '' 

j; ':  ;'i-ii  'wi*  . 'fkl' ■VO-';! v'  . Kr»Vvv  *-- 

’V  ■ i,  V.  .;;.;'^;;':4l‘i>*:''  t 

,::.,  y'ii  J ■ b.  fuM.t:xrtTkt>  y„,  ^ ^ 

■ •''."■•"Vo:'  '••  ■;*'•  ;■  ■'''■  ;.  ■ v ':-f»'4'-.v,''/;  ■ . « ■‘/•‘i- ■ .'a  , ' ■ ' ■ \n\.  ■ 

■*•  .'.  ■ k^;■' 

T-'-ii’i  ‘H'y  ./i*"’;:  '■  * '>ri k'ffSfi^rfy'y;! 'J ■ ' ■ , 

■;  s^<K>  A ’....,  , '"  . ■ 


>^o’<frk?rq 


■ ■ ■ fi^ry'wfejfvv 


ki 


ISIS 


"»  j'.-4'7  > -V. 


[ 515  ] 


XXIV.  On  the  Presence  of  Fibrils  of  Soft  Tissue  in  the  Dentinal  Tubes. 
By  John  Tomes,  F.R.S.,  Surgeon-Dentist  to  the  Middlesex  Hospital. 


Received  February  21, — Read  March  13,  1856. 


The  dental  tissues,  as  parts  of  the  human  system,  have  received  their  full  share  of 
attention  from  anatomists.  Papers  have  from  time  to  time  appeared  upon  this  sub- 
ject, each  observer  confirming  or  correcting  the  views  of  his  predecessor,  or  adding- 
new  facts  to  those  already  recorded,  until  this  field  of  investigation  seemed  fairly 
exhausted,  at  all  events  of  new  matter. 

Histologists,  I think,  now  agree  that  dentine  is  made  up  of  series  of  tubes,  which 
radiate  from  one  or  more  cavities,  situated  within  the  interior  of  the  tooth.  In  their 
way  outwards  the  tubes  branch  freely,  and  connect  themselves  through  their  branches 
with  each  other;  thereby  establishing  a network  of  communications  throughout  the 
whole  substance  of  the  dentine.  The  tubes  on  the  one  hand,  after  running  their 
course,  become  lost  in  the  anastomosing  branches  near  the  outer  surface  of  what  has 
been  termed  a dentinal  system,  on  the  other,  terminate  by  open  mouths  on  the  inner 
surface  of  the  system*,  or  pulp-cavity.  This  cavity  being  occupied  by  an  organ  rich 
in  blood-vessels,  has  led  to  the  opinion  generally  entertained,  that  the  tubes  are  canals 
for  the  conveyance  of  nutritive  fluid. 

M.  Kolliker'I'  states,  “During  life  the  (dentinal)  canals  contain  a clear  fluid,  and 
cannot  therefore  be  readily  detected  in  recent  preparations.” 

In  sections  which  have  been  dried,  the  tubes  become  very  distinct,  and  we  may 
sometimes,  on  adding  a coloured  fluid  to  the  preparation  when  under  the  microscope, 
observe  the  tubes  becoming  gradually  filled. 

The  foregoing  conditions  of  the  dentinal  tubes  are  so  easily  demonstrated,  and 
appeared  to  indicate  so  satisfactorily  the  offices  of  these  canals,  that  the  subject  was 
regarded  as  one  which  had  been  fully  investigated.  There  are,  however,  certain  phy- 
siological conditions  observable  in  teeth,  when  forming  part  of  the  living  body,  which 
the  recorded  knowledge  of  the  histological  characters  of  dentine  fails  to  explain. 

If,  for  instance,  a portion  of  enamel  be  accidentally  broken  from  the  surface  of  a 
tooth,  so  that  the  dentine  becomes  exposed,  the  surface  of  the  latter  will  be  highly 
sensitive  to  any  variation  of  temperature  from  that  of  the  mouth,  or  to  the  contact  of 

* “On  the  Structure  of  the  Dental  Tissue  of  the  Order  Rodentia,”  by  John  Tomes,  Philosophical  Transac- 
tions, Part  2,  1850. 

t Manual  of  Human  Histology,  by  A.  Kolliker.  Translated  and  edited  by  George  Busk,  F.R.S.,  and 
Thomas  Huxley,  F.R.S.  Vol.  ii.  page  41. 

3 Y 


MDCCCLVI. 


516 


MR.  JOHN  TOMES  ON  THE  PRESENCE  OF  FIBRILS 


foreign  bodies,  even  pressure  from  the  tongue  giving  pain.  The  degree  of  pain  is  not, 
however,  increased  by  increasing  the  pressure.  Then,  again,  in  operating  upon  the 
teeth  for  the  removal  of  carious  dentine,  it  is  almost  invariably  found  that  the  dentine 
immediately  below  the  enamel  is  much  more  sensitive  than  that  situated  deeper  in  the 
tooth. 

If  the  pulp  of  a tooth  be  destroyed,  either  by  an  instrument  or  by  an  escharotic, 
the  sensitiveness  of  the  whole  of  the  dentine  is  immediately  lost,  no  pain  being  after- 
wards experienced  when  it  is  cut  either  near  the  enamel  or  the  pulp-cavity.  The  teeth 
of  young  subjects  are  much  more  sensitive  than  those  of  older  people,  and  this  is  more 
especially  the  case  when  they  are  attacked  by  caries. 

The  dentine  of  teeth  which  are  rapidly  decaying  is  much  more  sensitive  than  that 
of  teeth  in  which  the  destruction  progresses  more  slowly.  The  former  condition  is 
indicated  by  the  light  colour  of  the  decomposing  part,  together  with  the  extent  of 
tissue  involved  ; the  latter  by  the  deep  brown  colour,  and  the  comparative  hardness 
of  the  affected  dentine.  In  certain  cases  of  caries,  the  softened  tissue  appears  to  be 
extremely  sensitive,  so  that  the  patient  can  scarcely  bear  its  removal ; but  when  the 
instrument  reaches  the  comparatively  healthy  dentine,  the  pain,  although  present,  is 
much  less  severe. 

In  any  case,  however,  the  dentine  loses  its  power  of  feeling  pain  if  the  pulp  be 
destroyed ; but  if,  after  the  destruction,  the  pulp-cavity  be  perfectly  filled  with  gold, 
the  tooth,  in  cases  suitable  for  such  an  operation,  may  retain  its  colour  and  usefulness 
for  a considerable  period.  The  dentine  will  not,  however,  recover  its  sensitiveness. 

These  several  conditions  indicate  sufficiently  clearly  that  the  sensitiveness  of  the 
dentine  is  dependent  upon  its  connexion  with  the  pulp  of  the  tooth,  and  that  it  has 
no  inherent  sensibility  in  its  own  hard  tissue;  although  the  tissue  may  remain  for  a 
considerable  period  without  any  manifest  change,  if  the  root  of  the  tooth  be  healthy, 
and  the  dentine  be  protected  from  the  influence  of  the  fluids  of  the  mouth. 

After  a portion  of  dentine  has  been  for  some  time  exposed,  or  if  the  exposure  be 
brought  about  gradually  by  the  slow  wearing  away  of  the  enamel,  that  acute  sensi- 
tiveness which  has  been  described  is  not  then  found  to  exist.  In  parts  which  have 
been  subject  to  the  foregoing  conditions,  it  will  on  examination  be  found  that  the  den- 
tinal tubes,  the  peripheral  extremities  of  which  have  been  exposed,  are  more  or  less 
obliterated  in  some  part  of  their  course  between  the  surface  and  the  pulp-cavity. 

On  reviewing  the  various  circumstances  under  which  dentine  evinces  sensibility, 
and  those  under  which  that  sensibility  is  lost,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion, 
that  the  dentinal  tubes  are  in  some  way  the  medium  through  which  sensation  is  dis- 
tributed through  the  substance  of  the  tissue  But  if  the  sole  office  of  the  tubes  be 
the  conveyance  of  nutrient  fluid  derived  from  the  pulp,  the  difficulty  of  accounting 
for  the  sensitiveness  of  the  dentine  remains,  inasmuch  as  we  have  no  instance  of 
sensation  being  manifested  in  a fluid.  We  might  seem  to  get  out  of  the  difficulty  by 
assuming  that  the  dentinal  tubes  are  constantly  filled  by  fluid,  and  that  pressure  made 


OF  SOFT  TISSUE  IN  THE  DENTINAL  TUBES. 


517 


upon  the  fluid  at  the  exposed  ends  of  the  tubes  is  felt  by  the  pulp  at  their  inner  extre- 
mities. This  assumption  does  not,  however,  account  for  all  the  circumstances  of  the 
case,  failing  altogether  to  explain  the  greater  sensibility  of  the  dentine  at  one  part  of 
the  tooth  than  at  another. 

The  want  of  accordance  between  the  views  usually  entertained  upon  the  structure 
of  dentine  and  the  physiological  conditions  manifested  by  that  tissue  when  in  con- 
nexion with  the  body,  has  wholly  arisen  from  assuming  that  the  dentinal  tubes  are 
solely  for  the  conveyance  of  fluid,  and  that  they  are  otherwise  empty.  With  the  hope 
of  gaining  some  further  knowledge  upon  this  point,  I commenced  a series  of  obser- 
vations, the  results  of  which  it  is  the  main  purpose  of  this  paper  to  communicate. 
When  these  investigations  were  commenced,  I had  but  little  expectation  of  finding 
that  one  of  the  most  important  parts  in  dental  structure  had  been  overlooked, 
namely,  that  each  dentinal  tube  is  permanently  tenanted  by  a soft  fibril,  which,  after 
passing  from  the  pulp  into  the  tubes,  follows  their  ramifications. 

With  proper  care  in  manipulating,  nothing  is  more  easy  than  to  demonstrate  the 
existence  of  the  dentinal  fibrils,  in  any  tooth  which  has  been  recently  extracted.  If 
a thin  section  be  made  in  the  plane  of  the  direction  of  the  tubes,  and  then  placed  in 
dilute  hydrochloric  acid  until  the  whole  or  a greater  part  of  the  lime  is  removed,  and 
the  section  be  afterwards  torn  in  a direction  transverse  to  that  of  the  tubes,  many  of  the 
fibrils  will  be  seen  projecting  from  the  torn  edges  (Plate  XXI!^fig.  1).  It  is  desirable, 
in  repeating  the  experiment,  to  place  the  decalcified  section  upon  a slide  before  tear- 
ing, as  in  moving  it  from  the  surface  upon  which  it  has  been  torn,  some  of  the  longer 
fibrils  may  be  folded  back  upon  the  body  of  the  specimen  and  thus  become  obscured. 
Where  the  separation  between  the  torn  surfaces  has  been  but  slight,  we  may  often 
see  a fibril,  unbroken,  stretching  across  from  the  separated  orifices  of  the  tube  to 
which  it  belongs. 

It  is  not  necessary,  however,  to  decalcify  dentine  in  order  to  show  the  fibrils.  If 
a similar  section  to  that  already  described  be  divided  with  the  edge  of  a knife,  many 
of  these  delicate  organs  will  be  seen,  but  they  are  usually  broken  off  much  shorter, 
many  of  them  scarcely  projecting  beyond  the  orifices  of  the  tubes.  Again,  if  a minute 
portion  of  dentine  be  cut  with  a sharp  knife  from  the  surface  produced  by  fracturing 
a perfectly  fresh  tooth,  the  same  appearances  will  be  seen,  but  not  with  the  same  cer- 
tainty and  distinctness  as  in  the  previous  examples. 

In  order  to  demonstrate  the  connexion  of  the  fibrils  with  the  pulp,  fine  sections 
should  be  made  with  a sharp  knife  from  the  edge  of  the  pulp-cavity.  In  this  manner 
I obtained  the  specimen  from  which  Mr.  De  Morgan  has  been  kind  enough  to  draw 
the  accompanying  illustration,  showing  the  fibrils  stretching  from  the  pulp  to  the 
displaced  dentine,  and  some  of  them  passing  out  on  the  other  side  of  the  fragment 
(fig.  2).  That  the  fibrils  proceed  from  the  pulp  may  be  seen  by  carefully  fracturing  a 
fresh  tooth  with  as  little  displacement  of  the  fractured  parts  as  possible;  and  then,  by 
slowly  removing  the  pulp  from  its  place  in  the  tooth,  we  shall  be  enabled  to  examine 

3 Y 2 


518 


MR.  JOHN  TOMES  ON  THE  PRESENCE  OF  FIBRILS 


the  fibrils  which  have  been  drawn  out  from  the  tubes.  By  this  procedure  some  of 
the  fibrils  will  be  withdrawn  from  their  normal  position  in  the  dentine  in  the  greater 
part  of  their  length,  a few  of  them  retaining  short  lengths  of  their  branches,  but 
sufficient  to  show  that  they  have  come  from  the  branches  of  the  dentinal  tubes. 

If  a carious  tooth  be  selected  in  which  the  diseased  part  is  of  a deep  brown  colour 
and  of  tolerably  firm  consistence  (conditions  indicating  that  the  disease  has  been 
slow  in  progress),  it  will  be  seen,  on  making  a transverse  section  of  the  tubes  in  the 
affected  part,  that  the  fibrils  have  been  consolidated  (fig.  3)  and  their  outline  lost, 
the  circumference  of  the  tube  alone  being  distinguishable.  Indeed  the  tubes,  when 
in  this  state  and  seen  in  this  view,  have  the  appearance  of  solid  rods.  But  if  the  sec- 
tion be  made  in  a plane  with  the  tubes,  we  shall  be  enabled  to  trace  the  calcified  fibrils. 
They  appear  to  have  a greater  power  of  resisting  decomposition  than  the  surround- 
ing dentine,  and  hence  preserve  their  rigidity.  Some  will  project  from  the  edge  of 
the  specimen,  while  others  may  be  seen  broken  within  the  tubes,  and  more  or  less 
displaced.  Were  they  made  of  glass  the  fracture  could  not  be  more  abrupt  and  de- 
fined (fig,  4),  or  their  outline  more  distinct.  I have  on  a previous  occasion  described 
a zone  of  consolidation  limiting  caries* * * §,  but  I was  at  that  time  ignorant  of  the  exist- 
ence of  the  tube-fibrils,  otherwise  I should  have  more  fully  understood  its  import. 

Professor  Kolliker,  in  his  account  of  the  development  of  dentine,  describes  and 
figures  processes  extending  from  the  peripheral  cells  of  the  dentinal  pulp  in  developing 
teeth'f',  but  he  does  not  recognize  the  tube-fibril ; indeed  he,  as  before  cited,  describes 
the  tubes  as  filled  with  fluid.  M.  Lent,  in  a paper  published  last  year,  gives  a 
similar  description  to  that  of  M.  Kolliker,  but  says  that  the  cell-fibres  are  best  seen 
in  teeth  which  are  but  little  advanced  in  development^.  Mr.  Huxley  states  that  in 
a solitary  instance  he  observed  a fibre  pass  a short  distance  into  the  dentine^. 

Both  M.  Kolliker  and  M.  Lent  regard  the  process  which  they  observed  extend- 
ing from  the  peripheral  cells  of  the  pulp  in  forming  teeth,  as  organisms  for  the  deve- 
lopment of  the  dentinal  tubes.  The  latter  author,  near  the  conclusion  of  his  article 
on  the  development  of  dentine,  states,  the  processes  of  the  cells  are  the  dentinal  tubes. 
He  observes  further  on,  that  the  fact  first  observed  by  Muller  and  then  by  Kolliker, 
that  the  dentinal  tubules  possess  separate  walls,  which  can  readily  be  isolated,  is 
explained  by  the  history  of  the  development ; the  wall  of  the  dentinal  canal  is  iden- 
tical with  the  cellular  membrane  of  the  ivory  cell. 

I do  not  propose  entering  upon  the  subject  of  dentinal  development  in  the  present 
communication,  but  shall  confine  myself  to  showing  that  the  dentinal  tubes  are  in  the 

* Lecture  on  Dental  Physiology  and  Surgery,  by  John  Tomes.  Published  by  Parker,  West  Strand. 

t Loc.  cit. 

X Zeitschrift  fiir  wissenschaftliche  Zoologie,  herausgegeben  von  C.  T.  Siebolu  und  A.  Kolliker,  Sechster 
Band,  1855,  p.  121. 

§ On  the  Development  of  the  Teeth,  and  on  the  Nature  and  Imports  of  Nasmyth’s  “ persistent  capsule,” 
by  Thomas  Huxley,  F.R.S.,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Microscopical  Science,  No.  3,  1853. 


OF  SOFT  TISSUE  IN  THE  DENTINAL  TUBES. 


519 


normal  condition  occupied  by  fibrils  of  soft  tissr  e.  The  above  extracts  from  M.  Lent’s 
paper  have  been  made  in  order  to  show  that  he  has  not  recognized  the  existence  of 
permanent  tube  contents,  although  he  has  probably  seen  the  fibrils  themselves. 

The  nature  and  office  of  the  dentinal  fibrils  remain  for  consideration.  If  a fibril 
be  examined  in  its  natural  condition,  by  the  aid  of  an  eighth  of  an  inch  object-glass, 
it  will  be  found  to  consist  of  an  almost  structureless  tissue,  transparent,  and  of  a com- 
paratively low  refractive  power.  In  glycerine  the  fibrils  are  scarcely  visible.  At  pre- 
sent it  admits  of  doubt  whether  they  are  tubular  or  solid.  In  some  cases  there  is  an 
appearance  of  tubularity ; but  being  cylindrical  this  may  be  a mere  optical  effect. 
When  accidentally  stretched  between  two  fragments  of  dentine  the  diameter  of  the 
fibril  becomes  much  diminished,  and  when  broken  across,  a minute  globule  of  trans- 
parent but  dense  fluid  may  sometimes  be  seen  at  the  broken  end,  gathered  into  a 
more  or  less  spherical  form.  These  appearances  may  be  explained  by  assuming  that 
the  fibril  consists  of  a sheath  containing  a semifluid  matter,  similar  to  the  white 
fibrillse  of  nerves ; but  whether  such  a conclusion  can  be  justified  admits  of  doubt. 
The  manner  in  which  the  dentinal  fibrillae  terminate  in  the  pulp  I am  at  present 
unable  to  decide.  In  favourable  specimens  they  may  be  traced  a short  distance  into 
the  pulp,  but  whether  they  are  terminated  by  cells  or  in  any  way  connect  themselves 
with  nerves,  I am  unable  to  determine.  The  dimensions  of  the  fibrils  are  the  same 
as  those  of  the  interior  of  the  dentinal  tubes. 

The  conditions  under  which  sensation  is  manifested  in  dentine  have  been  already 
stated,  together  with  those  under  which  it  is  lost,  and  the  difficulty  of  accounting  for 
these  phenomena  has  been  pointed  out.  The  recognition  of  the  fibrils  of  dentine  will, 
however,  I think,  remove  the  difficulty,  and  enable  the  physiologist  to  explain  why 
under  certain  circumstances  that  tissue  is  susceptible  of  pain,  while  under  other  con- 
ditions the  sensitiveness  is  lost. 

That  the  dentine  owes  its  sensation  to  the  presence  of  the  dentinal  fibrils  cannot,  I 
think,  be  readily  doubted,  seeing  that  if  their  connexion  with  the  pulp  be  cut  off  by 
the  destruction  of  the  latter,  all  sensation  is  at  once  lost.  It  is  by  no  means  necessary 
to  assume  that  the  dentinal  fibrils  are  actual  nerves  before  allowing  them  the  power 
of  communicating  sensation.  Many  animals  are  endowed  with  sensation  which  yet 
possess  no  demonstrable  nervous  system  ; and  we  may  find  many  points  in  the  human 
body  highly  sensitive  without  our  being  able  to  demonstrate  nerves  in  such  numbers 
as  would  account  for  the  pain  uniformly  experienced  from  the  puncture  of  a needle, 
upon  the  supposition  that  the  needle  had  in  each  case  wounded  a nerve.  Additional 
evidence  in  favour  of  the  view  that  the  fibrils  possess  sensation  mav  be  obtained  by 
examining  their  condition  in  diseased  teeth,  and  the  conditions  attendant  upon  the 
disease.  In  those  cases  in  which  the  fibrils  are  consolidated  in  the  manner  already 
described,  there  is  perfect  absence  of  pain  when  the  part  is  removed,  but  so  soon  as 
the  instrument  reaches  the  healthy  dentine,  more  or  less  inconvenience  is  felt.  If,  on 
tbe  other  hand,  there  is  no  consolidation  of  the  fibrils,  but  the  piiln  is  yet  living,  the 


520 


MR.  JOHN  TOMES  ON  THE  PRESENCE  OF  FIBRILS 


operation  of  removing  the  carious  part  is  productive  of  pain,  even  from  the  com- 
mencement ; indeed  pressure  upon  the  surface  of  the  softened  tissue  gives  rise  to  dis- 
comfort, If  in  such  cases  the  softened  dentine  be  examined,  fibrils  may  here  and 
there  be  found  but  little  altered  from  their  natural  appearance. 

The  greater  degree  of  sensitiveness  observable  in  the  dentine  immediately  below  the 
enamel,  that  is,  at  the  point  of  ultimate  distribution  of  the  dentinal  tubes,  and  con- 
sequently of  the  fibrils,  may  be  fully  accounted  for  on  the  supposition  that  the  latter 
are  organs  of  sensation,  just  as  in  nerves  of  sensation  the  point  of  greatest  sensibility 
is  that  of  their  ultimate  distribution. 

The  recognition  of  the  dentinal  fibrils  must  lead  to  a modification  of  the  opinions 
hitherto  entertained  as  regards  the  office  of  the  tubes,  namely,  that  they  are  for  the 
circulation  of  fluids  only.  The  presence  of  soft  tissue  would  not,  however,  hinder 
the  slow  passage  of  fluids  ; and  that  fluids  do  pass  through  or  by  the  side  of  the  fibrils 
is  rendered  probable  by  the  fact,  that  they  are  capable  of  undergoing  change  at  the 
parts  furthest  removed  from  the  pulp.  When  the  fibrils  become  calcified  near  the 
surface  of  the  dentine,  the  hardening  material  must  have  been  derived  from  the  pulp 
when  the  consolidation  has  taken  place  in  the  crown  of  the  tooth. 

The  foregoing  observations  wiL  I think  warrant  the  conclusion,  that  the  dentinal 
fibrils  are  subservient  to  sensation  in  the  dentine,  and  are  the  channels  by  which 
nutrition  is  carried  to  that  tissue. 

Further  evidence  may  be  adduced  in  favour  of  the  latter  opinion.  I have  already 
observed  that  dentine  may  remain  for  a time  apparently  unaltered  if  the  pulp  be 
destroyed  and  the  cavity  filled  with  gold.  After  a while  many  teeth  so  circumstanced 
become  loose,  and  when  removed  it  is  found  that  a considerable  portion  of  the  den- 
tine has  been  removed  by  absorption  ; a state  of  things  in  some  respects  similar  to 
that  which  accompanies  the  loss  of  teeth  in  old  people.  Here  we  find,  that,  although 
the  pulp  may  be  living,  the  tubes  of  the  root  of  the  tooth  have  become  eonsolidated, 
and  the  part  rendered  translucent.  Teeth  so  circumstanced  will  on  examination 
exhibit  loss  of  dentine.  A similar  condition  may  be  found  in  teeth  the  crowns  of 
which  have  been  lost;  the  roots  are  then  diminished  by  absorption.  In  each  of  the 
instances  adduced,  the  teeth  may,  however,  be  retained  for  a lengthened  period  in 
th  e jaw,  but  such  persistence  is  always  accompanied  by  the  deposition  of  cementurn 
to  an  unusual  extent  upon  the  roots.  These  phenomena  have  been  brought  forward 
to  show,  that  the  presence  of  the  dentinal  fibrils  in  a state  of  integrity  is  necessary 
to  the  normal  condition  of  the  tooth  ; that  if  from  any  cause  they  are  consolidated  or 
destroyed,  nature  will  coat  over  the  root  with  cementurn,  and  often  to  an  extent 
amounting  to  disease,  or  will  set  up  a process  for  its  removal.  The  dentine  will 
be  diminished  by  absorption,  the  root  will  be  thrown  up  on  the  surface  of  the  gum, 
or  the  socket  will  disappear,  and  the  tooth  by  the  one  or  other  process,  or  by  a 
combination  of  each,  will  be  cast  off  as  an  organ  no  longer  fitted  for  a place  in  the 
living  body. 


OF  SOFT  TISSUE  IN  THE  DENTINAL  TUBES. 


52  i 


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATE. 

PLATE  XXI.’^ 

Fig.  1.  A section  from  the  crown  of  the  tooth  of  an  adult  made  in  a plane  with  the 
direction  of  the  dentinal  tubes,  and  afterwards  decalcified  and  then  torn 
in  a line  transverse  to  the  direction  of  the  tubes : (a)  the  dentine ; (b)  the 
torn  edge  with  the  dentinal  fibril  (c)  extending  from  the  tubes. 

Fig.  2.  A section  made  with  a knife  from  the  edge  of  the  pulp-cavity  of  an  adult 
tooth,  including  a portion  of  the  pulp : (a)  the  dentine ; (b)  the  pulp  with 
the  peripheral  cells  arranged  in  lines ; (c)  the  dentinal  fibrils  drawn  out  of 
the  displaced  dentine ; (d)  fibrils  which  pass  through  the  fragment  of 
dentine,  and  appear  on  the  surface  furthest  removed  from  the  pulp. 

Fig.  3.  A section  from  dentine  softened  by  caries,  showing  the  consolidated  dentinal 
tubes  and  fibrils  cut  transversely. 

Fig.  4.  A section  in  a plane  with  the  tubes,  from  carious  dentine,  showing  consolida- 
tion of  the  fibrils,  some  of  which  are  seen  projecting  from  the  edge  of  the 
specimen,  while  others  have  been  broken  within  the  tubes  and  are  dis- 
placed. 


ADDENDUM. 

Received  June  18,  1856. 

Since  the  preceding  communication  has  been  in  the  possession  of  the  Royal  Society, 
the  head  of  a marsupial  animal  which  had  been  preserved  in  spirit  was  placed  at  my 
disposal,  the  teeth  of  which  were  in  a condition  favourable  for  showing  the  dentinal 
fibrils,  should  such  be  found  to  exist. 

A paper  upon  the  structure  of  the  dental  tissues  of  Marsupiata  will  be  found  in 
the  Philosophical  Transactions,  Part  II.  1849,  in  which  the  continuation  of  the  den- 
tinal tubes  into  the  enamel  is  described  and  figured;  together  with  those  minor 
differences  of  structure  which  are  peculiar  to  the  several  divisions  of  this  order  of 
Mammalia. 

After  the  discovery  of  the  dentinal  fibrils,  the  examination  of  a favourable  speci- 
men of  enamel  so  peculiarly  constituted  became  a matter  of  considerable  interest,  in 
order  to  ascertain  whether  the  soft  tissue  which  occupies  the  dentinal  tubes  is  con- 
tinued into  those  of  the  enamel.  I am  indebted  to  my  friend  Professor  Quekett  for 
the  jaws  of  Halmaturus , a member  of  a genus  in  which  the  majority  of  the  den- 

tinal tubes  situated  in  the  crown  of  the  tooth  are  continued  into  the  enamel,  and 
pass  to  within  a short  distance  of  the  external  surface  of  that  tissue.  Thin  sections 
were  made  both  of  the  incisor  and  molar  teeth  by  the  usual  process  of  grinding. 


522  ON  THE  PRESENCE  OF  FIBRILS  OF  SOFT  TISSUE  IN  THE  DENTINAL  TUBES. 

These  were  treated  with  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  and  were  examined  at  short  inter- 
vals  after  their  immersion  in  the  solvent  fluid.  The  acid  acted  upon  the  enamel  with 
great  rapidity ; and  in  the  course  of  a few  minutes  the  edge  corresponding  to  the 
outer  surface  of  the  tooth  disappeared,  leaving  in  its  place  a series  of  fine  flexible 
filaments.  More  prolonged  action  of  the  acid  led  to  a further  loss  from  the  surface 
of  the  enamel,  and  also  to  the  solution  of  the  part  in  contact  with  the  dentine.  In 
this  case  the  fibrils  were  seen  proceeding  from  the  extremities  of  the  dentinal  tubes 
across  the  space  which  had  been  occupied  by  the  enamel,  from  thence  they  were 
continued  through  that  portion  of  the  latter  structure  which  yet  remained  undis- 
solved, and  ultimately  formed  a delicate  fringe  floating  freely  in  the  fluid  by  which 
the  preparation  was  surrounded.  If  a section  presenting  the  above  conditions  be 
again  placed  in  acid  the  whole  of  the  enamel  will  be  dissolved,  leaving  the  dentine  in 
those  parts  which  have  been  invested  with  enamel,  bordered  by  a thick  fringe  of  long 
delicate  fibrils,  each  one  being  continued  from  the  peripheral  extremity  of  a dentinal 
tube.  In  the  dentine  the  fibrils  occupying  the  tubes  were  as  readily  detected  as  in 
the  human  tooth,  and  presented  the  same  general  appearances  and  relations. 

The  facility  with  which  the  fibrils  were  demonstrated  in  the  enamel  of  the  teeth  of 
the  Kangaroo,  induced  me  to  select  for  examination  specimens  of  human  teeth  in 
which  the  dentinal  tubes  are  continued  for  a short  distance  into  the  enamel.  Under 
similar  treatment  similar  results  were  obtained.  Wherever  the  dentinal  tubes  could 
be  traced  into  the  enamel,  the  presence  of  the  contained  fibrils  could  be  demonstrated 
by  the  aid  of  hydrochloric  acid. 


Cavendish  Square, 
June  \7th,  1856. 


[ 523  ] 


XXV.  On  the  Problem  of  Three  Bodies.  By  the  Rev.  J.  Challis,  M.A.^  F.R.S., 
F.R.A.S.,  Plumian  Professor  of  Astronomy  and  Experimental  Philosophy  in  the 
University  of  Cambridge. 


Received  May  15, — Read  May  22,  1856. 

The  determination  of  the  motions  of  three  bodies  mutually  attracting  according 
to  the  law  of  gravity  being  a problem  too  complicated  for  exact  solution,  mathe- 
maticians have  employed  various  methods  of  solving  it  approximately.  It  is  well 
known  that  of  these  methods  the  one  which  appears  to  be  the  most  obvious  and 
direct,  introduces  terms  which  may  increase  indefinitely  with  the  time,  and  render 
the  solution  inapplicable  to  any  observed  case  of  motion.  This  difficulty  occurs 
whether  the  problem  be  to  find  the  perturbation  of  the  moon’s  motion  by  the  sun,  or 
the  perturbation  of  the  motion  of  one  planet  by  another,  and  the  necessity  of  meeting 
or  evading  it  has  very  much  determined  the  courses  which  the  solutions  of  these  pro- 
blems have  taken.  In  the  theory  of  the  moon’s  motion,  Laplace,  Pontecoulant,  and 
others,  have  appealed  to  the  results  of  observations  of  the  motions  of  the  moon’s 
perigee  and  node,  to  justify  the  assumption  of  a form  of  solution  which  is  not 
attended  with  the  above-mentioned  difficulty.  Although  this  way  of  proceeding  may 
lead  to  correct  results,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  an  abandonment  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  determining  by  analysis  alone  the  form  of  development  which  is  appropriate 
to  the  conditions  of  the  problem.  Again,  in  the  theory  of  the  motions  of  the  planets, 
recourse  is  had  on  the  same  account  to  the  method  of  the  variation  of  parameters, 
more  especially  for  determining  the  secular  inequalities.  Now  it  will  perhaps  be 
admitted  that  that  method,  elegant  and  exact  though  it  be,  is  yet  not  indispensable, 
and  that  when  it  succeeds,  there  must  be  some  direct  method  which  would  be  equally 
successful  and  conduct  to  the  same  results.  The  discovery  of  such  a method  I have 
long  considered  to  be  a desideratum  in  the  theory  of  gravitation,  and  having  after 
much  labour  found  out  one  by  which  the  forms  of  the  expressions  for  the  radius-vector, 
longitude  and  latitude,  and  both  the  secular  and  the  periodic  inequalities,  are  evolved 
by  the  analysis  alone,  and  which  is  applicable  as  well  to  the  lunar  as  the  planetary 
motions,  I thought  it  might  deserve  the  attention  of  the  Royal  Society.  I propose 
in  this  communication  to  enter  at  length  into  the  details  of  the  method,  and  then  to 
add  a few  remarks  on  its  general  principle,  and  to  explain  why,  in  common  with  the 
method  of  the  variation  of  parameters,  it  succeeds  in  determining  the  motion  of  the 
apses  of  a disturbed  orbit. 


3 z 


MDCCCLVI. 


524 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


1.  Let  M represent  the  mass  of  the  principal  body,  or  its  attraction  at  the  unit  of 
distance,  m that  of  the  body  whose  motion  it  is  proposed  to  investigate,  and  ni!  that 
of  the  disturbing  body.  The  principal  body  is  supposed  to  be  at  rest,  and  the  rectan- 
gular coordinates  and  distances  of  the  other  two  reckoned  from  its  centre  as  origin, 
are  respectively  x,  y,  z,  r and  x',  y\  z',  r',  at  the  time  t reckoned  from  a given  epoch. 
Then  if  [ju  be  put  for  M+m,  and  R for  the  expression 

m'  [pox'  -f  yxj  + zz') 

{[x'-xf+{y'-'!/)^  + {z'-z)^y’ 


we  have  for  determining  the  motion  of  m the  known  equations, 


d'^x  y,x 
dt'^'  f.3  ~r 

(1.) 

df-  ' r^'  dy 

(2.) 

d^z  y.z  6?R 

df^  ' dz  ’ ■ 

(3.) 

Analogous  equations  apply  to  the  motion  of  m'  as  disturbed  by  m.  The  directions  of 
the  axes  of  coordinates  are  entirely  arbitrary.  Conceive,  therefore,  to  be  known  at 
a given  instant  (To)  the  position  of  the  plane  passing  through  m in  the  direction  of 
its  motion  at  that  instant,  and  through  the  centre  of  M,  and  let  this  plane  be  the 
plane  of  xy.  Conceive  also  to  be  known  at  a given  instant  (To)  the  position  of  the 
plane  passing  through  m'  in  the  direction  of  its  motion  at  that  instant,  and  through 
the  centre  of  M,  and  let  this  plane  make  with  the  other  the  angle  Also  let  the 
intersection  of  the  two  planes  be  the  axis  of  x 

2.  Now  since  according  to  these  suppositions,  the  body  m would  continue  in  the 
plane  xy  if  the  disturbing  force  of  m'  ceased  at  the  time  To,  it  is  clear  that  the  coordi- 
nate z at  any  time  To-j-r  is  a small  quantity  of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  force.  By 
multiplying  the  equations  (1.),  (2.),  (3.)  respectively  by  2dx,  2dy,  and  2dz,  adding, 
and  integrating,  we  obtain 


(4, 

being  the  differential  coefficient  of  R with  respect  to  x,  y,  and  ^ considered  as 


rf(R) 

dt 

dz^  d dz 

functions  of  the  time.  But  from  what  is  said  above,  and  — — ^ are  of  the  order 

dr  dz  dt 


of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force.  Hence  as  it  is  proposed  to  conduct  the 
approximation  according  to  the  powers  of  the  disturbing  force,  these  teians  in  the 
first  and  second  approximations  must  be  omitted.  Also,  if  6 be  the  polar  coordinate 

Z^ 

of  m reckoned  on  the  primitive  plane  of  its  orbit  from  the  axis  of  x,  and  ^ &c.  be 

neglected,  x=r  cos  6,y=:r  sin  0,  r being  now  regarded  as  the  projection  of  the  distance 
on  the  plane  of  xy.  Consequently 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


525 


dx^ + dy"^ = dr^ + r^df, 

(rfR) c?R  dr  ^ 

dt  d^  dt'  dr  dt  ’ 

and  the  equation  (4.)  becomes 

Again,  the  equations  (1.)  and  (2.)  give 

d'^ii  d^x  <?R  c?R 


(5.) 


But 


d.r^^— 
d^x  ' dt 


dy‘-y  d^x  dt  , c?R  «?R  «?R 

^ip-yi?=-dr’  ^Sj-y-S:=i»- 


Hence,  by  integrating, 


7 r«?R  , . , 

(®-> 


h being  an  arbitrary  constant.  Consequently,  by  substituting  for  ^ in  (5.)  from  (6.), 
and  neglecting  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force, 

M M , MCdU  , Cm/Cd'R.  , \ , , <i«  A , 

}M-dl‘‘^=dt]Ti'^^-]ir\]T>‘^*y*’  and  ^=^5  nearly. 

Hence  it  will  be  seen  that  to  the  first  power  of  the  disturbing  force  we  have 


df-r^i—  ^ +C— 2J  dtj  — . 


(7.) 


The  equations  (6.)  and  (7.)  are  suitable  for  determining  the  forms  of  the  develop- 
ments of  r and  & in  terms  of  the  time. 

The  function  R becomes,  by  neglecting  m!z, 


m\xod  + yy^) 


m 


and  reckoning  & from  the  axis  of  x on  the  plane  of  the  orbit  of  m!  in  its  position  at 
the  time  TJ,,  we  have  to  the  same  approximation, 

a?'=r'cos^',  3/'=r'sin  ^'cosiy. 


a'=r'sin  & siniw. 


Hence 


77i  / 

R=-72  (cos  ^ cos  ^'  + sin  & sin  4' cos  a)- 


m 


(p2  j,2  _ 2rd  (cos  fl  cos  4 -f-  sin  6 sin  fl'cos  cu) 

If  powers  of  a above  the  second  be  neglected,  the  following  approximate  value  of  R 


is  obtained ; 


R=^  cos(^— 4)' 


m' 


(,d2  _|_  ,.2  _ 2f^J cos  (9  — 4) ) ^ 


00/7' 

■2m' sin  6 sin  4sin^7; 


2\r 


,J-2 


(r'^  _j-  y.2  _ 2rr'  cos  (fi  — 4) ) 


4 


3 z 2 


526 


PROFESSOR  CH ALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


3.  The  foregoing  preliminaries  having  been  gone  through,  the  order  in  which  the 
approximate  integration  is  to  be  elfected  may  now  be  stated.  As  the  approximation 
is  to  proceed  according  to  the  disturbing  force,  the  equations  (6.)  and  (7.)  must  first 
be  integrated  omitting  the  terms  involving  R.  We  shall  thus  obtain  values  of  r and 
6 as  functions  of  t and  arbitrary  constants,  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  problem  of  two 
bodies,  and  these  constants  may  be  designated  by  the  letters  usually  employed  in  that 
problem.  As  the  exact  values  of  the  functions  would  be  unsuitable  for  carrying  on 
the  approximation,  they  may  be  expanded  in  series  proceeding  according  to  the 
powers  of  the  arbitrary  constant  e to  as  many  terms  as  we  please.  In  like  manner 
the  functions  which  express  the  values  of  r'  and  & in  terms  of  t,  may  be  expanded 
according  to  the  powers  of  e'.  When  these  values  of  r,  6,  r'  and  & have  been  substi- 
tuted in  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  (7.),  that  side  becomes  a function  of  t 
and  constants ; and  supposing  the  integrations  indicated  to  have  been  effected,  and 
the  result  to  be  Q,  we  shall  have 


A® 

r 


+C=2Q, 


Q being  a small  quantity  of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  force. 


Hence 


— — C+2Q| 


&c.  being  neglected.  In  the  second  term  we  may  substitute  for  r in  tefms  of  f 
from  the  first  approximation,  which  gives 


dr 


2a  7,/  , 2a  \ u, 


dr‘ 


dr 


Supposing,  therefore,  that  by  the  first  approximation  ^^-2  =/’(05  we  obtain 

dr 


dt{\+Qf{t))  = 


0’ 


This  equation  being  integrated,  a relation  is  found  between  r,  t and  arbitrary  con- 
stants, by  means  of  which  r is  to  be  expressed  in  a series  proceeding  primarily 
according  to  the  disturbing  force,  and  subordinately  according  to  the  quantities  e,  e' 
and  <y.  This  value  of  r is  next  to  be  substituted  in  the  equation  (6.),  which,  being 
put  under  the  form 

hdt  ( , \ dt 

shows  that  the  right-hand  side  then  becomes  a function  of  t and  constants,  and  that 
by  integration  ^ may  be  obtained  in  a series  proceeding  according  to  the  same  law  of 
arrangement  as  the  series  for  r. 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES, 


527 


The  plane  of  xy  has  hitherto  been  supposed  to  be  coincident  with  the  plane  of  m’s 
orbit  at  the  time  To.  On  this  supposition  values  of  r and  & have  been  obtained,  which 
fully  take  into  account  the  first  power  of  the  disturbing  force  and  the  mutual  incli- 
nation of  the  orbits.  We  are  now  at  liberty  to  suppose  the  plane  of  xy  to  have  any 
other  position  making  a small  angle  with  the  planes  of  the  orbits  of  m and  m!  in  their 
positions  at  the  epochs  To  and  TJ,,  and  the  equation  (3.),  viz. 

d'^z  d'R 

dt‘^''  r^'dz  ’ 


may  be  employed  for  finding  a series  for  z in  terms  of  t.  In  the  second  term  of  this 
equation  the  value  of  r given  by  the  second  approximation  is  to  be  substituted,  but 
in  the  third  term  it  is  only  required  to  substitute  the  values  of  r,  9,  r'  and  9’  given  by 


the  first  approximation. 


Also  for  z and  z'  we  may  substitute  in  the  functions  of 


t which  express  the  values  of  these  quantities  on  the  supposition  that  the  motions  are 
undisturbed,  and  that  they  are  referred  to  the  new  plane  of  xy.  Thus  becomes 

a function  of  t and  constants,  and  the  above  equation  takes  the  form 

d^z 


which  admits  of  being  integrated  only  by  successive  approximations. 

The  process  by  which  it  has  been  shown  that  r,  9 and  z are  approximated  to,  gives 
at  the  same  time,  mutatis  mutandis,  the  values  of  r' , 9'  and  z'  to  the  first  power  of  the 
disturbing  force  of  m.  By  means  of  these  six  quantities  the  approximation  may  be 
carried  to  terms  inclusive  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  forces. 

Having  thus  exhibited  the  general  scheme  of  this  approximate  solution  of  the 
Problem  of  Thi’ee  Bodies,  I proceed  to  exemplify  its  practicability. 


First  Approximation. 


4.  The  first  approximation,  which  omits  the  terms  involving  the  disturbing  force, 
and  is  therefore  identical  in  form  with  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  two  bodies,  is 
obtained  by  integrating  the  equations 


dt 


The  first  equation  gives,  by  integration. 


w(^-l-T)  = cos  ^x/aV— (a— r)S 


where  for  the  sake  of  brevity  a is  put  for  for  1 — and  n for  ^or^^.  Let  g 

it-  aM 

be  the  constant  introduced  by  the  integration  of  the  second  equation,  and  in  order 
to  designate  the  constants  in  the  present  problem  by  the  letters  usually  employed  in 


528 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


the  elliptic  theory,  let  g—cr  be  put  forwT.  Then  substituting  jo  for  — nr,  we  have, 
as  is  known,  the  following  expansions  of  r and  d to  the  third  power  of  e: 

r 3e^ 

-=  1 — e COS  /?+ 2 (1  — COS  2jw)H--^(cosjb  — COS  3p) 


5g2  ^ g3  ^23  \ 

^=g+w/+2esinjo  + — sin  2p+4( ^ 3jo  — sin/?  j. 

These  values  of  r and  & (excluding  the  terms  involving  for  the  sake  of  avoiding 
long  calculations)  will  be  employed  in  proceeding  to  the  second  approximation.  It 
is  evident  that  C,  h,  tu  and  g must  be  regarded  as  the  arbitrary  constants  of  the  inte- 
gration however  far  the  approximation  be  carried,  no  other  arbitrary  quantities  being 
introduced  by  the  process.  The  quantities  a and  e are  given  functions  of  C and  A, 
and  at  present  they  have  no  other  signification. 

5.  Before  proceeding  further,  an  inference  may  be  drawn  from  the  equation  (7.) 
which  will  be  useful  hereafter.  When  the  foregoing  values  of  r and  6 are  substituted 
in  the  right-hand  side  of  that  equation,  the  constant  e will  be  a multiplier  of  that 
side,  independently  of  any  limitation  of  the  orbit  of  w'.  Now  let,  if  possible,  e=0. 


h^C 

Then  1=—,  and  the  equation  (7.)  becomes 


dr'^ 


Since  the  relation  [//=h^C  shows  that  C must  be  positive,  it  follows  from  the  above 
equation  that  ^=0  and  ^=C,  or  that  the  orbit  of  w is  a circle  whose  radius  is  equal 


to  But  the  orbit  of  m cannot  be  exactly  a circle  independently  of  the  form  and 

magnitude  of  the  orbit  of  m',  unless  the  disturbing  force  be  indefinitely  small.  Con- 
sequently the  supposition  that  e=0  draws  with  it  the  inference  that  the  disturbing 
force  vanishes.  At  the  same  time,  the  supposition  that  the  disturbing  force  vanishes 
must  leave  e an  arbitrary  quantity,  because  on  this  supposition  the  problem  is  that  of 
elliptic  motion,  and  e is  the  eccentricity  of  the  orbit.  These  conditions  may  be  ana- 
lytically expressed  by  such  an  equation  as  e^=el-\-km',  k being  positive  and  of  fixed 
value,  and  being  arbitrary*. 


Second  Approximation. 

6.  The  first  step  towards  expressing  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  (7.)  as  a 
function  of  t,  is  to  expand  the  quantity  R in  a series  proceeding  according  to  cosines 
ot  multiples  of  the  arc  0 — Let 

R=Rq-{-R)  cos  (^— ^')-1-R2Cos  2(^— ^')-|-  &c. 

= Ro-l-2 . R^cos  s{6—d), 

the  values  of  .v  being  the  integers  1,  2,  3,  &c.  Also  let  r=a(l+M),  'r'= a' (1 -[-?/), 

* See  Note  (A)  at  the  end  of  the  paper. 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


529 


-\-v' and  for  the  sake  of  brevity  put  q for 
Then  m=— ecos/?+^— -^-cos  2yo,  u'=—e'cosp', 

0—6'=q-\-v — y'=^+2esin  jo— 2e'  sin  j»'. 

It  is  not  necessary  for  our  present  purpose  to  employ  expressions  containing  higher 
powers  of  e and  e'. 

7.  It  is  next  required  to  obtain  an  expression  for  dt  in  terms  of  t.  Since  each 
of  the  factors  Ro,  R„  R2,  &c.  is  a function  of  r,  r'  and  constants,  it  follows  that 

Also, if  As  represent  the  value  of  R^when  a is  substituted  for  rand  a'  for  r',  we  have  nearly 

„ . , dA^  , dA^  , , 

Rs=  A.+-^  a M 

* ' da  da' 

A , ,dA  , 

=As— ae^cos»— a e -^cos  » . 

da  ^ da'  ^ 

Again,  sin  .s(^— ^')=^  sin  r') 

— 5 sin^^  cos5(r  — y')-l-5cos  sq  sin  s{v—v'). 

Hence,  by  substituting  the  foregoing  value  of  v—d,  and  retaining  only  the  first  power 
of  e and  e',  it  will  be  found  that 

^ sin  ^')=^  sin^9+e^^(sin  (j9+'^5')H"Sin(p— 

— eV(sin  (/>' +55')  + sin  ( jo'  — sq)). 

By  supposing  5 to  have  all  negative  as  well  as  positive  integer  values,  this  equation 
may  be  more  briefly  written  thus : 

S 

s sin  s{6—&)  = 2 siB  i’^+e^^sin  {p-\-sq)  — eVsin  {p' •\-sq). 

Now  observing  that  .ssinA-^cosjo=.ssin  (jo+a^'),  because  a— + 1,  +2,  +3,  &c.,  the 
following  result  will  be  obtained  by  multiplying  the  foregoing  values  of  R,  and 
s sin  s{d—d): 

wi,  • sAs  . . / as  dAs\  . , 

R,s  sin  a(^— ^')=—  sin  sq-\-  je  sm  {p+sq) 


Consequently, 


— sin  (y +A^). 


2^'-^  J's.R.a sin .s(^— 


2s^  Ao  — as 


dK 

da 


*?  + 2-  —+s{n-ri)  « (/'+*'?) 
25®As  + <i's-^^ 

(?'+*?)■ 


530 


PROFESSOR  CHAELIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


Hence,  since  ^=--2ew^  sin p—5eV  sin  2j9,  the  following  equation  will  be  obtained 
to  terms  of  the  second  order  with  respect  to  e and  e' : — 

2 J - 2 -^1 « sm  (p+sj) 


+2. 


n-\-s{n 


■^)  e'sinsj 


A‘)  (2P+*?) 


+ 2. 


n'  + s[n 


2n^  / „ . , , dA.s\  , . , , 

^jee'  sin;?  cos  {p+sq). 


8.  Similarly  we  have  to  express  as  a function  of  t.  Since  ^ represents  the 


partial  differential  coefficient  of  R with  respect  to  r, 

dr 
dr  ' dt 


dr  dt 

the  values  of  s being  0,  1,2,  3,  &c 
But 


dr  ^ f^R^  dr  , ^ 

= coss{0-6), 


„ </As  dks  , , d’^Xs  , , . c?^A.,  a'V® 

R,=A,+^  au-\-^  a!u  -yrjTr'aduu! 


da’ 


dc?  ’ 2 ' dada’ 


da'^ 


Hence 

Also 


dRs  dr  du/dXg  d'^Xg  _ t?^A 
dr  dt  ^dt\da' 


da^ 


dado! 


a'u'^ . 


du 


■^=en  sin  p-\-e^n  sin  2p  nearly. 

Consequently  to  terms  of  the  second  order  with  respect  to  e and  e', 

«?R  dr  dXs  . 12/ dK  a d'^Xs\  . ^ , , d^X^  . , 

Also  to  the  first  power  of  e and  e', 

2 eos5(^  — ^')  = 2 cos sq  — 2 8\nsq.s{v—v') 

= 2 cos  sq-{-2es  (cos  (p+^^)  — cos  {p—sq)^ 

— 2e's  (cos  (p'+A';)  — cos  {p'  — sq)^ 

.s  being  equal  to  0,  1,  2,  3,  &c.  Or,  if5=  + 0,  +1,  +2,  &c.  on  the  right-hand  side  of 
the  equality, 

2 cos  s{0 — ^')  = cos  sq-\-2es  cos  {p-\-sq)  — 2e's  cos  {p' -\-sq). 

Hence,  placing  the  terms  corresponding  tO5=+0  apart  from  the  others,  and  obser- 
ving that  sin  {p-\-}>q)  cosp'  is  equivalent  to  sin;?  cos  {p-\-sq)  when  ^'=  + 1,  +2,  &c.,  it 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


531 


will  be  found  that 


rfR  dr  dA^  . , , dA^  d^An\  . ^ i i d'^A^  . , 

2 * = sinp+ae‘n  (^2  sm  2p-2aeaen  sinp  cosp 


I 'V  dAg  • / 1 \ 2 dAg  • 

+ 2 . aen  sin  {p-\-sq)  — Z. aems  sin  sq 

1 / 2 /I  1 \ dAg  a^e^n  d^Ag\  . 

+ ^.[ae‘n(l+s)-j^ ^ -jy  j sin  (2p+iy) 


^ / , dAg  , , d'^Ag\  . /IV 

-Z.[2aeens  -^-\-aa!een-^,J  sinp  cos  {p'+sq), 
the  values  of  s being  now  +1,  +2,  &c. 

9.  We  are  now  prepared  to  express  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  (7.)  in 
terms  of  t.  The  results  obtained  in  arts.  7 and  8 give, 

^ dH  Cd^  , dr 

*•*= 

„ dAp.  . „ / dA(.  d^Af\  . ^ , , , d^Ap.  . , 

— 2aen  sin/?  — ae  n f 2 — a \ sm  2p-\-2aea  en  ^^sin/?  cos/? 

V • / 1 N f A , dAg'\  V 2 . , \ f ^ , dAg  a%  d'^A,'\ 

-2.esm{p+sj)|^A.+««-5j-j-2.e-srn(2p+i»9)-|„-:isA.-l-««-*-^ 


— 2.e^(sin  (2/?+5^)— sin^^). 


'2s^Ag~as 


dAg'^ 

da 


\ dAg'] 


n + s{n — n’)  \ 

f 2//,^  / 

+ 2.ee' sinp  cos  (p'+sj)  .|^rf:^(^(2s’A,+ 

For  the  sake  of  brevity  of  expression  the  following  substitutions  will  he  made  : — 


, dAg  s dAg  , 


_ 2n^  . , dA 

Li  = fAg+an 

n — n * ' 


M: 


5n^ 


da 

dAg  ahi  d'^A 
2 da^ 


N: 


n 


n + s{n—n’) 
2rd- 


;^('2S’A.-«S^*)  + 
dA 


P =- 

nn' 


■ans 


dAg 
da 
dAg 


' o A , t dAg\  , dAg  , , d^Ag 

=S)(2^A,+as-^j  + 2a«i-^  + aan^ 


n'  + s{n 


After  multiplying  the  right-hand  side  of  the  foregoing  equation  by  dt,  integrating, 
and  substituting  in  the  equation  (7.),  the  following  will  be  the  result : — 

df-Tp^—  r -t-'— 

^ dAp.  , c/'dAp.  a d'^Ar\  ^ 2aa!edn  d^^Ap.  , i . i • - 

2ae-^cosp+ae^{-^-^  -^{ncospcosji+n^mpsmp) 


y Le  cos  {p  -I-  sq)  „ Me^cos  {2p+sq)  j_ 2 /cos  {2p  + sq)  cos  sq 
~r  • nMsfn  — n!)  "•  ’ 2n-\-  s{n  — rJ)  * * 1 9.n.-i-s(n  — 7)!\  stir).  — nl 


-2. 


n-\-s[n—rv 
'Ped 


\2re-|-s(??  — 7i')  s{n—n) 


''^(^n'  + s{n-n')y{^  COS/?  COS  (/?'-l-^^)  + (w'+5(?2-?2'))  siu/?  sin (/?'-+-«/)). 


4 A 


MDCCCLVI. 


532 


PROFESSOR  OH  ALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


Substituting-  Q for  the  sum  of  the  terms  on  the  right-hand  side  of  this  equation,  and 
neglecting  &c.,  vve  have 


rdr  Qdt  / . . \ 

~ V' 2/xr  — Cr^~  sin^^j  ^ ^ ” eCOS/>), 


because  by  the  first  approximation 


2]a 

r 


dt  dt 

dr'^  od-e^rd-  ( I + 4e  cos^) 


dt"^ 


Consequently 

nt-\-z  — nT  = COS' 


a — r 
ae 


2 ( 1 — 4e  cos  p), 


(8.) 


the  constants  a,  e,  i and  ts-  having  the  same  signification  as  heretofore*. 

10.  Before  proceeding  to  effect  the  integration  above  indicated,  it  will  be  right  to 
remove  certain  analytical  difficulties  presented  by  the  form  of  the  equation.  First,  it 
may  be  urged  that  as  Q contains  the  first  power  of  e,  the  coefficient  of  the  last  term 
might  become  infinite  if  e were  indefinitely  small,  and  the  equation  would  no  longer 
hold  good.  But  it  has  already  been  proved  (art.  5.)  that  e and  the  disturbing  force 


vanish  together,  from  which  it  follows  that  the  quantity,  jX  disturbing  force,  may 


approach  a finite  value  or  zero  as  e diminishes.  Again,  it  will  be  seen,  if  the  quantity 
to  be  integrated  be  put  under  the  form  that  the  factor  x,(0  becomes  infinite  each 

time  sin/?=0,  and  that  the  development  fails  for  the  values  of  t that  satisfy  this  equa- 
tion. But  it  is  well  known  that  an  analytical  circumstance  of  this  kind  will  not  prevent 
our  obtaining  in  the  final  analysis  the  correct  development  ofr,  provided  the  integration 
above  indicated  can  be  effected,  and  that  the  failure  must  admit  of  some  interpretation 
relative  to  the  proposed  problem.  Nov/  it  is  not  difficult  to  point  out  the  significance 

(l“~T 

of  the  failure  in  this  instance.  Let  us  suppose  that  cos“‘  Then  the  are  (p 


can  differ  from  only  by  a stnall  quantity,  and  we  have  exactly  r=a{l—e  cos  (p). 
Hence  as  the  quantities  a and  e are  absolutely  constant,  it  would  seem  that  the 
maximum  and  minimum  values  of  r are  «(l+e)  and  a(l—e)  in  every  revolution  of 
the  disturbed  body.  This  inference  is  manifestly  untrue,  and  the  reason  that  it  has 
not  been  legitimately  deduced  is,  that  the  above-mentioned  failure  occurs  when  r 
approaches  a maximum  or  minimum  value.  The  failure  has,  therefore,  an  important 
bearing  on  the  problem,  as  showing  that  the  maximum  and  minimum  values  of  the 
radius-vector  are  not  of  constant  magnitude.  I proceed  now  with  the  integration. 

* See  Note  (B)  at  the  end  of  the  paper. 


PROFESSOR  CHALfJS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


533 


11.  In  order  that  our  method  of  solution  may  be  successful,  the  differential, 

Qdt 


sin®j9 


(1  — 4e  eosp), 


must  admit  of  exact  integration  to  terms  inclusive  of  the  second  power  of  e.  Now  it 
will  be  seen  by  referring  to  the  expression  in  art.  9 for  which  Q was  substituted,  that 
this  integration  depends  on  the  following  integrals,  which  are  exact.  The  integra- 
tion can,  therefore,  be  effected. 


4e 


\ COS p)dt= — -| — 

] sin^jg  ^ ^ ' n sinjo  ' n 


cot;?-l-4e^ 


dt=  — 

J slidp 

n 

cos  ip + sq) 

dt  r 

] ^ n + s(n  — n!) 

sin®/)  J ■ 

cos  {p  + sq) 

* n-\-s{n — d) 

o 

S o 

11 

1 II  1 

cos(2/)4-s3’) 

■It  1 

nco&p  cos/)' -(-n'sinj9  sm/)' 

sin^p 


cos/)' 

sin/) 


^cos  (/) -|-s/)  cos(/)— dt 

pi-^s[n—7il)~'  n—s[n 

1 cos  sq 


' rd- — sin/) 


+ &C.] 


/cos(2/)  + sg)  cos(2?)-sg)\  dt  . o Xro  1 

^ '\2n-\-s[7i—'n!)'2n—s{n—'d)j&\\)dp  ^ ’ ’ 'J 

= -2-4j5^5|^(|P^+cos^?cot7>)  [^=  + 1,  ±2,  &c.] 


J^-( 


cos  (2/)-l-S/)  COS  S/ 


dt 


= 2. 


2 cos  [p  + sq) 

^{n  — 'n!){2n  + s{n  — 'd)'^  sin/) 


2n-\-s[n  — ri!)  s{n—n') J sin^/)’ 

r / , / , • ■ , , dt  „ cos(/y-t-5/) 

J 2 . (w  COS /)  COS  (y  4-^^)  + (w' - w ) ) SI n ps\n{p-\- sq) ) = — 2 sjn^  • 

Since  the  factors  which  multiply  tlie  two  last  differentials  are  different  according 
as  s is  positive  or  negative,  it  is  important  to  remark  that  these  integrals  have  been 
obtained  witliout  giving  to  s the  -f-  and  — signs.  The  factors  which  multiply  the 
three  preceding  differentials  do  not  contain  s. 

From  the  results  of  these  integrations  the  following  equation  is  readily  obtained  : 

^ Q,dt  ^ ^ \ f r ‘i  r 9 

J -4e cos p)  = 

, {ae  t?Ao  , ^ X , c?^Ao  \ 1 


2.; 


Le 


cos  sq 


id — s^{n — n')®  sin/) 

+ sq  sinp+cos  sq  cos;,)4^ 


4 A 2 


534 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


2Me^  / 2/i  . . , \ 1 

— — 27 TTa  1 h sm  sq  SID  »+cos  sq  cos  p hr::- 

An-^—s^{n—n'Y\s[n—n')  j r ^ i t Js\np 

2Ne^  cos(^  + s^) 

s{n  — 'n!){2n  + s{n  — Y)^  sinjp 

, 2aa!ee'n  d'^Ao  cosp' 

*'  n^  — 71'“^'  da  da'"  sin^ 

„ Ped  cos  (p'  + sq) 

~^^'n^  — (n'  + s(n—n'}y'  sinp 

Since  s=^l,  +2,  &c.,  the  following  equalities  are  true: 

2*COS  .^5  COS7?=  2.COS  + 
sin  S5' sin  JO  cos(jo  + S5') 


Hence  it  will  be  found  that  the  term  in  the  above  equation  which  involves  cos  (p-\-sq) 
is 

2 / 2Le^  (M  + N)e"  \cos(j(j  + sg) 


2 . / 

—n  V 6 


s(?i  + s(w  — 7*0)  s{2n  + s{n—n'))J  sin|j 
Consequently  the  equation  (8.)  becomes 
/ 3 (^Ao  1 d^Ao\  r 1 /-ii 7 ^ 


a dAa 


(Ye  (YAa 


2aa!dn  d^An 


L 2 

■ 2 • 2 s7  /\2  cos  sq  “i“  / • 2 • 

/r  — s'^in  — rt  \ 2 ' n — n 


+ 2- 


rr  — — n' 

Pd 


2Le 


. , (M  + N). 

s^n  + s(ra  — n'))  s(2n  + s(7*  — 7*0)  / \ P~T^2> 


'■  — {id  + s{n  — n')Y 


n 


cos  {p'-\-sq) 


12.  Before  advancing  to  the  next  operation,  our  attention  must  be  directed  to  the 
failure  of  the  term  containing  the  denominator  7Y—{rd-\-s{n  — n')^^  in  the  case  of  a==1. 

As  the  denominator  vanishes  for  this  value  of  s,  it  is  necessary  to  retrace  our  steps 
and  consider  that  case  separately.  Referring  to  the  equation  at  the  beginning  of 
art.  9,  it  will  be  seen  that  if  .9=1  and  Pi  represent  the  consequent  value  of  P,  the  last 
term  becomes  PjCe' sin/v  cos  (y+*y).  Also,  since 


p'  -\-q='rdt-\-^ — tzr'+wi+s  — idt — £'=jo+ro  — cj', 

we  have  I'sin/*  cos  (/>'+y)«/^=J  sin y?  cos 

(2y>4-ra'— w')— ^sin(w  — ot'). 

Thus  the  equation  (8.)  will  contain  the  term 

\ CP.eddtp  1 , , t . 

2.^j  'shi^  ( + ) - 2 sin  (*^7- J , 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


535 


which  will  give  rise  in  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  at  the  end  of  art.  II,  to 
the  terms 


2a^ens\np' 


Hence,  taking  these  terms  into  account,  and  putting  the  equation  under  the  form 


>-(V) + . . 


(9.) 


we  shall  have 

3 «?Ao  1 P^e' 


/ 6 aAo  , 

\'^na  da 


2n  da^  ‘ 


COS  {•or  — ■55-')  — •CT 


2a  dAo 


*”  J 2 2/  t\‘2 

“ — s (w — n')‘‘  2 


n da 


/7a  dAo  a^  d‘^Ao\ 


' ' n — n 


2. 


-2L 


L , M-fN  \ , 

-«'))+s(2«  + »(»-«0)/ 


W=^(cos(?jr  — sin  (z?  — zsr'))  cos/?^- 


2adn  d'^Ao 


^2_^/2 


cos  p i~\~  2 • 


It  may  be  remarked,  that  in  the  terms  containing  the  disturbing  force  we  have  put 
for  p and  p\  for  p',  which  is  plainly  allowable,  because  the  reasoning  might  be 
repeated  with  these  values  in  the  place  of  />  and  jo'.  Also,  it  appears  that  the  ex- 
pression for  which  W is  substituted  contains  a term  multiplied  by  /.  This  term 
might  be  included  in  p^,  but  it  is  more  convenient  to  retain  it  in  its  present  position. 
I proceed  to  develope  r in  terms  of  f by  means  of  the  equation  (9.). 

13.  This  equation  must  give  a result  of  this  form, 


H and  h representing  respectively  the  terms  which  contain,  and  those  which  do  not 
contain,  the  disturbing  force.  Hence,  omitting  &c.. 

Consequently,  putting  g for  the  last  term  within  the  brackets  of  equation  (9.), 

= cos  (p^+e\/l  -IP)  + sin  (g,  -j-  e\/ 1 - H^)  nearly. 

Hence  H=cos  (g^-l-c\/l  — H^) 

and  A=sin  -IT) . 

By  the  first  of  these  equations  H may  be  developed  in  a series  proceeding  according 
to  the  powers  of  e,  which  will  be  found  to  be  identical  in  form  with  the  analogous 


536 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


series  in  the  elliptic  theory.  In  the  other  equation  terms  involving  e"x  disturbing- 
force  are  to  be  omitted,  and  cosjo^  may  therefore  be  put  for  H.  Hence 

/z  = sin  ^mp){eh  c,oip,—g), 

or,  to  the  same  approximation  as  before, 

h=  -—g  sin p^{\-\-2e  cos Pi). 

Thus,  since  -=1— e(H+/i),  we  finally  obtain 

1 — eH  + ^(U  + e(V+2Ucos;?J  + e'W).  (10.) 


It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  process  sinpi  has  disappeared  from  the  denominator. 

14.  The  expressions  represented  by  U,  V and  W admit  of  simplifications  which 
will  render  them  more  convenient  for  substitution  in  the  equation  (10.).  In  art.  9 
we  have 

_ . dA.^ 

L — 7 A.4-  an  -r- 

71— rv  ® ' da 


N: 


2s^A,—as 


dAs\  dA, 

— as-^  1 -\-ans 


da  J 


da 


Hence 

also, 


'7i-\-s{n — n’) 

TVT  2A  I / s^n—n’)  ^ 

N= — ; — r — — 7t(  2n  A.-\-an{n—n)-:r~  I = — rA AL  ; 

n + s{n — 7i)\  * ' ^ ' da  j /i  + s(n  — vl) 

y.  It  A . f^As  (An  d’^As  _ , . cP-n  d'^Ag 

M = — 2- •^=L+— , A.— 


n—  n!  * 


71  — rJ  * 2 dd^ 


Using  these  values,  and  putting  s{n—n')  under  the  form  {s{7i—n')-\-n)—n,  it  will  be 
readily  found  that 

2 / 2L  , M + N 


I — n'  \ 


(^7i  + s{n—7i')')‘^—7 


2 V ra 


s(7i  + s{7i  — 7i')')~^s{^2n  + s{7i  — n'))i 

2iP  . dAs\  (s^ — s)(?i— ra')  — 3n  3?i^  a^a 

— n’  j’  7i  + s{7i — 7i')  ' ?i — 7i'  ^ 2 da^  J 


t?Ao 


Again,  since  A^  and-^  are  homogeneous  functions  of  a and  a'  of  the  dimensions  — 1 
and  —2  respectively,  by  a known  theorem  we  have 


. dAg  . dAg 


, d'^Ag dAg  d^Ag 

^ dada'  da  ^ da^ 


By  these  equations  the  differential  coefficients  of  A^  with  respect  to  a'  may  be  elimi- 
nated. Thus  by  substituting  in  the  expression  for  P in  art.  9,  and  reducing,  the 
following-  result  will  be  obtained  : — 


2n 


w'-l- «(?!—?/) " 

Hence,  putting  .9=1, 


^ • j ( 2.9^ — s)?iAg-]-(^{s'^ — 2s){n  — n')—  w/) a 


da 


d^Ag 

da^ 


ilA, 


Pi  = 2nA,  — 2/?a  -gg  — ad^n 


d^ 

da^ 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


537 


A I • T T 2a  dAn  ^ L 

Also,  since 

2cU  cos /),=  ^ cos  Pi—  2-„i!_j,S(„_„()sCOS  (p,+S9). 


Consequently,  by  putting  for  H its  known  expression  from  the  elliptic  theory,  sub- 

d'^A  d'^A 

■a  foi'  a -jznzn  and  making  use  of  the  foregoing  equalities,  with 


stituting 


.2^°. 

da 


dod-  dado!’ 

the  values  of  V and  W given  in  art.  12,  the  equation  (10.)  becomes  as  follows 


r 1 dA(.  ^ . 

a = + (cosp -COS  3;?^) 


r 3e  dA^  e d'^A^  , d / . dA,  „ d"^A,\  / . , x] 

+ -^J(cos(z^-?^)+2w^sm(z^r-tir)j|cos/y, 


dA,  , d^A, 
'Cd 


2n  . dAs 


1 n — w'***'  ' "da 

CO^  sq 


r 


+ 42. 


2n  , c?As 

’A.+'-aT 


n — n 


v?-—s\n  — n’f  “(n  + s(a— a'))2  — j 


—s){n  — n’)—3n 
n + s{n — n!) 


/ 2i 

\n  — 


2n  dA,\ 


(2s®— s)nAs+  ((s® — 2s){n—7^)—n''^ 


— (n'4-s(a— a'))^ 


a'  + s(?z  — n') 


3n  . 

/ ^s~ 

— TV  ® 

d^As 

2 dcd 

A dA. 

a®  d'^As  1 

2 dd^  J 

COS(/>,  + 6'9) 


In  this  equation  s has  the  values  +1,  +2,  +3,  &c.  in  the  terms  containing  cos 
and  cos(p^+>^^)j  and  the  values  +0,  — 1,  +2,  &c.  in  the  term  containing  cos(p'4-'^y)- 

On  comparing  this  expression  for  the  radius- vector  with  that  obtained  by  Laplace*, 
terms  will  be  found  in  the  latter  identical  with  all  the  above,  with  the  exception  of 
those  that  contain  e'  cosp^;  and  there  are  other  terms  to  which  none  of  the  above  cor- 
respond. These  are  only  differences  in  form,  arising  from  difference  in  the  processes 
of  integration.  It  is  chiefly  important  to  remark,  that  in  the  foregoing  expression 
for  r there  is  no  term  containing  ent  as  a factor.  The  signification  of  that  which 
contains  e'nt  will  be  presently  considered. 

15.  Having  obtained  the  development  of  the  radius -vector,  it  is  easy  to  infer  that 
of  the  longitude  (^)  from  the  equation  (6.),  viz. 


dA_ 

dt' 


A i 

r^J  d^ 


JdVi 

dt  in  terms  of  t,  which  has  been  already  found.  Putting 
r^+^r  for  r,  and  taking  Ir  to  represent  the  terms  multiplied  by  the  disturbing  force. 


* Mecanique  Cel.  part  1.  liv.  ii.  No.  50. 


538 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


we  shall  have  to  the  same  approximation  as  before, 


h 


dt' 


=-"-17; 


2Sr\  1 


h 2h  , 1 , , rt?R  , 

=y^—^{  1 -i-3e  cos  (1  -{-2e  cos  pj  | ; 


. d~z-\-\-^dt — 1 ( Ta  + 


2h 


1 rt?R 


H-~2  J ^ e cos  p^dt. 

The  development  of  the  term  ^-^dt  will  be  of  the  same  form  as  in  the  elliptic  theory. 
An  equation  obtained  in  art.  7 gives, 

. , 2s^As— 

1 ^ c?R  1 As  , 1 ^ da  / , X 


n-\-s[n — 7i’) 


dA., 


2s^As  + a's-^, 

+ ^2. — rT~7 rr  cos(p-{-SQ)  '■ 

’ 2a"  n +s[n — n)  1 ' 2/ 


JC 


2s2A,- 


as 


d^ 

da 


' (n  + s{n  — n')Y 
dA 


esin(p^+.sry) 


2s\As  + a'5-^, 

+gg  ^ ■>..! si"  (p:+»?)- 


2a‘^  ’(a'  + s(a — a'))^ 

Since  the  relations  of  the  constants  h,  a,  n and  e are  expressed  in  our  problem  in  the 
same  manner  as  in  the  elliptic  theory,  we  have  h=nd^\/\-~e~.  Hence  we  may  put 
na^  for  h in  the  terms  involving  the  disturbing  force.  Consequently,  omitting  e%  &c.. 


j^8recos/>,rf<=J^‘(-^ 


T 


■^2 


da 


da  2a  — s^[n — n’) 


cos  sq^e  co^  pflt 


/\2 


6e  </Ao 


3ne 


V a — lu  da  ' / I V 

2 "T~sin  p, — 27 7“ — rw2 — s — 07 {P,-Tsq). 

arr  da  « (a  + s(a — n))  — s^{n — dp  ^ 

Also,  to  the  same  approximation, 

^ dt^e  cos  CO'S:  sq  cos  p^dt 

A, 


f(!«j  V9  "V 


— — 2-- 


7^sin(p,+.sg). 


In  all  these  equations  the  values  of  s are  +I5  +2,  +3,  &c. 

Putting  now,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  D for  2Ai— 2a^J— and  P,  G and  H for 

(XU/  (XU 


the  coefficients  of  cos  sq,  cos  cos  {p\-^sq)  respectively  in  the  expression  for 

and  observing  that 


J tdtcosp-- 


tsmp^  cospj 


^2  » 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


539 


the  following  equation  is  readily  obtained  : 

V j.  2 dAo  . , \ Se  dAo  , e d'^Ao  De' 

}-^orat= t+ 

J na  da  ' 


{3e  «?Ao  , e 
an^  da 


da^  4a^n^ 


COS 


(ar— zy')|sin 


De' 

(/>:+?) 

the  value  ^=1  being  excluded  from  the  last  term. 

Substituting  the  results  of  these  integrations,  the  following  will  be  found  to  be  the 
value  of  6 : 

. , / , 2 </Ao\  , 5e2  . ^ , e3/13  . „ . \ 

«=5+  («+j;-s-;<+T  ^P‘+1  [J  ®'"  3;>,-sin  p, J 

, , 3e  dAo  e d^Ao  , D e' / , , ,_\'l  . 

dAi 


2a^n^ 


, 1 V / 2wF  _A,  \ . 

~^2a^  n')  s(w— 

2 [3«+|  ("-^C”-"'))]  F-^ir -2«g}  sin  (ft+i?) 


—2.- 

o-«'  / 


ra'  + s(: 


1 / 

(m— w') 


(2s®— s)  As— as 


da 


-l-2wHjsin  {'p',-\-sq), 


2(^«'  + s(re— «')) 

where  s has  the  values  +0,  —1,  +2,  +3,  &c.  in  the  last  term,  and  the  values  +1, 
+2,  +3,  &c.  in  the  other  terms,  and  A_s  has  the  same  value  as  A,. 

16.  The  expressions  for  r and  6 obtained  in  arts.  14  and  15  may  be  put  under 
forms  more  compact,  and  more  convenient  for  drawing  inferences,  by  making  the 
following  substitutions : 

1 dAo 

A=“-S5-*+T 

e «?®Ao  De7 


E=e-i-,  ^“-^sin  (®-b') 


4a®  </a® 

_ / 1 d'^Ap 

^ yaa  da  "^2a*  c?a®  ' 


Bd 


2a*  c?a®  ' 4aa®a 


cos( 


nr  — ra 


o 

N=?^+“  "^5  so  that  je>^=N/+£— n 

^f=-2rfa  ■^+8A» 
d 


e'g-. 


2a®a® 


+^)’ 


4 B 


MDCCCLVI 


540  PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 

Thus  vre  shall  have, 

(l(^ 

r=A— «(E— cos  (NT+s  — D) — ^ cos  2(N^-l-2  — n)+&c. 
-i2.Fcosi-(NT+2-N'^-£') 

2.G  cos{A’(N^-i-£ — — a')-|-N^-l-s— ri} 

+^2.IIcos{(6--l)(NT-l-£-N7-a')+N^+s-n'}. 

And  putting  F',  G',  IT  for  the  coefficients  of  sin^^',  sin  and  sin  in 

the  development  of  d,  we  have 

5 ^ 

^ = a+N^+2(E  + ^)  sin  (N^+s  — 11)+-^  sin  2(NT+e  — n)+&c. 

+ e'g  sin(N^+£  — 11')+;^  2 . F'sin  .v(N^+£~N'^ — a') 

2 . G'sin  {^(N^+a — N'^— a')+N^-f-a  — 11} 

2 . H'sin  — l)(N^-l-a — N'^— a')+N^-}-a  — H'}. 

17.  I proceed  next  to  draw  some  conclusions  from  these  values  of  the  radius- 
vector  and  longitude. 

(1)  The  quantity  A is  the  non-periodic  part  of  the  radius-vector,  and  being  equal 

X d a 

toa  — is  a function  of  given  quantities  and  arbitrary  constants.  A is, 

therefore,  invariable.  It  may  also  be  remarked,  that  as  the  value  of  r may  be  put  to 
the  same  approximation  under  the  form 

" ( ' -i  - v+ ^ 

1 dh. 

the  quantity  ^ is  approximately  the  mean  distance.  Thus,  so  far  as  this 

approximation  shows,  the  mean  distance  is  invariable. 

(2)  The  mean  motion  is  necessarily  the  factor  of  the  non-periodic  term  Nf  in  the 
development  of  6.  Hence 

n/r  • -IWT  .2  «?Ao 

Mean  motion  =N=w4 — -1— 

' na  da 

For  the  reason  just  adduced,  the  mean  motion  is  thus  proved  to  be  invariable. 

As  the  two  quantities  A and  N are  functions  of  a and  e,  they  are  by  consequence 
functions  of  the  arbitrary  constants  h and  C.  Hence,  if  the  values  of  the  non- 
periodic part  of  the  radius-vector  and  the  mean  motion  be  deduced  from  observa- 
tion, the  constants  a and  e,  or  h and  C,  become  known. 

(3)  The  quantity  a,  being  simply  an  arbitrary  constant,  is  invariable.  Analogous 
considerations  apply  to  the  mean  distance,  mean  motion,  and  the  epoch  (a')  of  the 
orbit  of  m!  as  disturbed  by  m. 


PROFESSOR  CHAELIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


541 


(4)  The  expressions  for  E and  EE  show  that  these  quantities  contain  terms  which 
have  t for  a factor,  and  may  therefore  increase  indefinitely.  This  circumstance  creates 
no  difficulty  with  regard  to  IT,  which  is  always  part  of  a circular  arc  affected  by  a 
sine  or  cosine.  But  as  E appears  as  a coefficient,  it  might  seem  that  the  develop- 
ments of  r and  6 contain  terms  which  admit  of  indefinite  increase.  It  must,  how- 
ever, be  observed,  that  according  to  the  remark  made  at  the  end  of  art.  12,  the 
function  that  has  given  rise  to  these  terms  is  really  affected  by  a cosine,  and  that 
they  have  their  origin  in  the  development  of  that  function  in  terms  arranged  accord- 
ing to  the  disturbing  force. 

The  following  considerations  will  enable  us  to  obtain,  at  least  approximately,  the 
periodic  functions  of  which  11  and  E are  partial  developments.  Whatever  functions 
the  complete  values  of  IT  and  E are  of  t,  they  may  be  expanded  in  series  of  the  form 
the  two  first  terms  of  which  are  already  determined.  Hence 


£?n  „ , „ , , 0 


:^'_|-2y74-&C. 


Let  t be  indefinitely  small.  Then  substituting 

1 

2n  da^ 


B for-- 

na  da 

dn 


7E 


we  shall  have  strictly  the  values  of  and  for  the  epoch  at  which  t commences 


dt 


VIZ. 


m 

dt 


=B 


De' 


COS(to'- — raj 


De' 

— 2 sin  — '^')- 

Anea‘^  ' ' 

dU 


Now  if  t commenced  at  a different  epoch,  we  should  obtain  for  and  ^ the  same 

expressions  as  those  above,  but  different  in  value,  because  by  hypothesis  these 
differential  coeffieients  vary  with  the  time.  The  changes  of  value,  which  in  actual 
cases  take  place  very  slowly,  are  due  to  changes  in  the  eccentricities,  and  in  the  lon- 
gitudes of  the  apses,  of  the  two  orbits,  and  will  be  very  approximately  taken  into 
account  by  substituting  in  the  above  equations  for  e,  e',  ra  and  ra-',  the  variable  quan- 

dYV  7E' 

titles  E,  E',  n and  11'.  • Like  considerations  apply  to  the  values  of  -yr  and  — . Thus 


JiX\^  llo  I VJ  Ci  t I/IJV/  VCtlUCo  Cillvi 

we  shall  have  four  differential  equations,  by  the  simultaneous  integration  of  which  the 
four  quantities  maybe  obtained  as  periodic  functions  of  the  time.  The  arbitrary 
constants  introduced  by  the  integration  are  determined  by  the  known  values  of  the 
functions  when  ^=0.  These  periodic  functions  are  to  be  substituted  for  E,  E',  11 
and  II',  wherever  these  quantities  occur  in  the  developments  of  r,  r',  6 and  & . The 
four  equations  just  mentioned  are  identical  with  those  obtained  by  the  method  of  the 
variation  of  parameters  for  determining  the  eccentricities  and  longitudes  of  the 
apses.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  in  both  methods  the  changes  of  the  eccentricities 
and  of  the  longitudes  of  the  apses  which  are  due  to  the  disturbances,  are  taken  into 
account  in  calculating  the  changes  themselves,  so  that  the  approximation  does  in 

4 B 2 


542 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


fact  extend  beyond  the  first  power  of  the  disturbing  force,  so  far  as  it  relates  to  these 
two  elements. 

If  the  approximation  be  made  to  include  generally  the  square  of  the  disturbing 
force,  and  the  values  of  r and  & in  art.  16,  and  the  like  values  of  r'  and  be  used 
for  that  purpose,  terms  may  arise  containing  coefficients  which  have  f for  a factor. 
These  terms  may  be  converted  into  periodic  functions  of  the  time  by  the  application 
of  the  principles  exhibited  above,  but  in  that  case  the  differential  equations  by  which 
E,  E',  n and  11'  are  found  will  be  of  the  second  order,  and  the  periodic  functions 
will  be  more  completely  determined. 

The  inferences  (1),  (2),  (3)  and  (4)  respecting  the  secular  variations  of  the  elements, 
although  obtained  in  a manner  quite  new,  agree  exactly  with  those  deduced  from 
previous  solutions  of  the  same  problem. 

18.  Having  now  obtained  the  developments  of  r,  r'  and  inclusive  of  both 
periodic  and  secular  inequalities,  to  an  extent  which  is  sufficient  for  most  of  the  appli- 
cations of  the  Planetary  Theory,  I shall  reserve  for  a future  opportunity  the  investi- 
gation of  the  inequalities  in  latitude,  and  shall  then  take  occasion  to  show  in  detail 
how  this  method  adapts  itself  to  the  determination  of  the  motions  of  the  moon.  At 
present  I propose,  in  concluding  this  memoir,  to  make  a few  general  remarks  on  the 
Problem  of  Three  Bodies. 

It  has  been  already  observed,  that  the  solution  here  adopted  introduces  no  terms 
containing  ent  in  the  coeflScients.  These  terms  are  to  be  distinguished  from  those 
whose  coefficients  contain  which,  as  we  have  seen,  have  reference  to  secular 
variations  of  the  eccentricity  and  of  the  motion  of  the  apse,  and  would  vanish  with 
the  eccentricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  disturbing  body.  The  former  relate  to  the  motion 
itself  of  the  apse,  and  are  not  peculiar  to  the  Problem  of  Three  Bodies,  occurring  in 
fact  in  cases  where  the  force  is  directed  to  a fixed  centre.  To  illustrate  this  remark. 


let  us  suppose  the  force  directed  to  a fixed  centre  to  be  Then,  the  differen- 

tial equation  for  finding  the  orbit  being 


d^‘- 

r 


1 [X,  ixJr^ 

r 


:0, 


let  this  equation  be  integrated  by  successive  approximations,  first  neglecting  the  last 
term,  and  then  substituting  in  that  term  the  value  of  r given  by  the  first  approxima- 
tion. By  this  process  a term  containing  t in  the  coefficient  will  be  introduced,  and 
the  motion  of  the  apse  will  fail  of  being  ascertained.  But  if,  instead  of  this  process, 

the  equation  dr’^  ‘lix  , , , ^ 

^^2+^2-  ^ -PC— 0 


be  obtained,  and  its  approximate  integration  be  conducted  according  to  the  powers 
of  (jJ,  no  such  term  will  arise,  and  the  motion  of  the  apse  will  be  determined.  The 
latter  process  is  exactly  analogous  to  steps  employed  in  the  foregoing  solution  of  the 


PROFESSOR  CHALr.IS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


543 


Problem  of  Three  Bodies.  The  difference  of  the  analytical  results  of  the  two  methods 
may  be  thus  explained.  The  equation  obtained  by  putting  ^ = 0,  viz.  h^—2^r-\-Qr^ 


—ljj'r‘^—0,  may  be  shown  to  have  three  positive  roots  if  C be  positive,  so  that  analyti- 
cally there  are  three  apsidal  distances.  The  first  method,  by  embracing  the  third 
apsidal  distance  (no  step  being  taken  to  exclude  it),  applies  to  the  other  two  only  in 
an  expanded  form,  the  expansion  giving  rise  to  terms  containing  the  factor  t.  The 
other,  by  commencing  the  approximation  with  the  equation 


|^+^-^+c=o, 


restricts  the  application  of  the  solution  to  the  part  of  the  curve  which  has  two  apsidal 
distances,  and  accordingly  finds  the  function  of  t which  in  the  other  method  is  ex- 
panded. The  method  of  the  variation  of  parameters,  by  the  very  nature  of  the  pro- 
cess, restricts  the  analysis  in  the  Problem  of  Three  Bodies  to  two  apsidal  distances, 
and  on  this  account  is  successful  in  determining  the  motion  of  the  apse. 

Again,  I think  it  important  to  remark  that  the  solution  of  the  Problem  of  Three 
Bodies,  as  here  proposed,  applies  equally  to  the  Lunar  and  the  Planetary  Theories. 
The  Problem  of  the  Moon’s  motion  does  not  differ  in  the  analytical  treatment  it 
requires,  from  that  of  the  motion  of  a Planet.  In  the  one  case  as  well  as  the  other  the 
approximation  ought  to  be  conducted  primarily  according  to  the  disturbing  force, 
which  is  assumed  to  be  small  compared  to  the  principal  force,  and  secondarily 
according  to  the  form  of  the  orbit,  which  is  assumed  to  differ  little  from  a circle.  It 
is  not  necessary  to  take  account  of  the  ratio  of  w'  to  n in  arranging  the  developments, 
but  only  in  estimating  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  the  terms  resulting  from 
the  integrations.  The  possibility  of  effecting  the  integrations  is  the  proper  proof  of 
the  correctness  of  the  process,  and  of  its  being  adequate  to  give  the  development  which 
is  alone  appropriate  to  the  question,  and  which  must  result  from  every  process  that 
is  in  all  respects  legitimate.  After  making  any  assumption  respecting  the  analytical 
form  of  the  solution  (as  in  the  Lunar  Theory  is  done  by  introducing  the  constants  c 
and  g),  there  can  be  no  certainty  that  the  solution  will  not  at  some  stage  become 
empirical.  Probably  the  reason  that  the  process  which  succeeds  for  a planet  has  not 
been  applied  to  the  moon,  is  the  difficulty  of  extending  it  to  the  square  and  higher 
powers  of  the  disturbance  (which  in  the  Lunar  Theory  it  is  necessary  to  take  into 
account),  and  of  embracing  in  the  same  operation  both  the  periodic  and  the  secular 
inequalities.  The  method  I have  exhibited  in  this  communication  appears  to  meet 
this  difficulty  by  evolving  simultaneously  both  kinds  of  inequalities  by  a process 
which  obviously  may  be  extended  to  higher  powers  of  the  eccentricity  and  the  dis- 
turbing force.  Such  an  extension  would  require  nothing  more  than  great  labour  in 
executing  the  analytical  details. 


544 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


NOTE  (A). 


Received  July  7,  1856. 


It  has  been  shown  in  art.  5 from  a 'priori  considerations,  that  if  the  constant  e=0, 
the  disturbing  force  vanishes,  and  if  the  disturbing  force  vanishes,  e is  arbitrary. 
Hence  it  appears  from  the  development  of  the  radius-vector  in  art.  16,  that  the  eccen- 
tricity of  the  disturbed  orbit  and  the  disturbing  force  are  related  in  such  a manner 
that  if  the  eccentricity  =0,  the  disturbing  force  vanishes,  and  if  the  disturbing 
force  =0,  the  eccentricity  remains  arbitrary.  The  particular  relation  which  satisfies 
these  conditions  ought  plainly  to  result  from  the  solution  of  the  Problem  of  Three 
Bodies,  and  it  may,  therefore,  be  worth  while  to  inquire  how  far  such  a result  can 
be  deduced  from  the  integrations  effected  in  the  foregoing  approximate  solution. 
Now  the  expressions  for  the  variations  of  the  eccentricity  and  of  the  longitude  of 
the  apse  obtained  in  art.  17,  are  identical  with  those  given  by  the  method  of  the 
variation  of  parameters.  Hence  for  the  present  purpose  I may  make  use  of  the 
deductions  from  those  expressions  which  are  usually  given  in  treatises  on  the  Plane- 
tary Theory.  Referring  to  Pratt’s  ‘ Mechanical  Philosophy,’  art.  385,  we  have  the 


equations, 

D^=:  — (2BD-t-CD')  . . . (1.)  E/i=~(2BE-4-CE')  . . . . (2.) 

j/,  fj, 

D'g=— (2B'D'-fCD)  . . . (3.)  E'A=— (2B'E'-hCE)  . . . (4.) 

ft  ft 

e7=D^-l-E®-l-2DE  cos  /}• (5.) 

6''®=D'^-1-E'^-1-2D'E' cos  {(g-— /} (6.) 


g or  A = 


nam'B  + n'a'mB' 


{ {nam'B  — n'a’tnB'y-^nn'aa'mm'C^}^ 


(7.) 


In  these  equations  B,  B'  and  C are  known  quantities  independent  of  the  eccentricities 
and  longitudes  of  the  apses,  and  e are  respectively  the  eccentricities  of  the  orbits 
of  the  disturbed  and  disturbing  bodies,  k and  / are  arbitrary  quantities,  and  D,  D',  E,  E' 
are  also  arbitrary,  excepting  so  far  as  they  are  connected  by  the  first  four  equations. 
Let,  if  possible,  e^  = 0 independently  of  the  time.  Then  it  follows  from  (5.)  that  D = 0 
and  E=0.  Hence,  since  e[  does  not  consequently  vanish,  it  appears  by  (6.)  that  D' 
and  E'  do  not  on  this  supposition  both  vanish,  and,  therefore,  by  the  first  or  second 
equation,  that  m'=0.  Again,  let  m!=0.  Then  by  (1.)  and  (2.),  Dg=0  and  E/i  = 0, 
and  by  (7.),  one  of  the  quantities  g and  h vanishes.  Hence  one  of  the  quantities  D 
and  E vanishes  and  the  other  remains  arbitrary.  Hence  also  is  arbitrary.  These 
results  confirm  the  reasoning  in  art.  5. 


PROFESSOR  CHALLIS  ON  THE  PROBLEM  OF  THREE  BODIES. 


545 


NOTE  (B). 

The  following  method  of  obtaining  an  expression  for  dt  equivalent  to  that  in 
art.  9,  was  communicated  to  me  by  Sir  John  Lubbock  after  the  reading  of  my  Paper, 
and  appears  to  be  well  worthy  of  being  recorded  in  connection  with  the  process  of 
solution  I have  adopted,  as,  on  a resumption  of  the  reasoning  for  the  purpose  of 
carrying  the  approximation  farther,  it  might  considerably  abbreviate  the  analytical 
details. 

\i  dt=^^-rdv,  and  v be  taken  for  the  independent  variable,  the  equation 


becomes 

and  if 


ar 


r=a  — ae  cos  v + cos 


and 

Hence 


t>=cos' 


1 

L 

1 cos  V 

ae  ' 

^ ae 

uj  Q sin  vdv  — sin  Q cos  vdv, 
Jq  sin  cos  vdv^- 


dt 


fa  ^ fa  '>'dT  + r sin  vdvf Q sin  vdv  + r cos  vdv f Q,  cos  vdv 

V ft  ^ gjjj  ^y’Q  cos 


Neglecting  powers  of  Q above  the  first, 


dt 


fa  J rdr 

^ l(«V-(a- 


-.4 


rdv  (sin  vj' Q,  sin  vdv  + cosvJ'(3i  cos  vdv) 


-VH 

-VH: 


(a  — r)  {a^e^— {a— rYY 

r[a  — r)dr[co^  vJ'Ql  sin  sin  vJ'Ql  cos  Wv)'| 

{aV-(a-r)2)§  / 

Q sin  yc?y4“Cos  v i Q cos  vdv) 


f rdr  1 

1 rdv 

[a  — rY)^ 

' ae  sin  v 

r cos  idv  , — sin  z;fQ  cos  vdv) 

ae  sin^^t;  ^ J J 


rdr 


2o2. 


a^e 


■ (a— r)^)- 


ae  sin 


^^iQsinfG^ylj 

iin'^wj  ^ j 


which  equation  is  true  to  all  powers  of  the  eccentricities  and  inclinations,  v being  the 
eccentric  anomaly.” 


L 547  ] 


XXVI.  Researches  on  the  Foraminifera. 

By  William  B.  Carpenter,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.  ^c. 


Received  June  19, — Read  June  19,  1856, 

PART  II. 

ON  THE  GENERA  ORBICULINA,  ALVEOLINA,  CYCLOCLYPEUS  AND  HETEROSTEGINA. 

Genus  Orbiculina. 

78.  History.  —The  interesting  group  of  organisms  belonging  to  this  type  seems  to 
have  early  attracted  notice,  probably  on  account  of  the  great  abundance  in  which  it 
presents  itself  on  the  sands  of  many  of  the  West  Indian  shores.  Three  species  are 
described  and  figured  by  Fichtel  and  Moll*,  under  the  names  o(  Nautilus  orbiculus, 
N.  angulatus,  and  N.  aduncus.  Lamarck,  however,  in  his  first  systematic  treatise-l-, 
separated  them  fi’om  Nautilus,  and  raised  them  to  the  rank  of  an  independent  genus, 
to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Orbiculina ; and  he  also  changed  two  of  the  specific 
names,  the  three  standing  respectively  as  O.  numismalis,  O.  angulata,  and  O.  uncinata. 
By  Denys  de  Montfort:|:,  these  species  were  raised  to  the  rank  of  independent 
genera,  under  the  names  of  Helenis,  Archaias,  and  Ilotes ; but  these  genera  have  not 
been  adopted  by  any  other  systematist.  M.  d’Orbigny§,  in  his  first  classification  of 
the  Foraminifera,  not  merely  adopted  Lamarck’s  generic  designation,  but  affirmed 
that  the  three  reputed  species  were  really  nothing  else  than  one  and  the  same  organism 
in  different  phases  of  growth,  O.  angulata  being  the  youngest,  O.  numismalis  the 
nex^  in  age,  and  O.  uncinata  the  adult.  He  arrived  at  this  result,  of  the  truth  of 
which  I am  myself  well  assured,  by  the  comparison  of  a great  number  of  specimens, 
— a process  which  it  would  have  been  well  for  science  if  he  had  more  constantly 
adopted.  The  name  of  the  adult  form  should  of  course  stand  as  that  of  the  species  ; 
but  the  organism  in  question  is  more  commonly  known  under  the  designation  Orbi- 
culina adunca,  which  seems  to  have  been  conferred  upon  it  by  M.  Deslongschamps[|. 

79.  A considerable  number  of  figures  of  this  species  are  given  by  M.  d’Orbigny 
in  his  treatise  on  the  Foraminifera  of  Cuba,  which  forms  part  of  the  great  work  of 
M.  Ramon  de  la  Sagra  on  the  Natural  History,  &c.  of  that  island^.  These  figures, 

* Testacea  Microscopica,  Vindob.  1798.  f Systeme  des  Animaux  sans  Vertebres.  Paris,  1801. 

I Conchyliologie  Systematiqne.  Paris,  1808. 

§ Tableau  Methodique  de  la  Classe  des  Cepbalopodes.  Paris,  1825. 

II  Encyclopedie  Methodique,  Zoophytes.  Paris,  1824. 

^ Histoire  Physique,  Politique,  et  Naturelle  de  Pile  de  Cuba.  Paris,  1840. 

4 c 


mdccclvi. 


548 


I)R.  carpenter's  researches  on  the  FORAMINIFERA. 


however,  serve  only  to  give  a general  idea  of  the  diversities  of  external  conformation 
which  had  presented  themselves  to  him  ; and  notwithstanding  their  number  and 
variety,  they  do  not  include  some  of  the  most  important  among  the  protean  shapes  of 
these  bodies,  nor  do  they  throw  any  light  upon  their  internal  structure. 

80.  The  memoir  of  Professor  Ehrenberg"^,  in  which  his  group  of  Bryozoa  was 
originally  constituted,  contains  the  first  recognition  of  the  relationship  between 
Orhitolites  (5[  4)  and  Orbiculina  ; of  which  the  first  had  previously  been  ranked 
among  the  Zoophytes ; while  the  second  (until  the  Rhizopodous  nature  of  the  whole 
group  of  Foraminifera  was  made  known  by  M.  Dujardin  in  1835)  had  been  associated 
with  the  Cephalopods.  Professor  Ehrenberg's  description  and  figures  of  OrhicuUna, 
however,  being  just  as  inaccurate  as  I have  shown  those  of  Orhitolites  to  be  (partly, 
it  seems  likely,  through  his  unacquaintance  with  the  mode  of  making  thin  sections), 
there  is  no  occasion  for  me  to  make  further  reference  to  them. 

81.  The  excellent  memoir  of  Professor  WiLLiAMsoN-j-  “ On  the  minute  structure  of 
the  Calcareous  Shells  of  some  recent  species  of  Foraminifera,”  contains  the  first 
approach  to  a correct  description  of  the  internal  conformation  of  Orbiculina',  and 
the  fact  was  fully  recognized  by  him,  that  in  advanced  age,  when  the  spiral  type  of 
growth  has  given  place  to  the  cyclical,  there  is  no  other  difference  between  the 
structure  of  Orhitolites  and  that  of  Orbiculina,  than  that  which  arises  from  the  dis- 
similarity of  their  earlier  mode  of  development.  Although  I am  satisfied  that,  as  to 
one  or  two  points  of  minute  structure.  Professor  Williamson  has  fallen  into  error,  I 
am  disposed  to  attribute  this  to  the  want  of  a sufficient  number  of  well-preserved 
specimens  for  examination  ; and  for  having  it  in  my  power  to  correct  and  extend  his 
description,  I am  chiefly  indebted  to  Mr.  Hugh  Cuming,  the  specimens  of  this  type 
included  in  his  Philippine  collection  being  remarkable  both  for  their  high  develop- 
ment, and  for  their  very  beautiful  state  of  preservation. 

82.  The  investigations  of  Professor  Williamson  are  entirely  unnoticed  by  M. 
d’Orbigny  in  his  latest  classification  of  the  Foraminifera Orbiculina  being  ranked 
in  the  Qv(\ev  Helicostegues,  and  being  defined  as  follows, — “ Coquille  nautiloide,  eom- 
primee,  formee  de  loges  divis^es  interieurement  en  compartiments  reguliers,  percees 
de  nombreuses  ouvertures  en  lignes  longitudinales  a I’enroulement  special — whilst 
Orhitolites  (his  definition  of  which  has  been  already  cited,  ^ 5)  is  placed  in  the  order 
Cyclostegues.  The  separation  of  the  two  genera  by  so  wide  an  interval,  is  grounded, 
therefore,  on  the  assumption  that  the  type  of  growth  in  OrhicuUna  is  spiral,  whilst 
that  of  Orhitolites  is  cyclical.  I have  already  shown  that  this  assumption  is  incorrect 
as  regards  Orhitolites,  the  early  plan  of  whose  growth  is  frequently  spiral  (^  54);  and 
I shall  presently  show  that  it  is  equally  incorrect  as  regards  Orbiculina,  whose  later 
plan  of  growth  is  typically  cyclical.  And  after  having  closely  compared  these  and 

* Transactions  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Berlin*  1839. 

t Transactions  of  the  Microscopical  Society,  1st  series,  vol.  iii.  p.  120. 

X Cours  Elementaire  de  Paleontologie,  tom.  ii.  Paris,  1852. 


GENUS  ORBICULINA  : — ORGANIZATION. 


549 


Other  types,  we  shall  be  in  a position  to  inquire  what  value  is  really  to  be  attached 
to  such  a character  as  a basis  for  classification. 

83.  Organization. — Among-  the  diversified  forms  that  are  presented  by  the  species 
before  us,  it  is  of  course  necessary  to  select  some  particular  type  as  that  with  which 
others  may  be  compared;  and  this  I consider  to  be  the  form  delineated  in  Plate  XXVIII. 
fig.  5 ; since  by  far  the  larger  proportion  of  the  very  numerous  specimens  I have 
examined  show  such  a degree  of  approximation  to  it,  that  their  differences  may  fairly 
be  set-down  to  the  account  of  incomplete  development.  The  general  aspect  of  a 
typical  Orhiculina,  then,  differs  but  little  from  that  of  OrbitoUtes,  except  in  the  pro- 
minence of  its  nucleus,  and  in  the  peculiar  spiral  disposition  of  the  bands  by  which 
the  surface  of  the  nucleus  is  marked.  The  species  never  attains,  so  far  as  I am 
aware,  the  dimensions  of  OrbitoUtes ; the  diameter  of  the  largest  recent  disk  in  my 
possession  (one  of  Mr.  Cuming’s  Philippine  specimens)  being  ‘20  of  an  inch  ; whilst 
of  the  specimens  which  I have  seen  from  the  West  Indian  and  ^gean  seas,  none 
exceed  -12  of  an  inch.  Mr.  Carter*,  however,  describes  under  the  name  of  Orbito- 
lites  Malabaricus  a fossil  OrbicuUna  90),  whose  specific  identity  with  the  type 
before  us  I see  no  reason  to  doubt,  as  attaining  a diameter  of  from  7 to  8 lines.  The 
thickness  of  the  disk  is  usually  less  in  proportion  to  its  diameter,  than  it  is  in  Orbi- 
toUtes; but  this  is  by  no  means  a constant  difference,  depending  as  it  does  merely  on 
the  relative  increase  of  the  columns  of  sarcode  in  the  vertical  direction,  as  compared 
with  the  extension  of  the  surface  by  the  addition  of  new  annular  bands. 

84.  On  more  closely  comparing  the  marginal  portion  of  such  a disk  with  the  cor- 
responding portion  of  one  of  those  forms  of  OrbitoUtes,  in  which  the  concentric  annu- 
lation  is  strongly  marked  externally  whilst  the  transverse  divisions  of  each  annulus 
are  scarcely  indicated  (5[ 49),  no  essential  difference  is  perceptible  between  them; 
and  although  these  transverse  divisions  are  usually  but  very  faintly  indicated  in 
OrbicuUna  (Plate  XXVIII.  figs.  13,  14),  yet  they  are  sometimes  very  obvious,  as  is 
seen  in  figs.  15,  16.  In  the  fossil  OrbicuUna  just  adverted  to,  the  surface-markings 
(figs.  21,  22)  are  entire!}^  conformable  to  the  ordinary  type  of  OrbitoUtes.  The 
margin  itself  exhibits  one  or  more  ranges  of  pores  (figs.  6,  7,  18,  19)  arranged  after 
precisely  the  same  fashion  as  those  of  OrbitoUtes:  these  ranges  are  more  numerous 
in  the  fossil  than  in  the  recent  forms  of  this  type. 

85.  The  internal  structure  of  OrbicuUna  presents  such  a general  conformity  to  that 
of  OrbitoUtes,  that  it  will  not  be  requisite  here  to  do  more  than  specify  the  points  of 
agreement  and  of  difference.  The  general  aspect  of  the  horizontal  section  of  such  a 
typical  specimen  as  is  shown  in  Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  1 1,  does  not  differ  from  that  of  a 
corresponding  section  of  OrbitoUtes  in  any  other  essential  particular  than  the  dispo- 
sition of  the  central  portion,  in  which  the  successive  additions  to  the  first-formed 
chambers  are  so  made  as  to  produce  a spiral,  instead  of  a concentric  disk.  When  we 
examine  this  central  portion  more  closely,  we  see  that  its  plan  of  growth  is  exactly  the 

* Annals  of  Natural  History,  New  Series,  vol.  xi.  p.  425. 

4 c 2 


550 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


same  as  that  which  is  presented  by  those  aberrant  forms  of  Orhitolites,  in  which  the 
central  cell  buds-out  only  on  one  side,  instead  of  all  around  (see  ^ 64,  and  Plate  IX. 
fig.  4).  The  spiral  mode  of  increase  is  usually  carried-on  much  further  in  Orhiculina, 
than  it  ever  is  in  Orhitolites-,  several  turns  being  made  before  it  gives  place  to  the 
cyclical  plan.  But  as  this  is  a mere  question  of  degree,  such  a difference  would 
scarcely  alone  afford  a valid  distinction  between  these  two  types.  There  is,  however, 
this  very  definite  positive  distinction, — that  in  Orhiculina  each  turn  of  the  spire  not 
only  surrounds  the  preceding,  but  eompletely  invests  it  above  and  beneath,  every 
band  of  new  chambers  being  continued  to  the  very  centre;  so  that,  whilst  the  spiral 
mode  of  growth  continues,  the  thickness  of  the  shell  inereases  with  each  turn  ; and 
after  this  has  given  place  to  the  cyelical,  the  central  nucleus,  thus  augmented  in 
thickness,  projects  above  the  plane  of  the  disk.  This  peculiarity  in  Orhiculina,  which 
I have  never  found  to  be  wanting,  and  to  which  there  is  never  the  least  approach  in 
Orhitolites,  is  best  seen  in  vertical  sections.  Thus  in  Plate  XXIX.  fig.  3 is  shown 
that  part  of  a vertical  section  of  a large  disk,  which  has  passed  through  its  nucleus ; 
the  innermost  and  therefore  first-formed  portion  of  which  is  seen  to  be  invested  above 
and  below  by  three  layers,  formed  by  three  turns  of  the  spiral.  The  same  peculiarity 
is  shown  in  Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  17,  which  represents  a portion  of  a fossil  disk  near  the 
nucleus. 

86.  The  transition  from  the  spiral  to  the  cyclical  mode  of  growth  is  effected  in 
Orhiculina,  exactly  as  in  the  aberrant  forms  of  Orhitolites  just  referred-to,  by  the 
opening-out  (so  to  speak)  of  the  mouth  of  the  spire;  the  successive  rows  extending 
themselves  more  and  more  on  either  side,  until  they  meet  around  the  previously- 
formed  portion  ; after  which  each  new  row  forms  a complete  zone  or  annulus.  The 
commencement  of  this  change  is  seen  in  Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  1 ; and  its  subsequent 
stages  are  shown  in  figs.  2-5,  a comparison  of  which  will  show  that  the  specimens 
which  they  represent  are  in  different  phases  of  this  transitional  state. 

87.  But  this  transition  by  no  means  constantly  occurs;  for  the  original  spiral  plan 
of  growth  is  not  unfrequently  maintained,  apparently  through  the  whole  of  life;  so 
that  specimens  are  often  met-with,  wliich  are  not  inferior  in  size  or  in  number  of 
rows  to  the  larger  disks,  but  which  retain  the  aduncal  form.  Such  a series  of  speci- 
mens is  shown  in  figs.  8-10  ; the  first  of  which  represents  a very  young  Orhiculina,  in 
that  stage  which  is  common  to  both  types  of  growth  ; whilst  it  is  obvious  from  a com- 
parison of  this  with  the  two  following,  that  increase  has  continued  to  take  place 
upon  the  same  plan,  each  row  that  is  put-forth  from  its  predecessor  terminating 
abruptly  like  it  at  its  free  extremity,  without  any  such  disposition  to  extend  itself 
as  would  carry  it  round  the  nucleus  so  as  to  form  a complete  annulus,  A horizontal 
section  of  such  a specimen  as  is  represented  in  fig.  10,  is  shown  in  fig.  12. — It  may, 
of  course,  be  urged  that  such  a difference  ought  to  be  accounted  sufficient  to  sepa- 
rate the  spiral  and  the  discoida.l  types  of  Orhiculina,  as  two  distinct  species;  but  the 
following  reasons  appear  to  me  quite  sufficient  to  negative  such  a mode  of  viewing 


GENUS  ORBICULINA  : — ORGANIZATION. 


551 


them  : — First,  they  so  closely  resemble  one  another,  as  to  be  nndistingnishable,  in  their 
early  condition.  Second,  they  correspond  in  every  particular,  so  far  as  regards  the 
structure  ol  their  minute  parts.  Third,  the  assumption  of  the  cyclical  plan  of  growth 
does  not  take-place  at  any  one  fixed  epoch  of  development,  but  may  occur  at  various 
periods.  Fourth,  the  per^istence  of  the  original  plan  of  growth  througliout  life,  can- 
not be  fairly  regarded  as  anything  else  than  an  arrest  of  development,  such  as  we 
shall  presently  see  to  be  a common  occurrence  in  Orhiculinu,  as  in  OrhitoUtes,  in 
regard  to  other  particulars  90). 

88.  Turning  now  from  the  general  plan  of  growth  to  the  minute  structure  of  the 
individual  parts  of  OrhicuUna,  we  continue  to  find  a very  close  conformity  to  the  type 
of  OrhitoUtes.  The  texture  of  the  shell  is  precisely  the  same;  and  it  exhibits  no 
other  peculiarity  than  a minute  punctation  of  the  superficial  layers  (Plate  XXVIII. 
fig.  15),  which  at  first  suggests  the  idea  of  apertures*,  but  which  is  found  on  careful 
exatnination  of  transparent  sections  (Plate  XXIX.fig.  2)  to  be  due  to  a mere  thinning 
of  the  shell  at  certain  points,  so  as  to  give  an  appearance  of  cellular  areolat ion  closely 
resembling  what  is  seen  in  OrhitoUtes  (Plate  VI.  fig.  5). 

89.  Not  having  had  the  good  fortune  to  obtain  specimens  in  which  the  animal 
body  has  been  preserved,  I cannot  speak  as  confidently  on  the  subject  of  its  conforma- 
tion, as  I could  in  regard  to  that  of  OrhitoUtes  but  a comparison  of  the  features 
which  present  themselves  in  the  structure  of  the  calcareous  skeleton  of  the  two  types, 
can  leave  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  general  arrangement  of  its  segments  of 
sarcode  must  have  been  precisely  the  same.  For  the  conformation  of  the  chambers 
and  passages,  as  displayed  by  a horizontal  section  (Plate  XXIX.  fig.  1),  shows  that 
the  soft  body  must  consist  of  a succession  of  bands  of  sarcode,  each  band  swelling  at 
intervals  into  larger  segments;  that  the  segments  of  each  band  usually  alternate  with 
those  of  the  bands  internal  and  external  to  it,  so  as  to  be  opposite  to  the  interv’^als 
between  them  ; and  that  the  stolons  which  connect  one  band  with  another  pass-forth 
from  pores  in  the  intervals  between  the  segments  of  one,  into  the  segments  of  the  next, 
those  of  the  outermost  band  emerging  from  the  margin  as  pseudopodia.  By  the 
coalescence  of  these  a new  band  would  originate,  which  would  become  thickened 
into  segments  opposite  the  pores  of  the  preceding,  and  would  give  olf  its  own  pseudo- 
podia from  the  intervals  between  the  segments. 

90.  Again,  by  an  examination  of  the  natural  margins  of  Orhicidinoe  (Plate  XXVIII. 
figs.  6,  7?  18?  19),  and  by  a comparison  of  these  with  vertical  sections  (Plate  XXIX. 
fig.  3),  it  becomes  evident  that  the  same  variety  exists  as  in  OrhitoUtes,  in  regard  to 
the  increase  of  the  disk  in  thickness  by  the  vertical  elongation  of  the  segtnents  of 
sarcode.  For  some  speciinens  are  altogether  conformable  to  the  ‘simple  type’  of 
OrhitoUtes,  in  having  but  a single  floor  of  chambers  (so  to  speak),  with  a single  row 
of  marginal  pores;  whilst  others  correspond  with  the  complex  type  of  OrhitoUtes,  in 

* Professor  Williamson  {loc.  cit.)  has  described  these  punctations  as  perforations  for  the  passage  of  pseu- 
dopodia ; but  I am  quite  certain  that  such  is  not  the  case. 


552 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


having  many  such  floors,  with  numerous  rows  of  marginal  pores.  In  the  former,  the 
segments  of  sarcode,  with  their  single  annular  stolon,  would  resemble  rounded  beads 
strung  at  short  distances  on  a cord.  In  the  latter  the  segments  would  be  columnar, 
with  constrictions  at  intervals,  and  would  communicate  with  each  other  by  two  or 
more  annular  stolons.^ — It  is  true  that  we  seldom  find  any  such  complete  differentia- 
tion of  the  superficial  cells,  as  the  fully-developed  type  of  Orbifolites  presents ; but 
we  have  seen  that  such  differentiation  is  by  no  means  a constant  character  in  that 
genus  58);  and  the  structure  of  the  most  developed  specimens  I have  examined 
among  the  recent  Orhiculince  closely  corresponds  in  this  respect  with  that  of  the 
fossil  OrbitoUtes  of  the  Paris  basin,  as  will  be  seen  on  comparing  the  left-hand  portion 
of  Plate  XXIX.  fig.  3 with  Plate  VI.  fig.  1 1 of  my  former  memoir.  But  it  is  not'  a 
little  remarkable,  that  while  the  fossil  OrbitoUtes  of  the  Paris  tertiaries  are  less  deve- 
loped in  this  respect  than  their  existing  repi’esentatives  in  the  South  Seas,  the  fossil 
Orbiculinte  of  the  Malabar  tertiaries  should  be  more  developed  than  existing  speci- 
mens of  the  same  type ; for  in  them  we  find  the  superficial  cells  differentiated  from 
the  intermediate  layers  (Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  20),  precisely  as  in  OrbitoUtes^.  Looking 
to  the  far  larger  dimensions,  as  well  as  to  the  higher  development,  which  these  fossils 
present  83),  as  compared  with  the  existing  specimens  of  OrbicuUna,  I am  disposed 
to  believe  that  this  type  attained  its  highest  evolution  in  a period  long  since  passed, 
and  that  we  now  have,  so  to  speak,  only  the  degenerate  descendants  of  an  ancestry  of 
higher  rank;  whilst  in  the  case  of  OrbitoUtes,  I am  inclined  to  think  that  the  type  is 
most  fully  evolved  at  the  present  time. 

91.  General  conclusion. — From  the  foregoing  details  it  is  obvious  that  the  relation- 
ship between  OrbitoUtes  and  OrbicuUna  is  extremely  close ; the  only  essential  point 
of  difference  between  them  being  that  which  is  furnished  by  the  structure  of  the 
nucleus.  Whether  or  not  they  ought  to  rank  as  types  of  distinct  genera,  or  whether 
they  ought  (as  Professor  Williamson  maintains)  to  rank  as  cognate  species  of  the  same 
genus,  is  a point  as  to  which  it  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  a satisfactory  conclusion, 
until  the  characters  which  should  serve  for  the  distinction  of  genera  and  species  in 
this  class  shall  have  been  determined  on  a physiological  basis.  This  much  I think 
myself  entitled  to  assert  with  confidence, — that  even  if  they  are  to  be  regarded  as 
distinct  genera,  they  must  be  ranked  in  the  same  family,  and  in  immediate  proximity 
to  each  other;  and  that  no  classification  can  have  any  claim  to  be  considered  as 
natural,  in  which  they  shall  be  widely  separated. 

Genus  Alveolina. 

92.  History. — Although  the  form  and  aspect  of  the  Foraminifera  which  are  refer- 
able to  this  genus,  would  seem  to  remove  them  altogether  from  proximity  to  the  pre- 

* Although  Mr.  Carter  has  described  this  fossil  as  a species  of  OrbitoUtes,  yet  it  is  really  an  OrbicuUna,  as 
is  shown  by  the  spiral  conformation  of  its  central  portion  (Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  17),  and  by  the  investment 
afforded  by  each  turn  of  the  spire  to  its  predecessor,  as  shown  in  fig.  1 8. 


GENUS  A LVEOLINA  HISTORY  AND  ORGANIZATION. 


553 


ceding,  yet  the  two  really  bear  a very  close  relationship  in  all  essential  points  of 
minute  structure,  as  will  appear  from  the  particulars  I shall  presently  have  to  detail. 
The  following  outline  of  what  has  been  previously  ascertained  respecting  it  (for 
which  I am  indebted  to  M.  d’Orbigny*),  will  show  how  little  the  nature  of  its 
organization  has  hitherto  been  understood. — Most  of  the  species  at  present  known 
are  fossils,  occurring  in  association  with  Nummulites,  Orhitolites,  &c.  in  the  Num- 
mulitic  limestone,  or  in  other  formations  which  represent  it;  and  the  examples  first 
described  (by  Fortis)  were  confounded  with  Nummulites  and  Orhitolites  under  the 
term  Discolites.  By  Fichtel  and  Moll,  they  were  ranked  as  a sub-type  of  their 
comprehensive  genus  Nautilus.  The  designation  Alveolites  was  first  given  to  this  type 
by  Bosc-f-;  but  it  was  not  generally  adopted ; and  Montfort,  according  to  his  wont, 
raised  three  of  Bose’s  species  to  the  rank  of  genera,  under  the  names  of  Borelia, 
Clausalia,  and  MelioUtes.  Lamarck  did  not  adopt  either  Bose’s  or  Montfort’s 
generic  designations,  but  substituted  a new  one,  Melonia ; and  this  was  adopted  by 
Cuvier  and  Ferussac.  Defrance  proposed  yet  another  name,  Orizaria.  And 
finally  M.  d’Orbigny,  in  1825,  adopted  Bose’s  name,  with  a slight  alteration  in  its 
termination,  which  served  at  the  same  time  to  mark  the  continued  existence  of  the 
type,  and  to  distinguish  it  from  a genus  of  Corals  which  also  had  received  the  name 
of  Alveolites.  The  name  Alveolina  was  soon  afterwards  adopted  by  M.  Deshayes  ; 
and  it  may  now  be  considered  as  the  established  designation  of  the  genus.  The 
following  is  the  latest  definition  given  of  this  type  by  M.  d’Orbigny  : — “ Coquille 
allongee  dans  le  sens  de  I’axe  d’enroulement,  formee  de  loges  divisees  par  des  canaux 
capillaires,  ronds,  percees  de  nombreuses  ouvertures  placees  en  lignes  transversales  a 
I’enroulement  spiral.”  Not  the  least  idea  seems  to  me  to  be  conveyed  by  this  defini- 
tion of  the  real  structure  of  these  bodies,  such  as  is  brought  into  view  by  thin 
sections;  and  no  one,  so  far  as  I am  aware,  has  previously  attempted  thus  to  eluci- 
date it. 

93.  Organization. — My  investigations  have  been  made  upon  specimens  which  were 
tolerably  abundant  both  in  Mr.  Jukes’s  Australian  dredgings,  and  in  Mr.  Cuming’s 
Philippine  Collection.  These  were  obviously  identical  specifically,  but  the  latter  con- 
siderably exceeded  the  former  in  average  size.  The  length  of  the  longest  complete 
specimen  in  my  possession  is  *35  of  an  inch;  but  I have  a specimen  whose  shape  is 
somewhat  abnormal — indicating  that  it  has  increased  with  unusual  rapidity  in  length, 
as  proportioned  to  its  diameter, — which,  though  incomplete  at  one  end,  measures  ’50 
of  an  inch.  The  ordinary  form,  from  which  any  considerable  departure  is  very  rare, 
is  that  which  is  exhibited  in  Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  23 ; and  it  is  obviously  produced,  as 
correctly  stated  by  M.  d’Orbigny,  by  the  involution  of  a spiral  around  an  elongated 
axis.  The  surface  is  marked-out  by  longitudinal  furrows  into  a succession  of  bands 
of  tolerably  uniform  breadth  ; and  each  of  these  is  crossed  by  secondary  furrows, 

* Foram.  Foss,  de  Vienne,  p.  140. 

t Bulletin  des  Seances  de  la  Socidte  Pliilomathique,  No.  61. 


554 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


which  lie  so  closely  together  as  to  mark-out  each  band  into  a series  of  very  elongated 
cells,  which  remind  us  of  the  oblong  superficial  cells  of  the  complex  type  of  Orhi- 
toiites,  but  are  much  narrower  in  proportion  to  their  length.  The  mouth  of  tlie  spire 
is  closed  by  a solid  wall,  the  surface  of  which  is  nearly  flat,  and  which  is  perforated 
by  three,  four,  or  five  rows  of  rounded  pores,  bearing  a very  close  resemblance  to 
those  at  the  margin  of  OrhitoUtes  and  Orbiculina. 

94.  The  resemblance  suggested  by  external  configuration  is  fully  borne-out  by  the 
examination  of  the  internal  structure  of  this  genus,  as  brought  into  view  by  longitu- 
dinal and  transverse  sections.  For  it  is  shown  in  Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  24,  that  the 
whole  organism  has  originated  from  a single  large  nearly-globular  cell,  around  which 
are  successive  layers  of  chambers  freely  communicating  with  each  other,  each  layer 
completely  enveloping  the  preceding,  and  adding  much  more  to  its  length  than  to  its 
diameter.  A portion  of  such  a section,  more  highly  magnified,  is  shown  in  Plate 
XXIX.  fig.  9.  The  formation  of  the  successive  layers  by  spiral  involution,  is  well 
displayed  by  a series  of  transverse  sections  taken  at  different  points,  such  as  are 
delineated  in  Plate  XXIX.  figs.  4 to  7 ; the  first  (fig.  4)  having  crossed  near  the  narrow 
termination  of  the  fusiform  shell,  and  having  consequently  traversed  only  the  two 
last-formed  turns ; the  last  having  crossed  near  the  middle  of  its  length,  and  having 
traversed  all  the  six  turns  by  which  it  was  formed.  Each  whorl  seems  to  he,  as  to  all 
essential  particulars,  a repetition  of  the  rest;  and  hence  it  will  be  sufficient  to  make 
a detailed  examination  of  only  a small  part  of  a section,  such  as  is  shown  on  a larger 
scale  in  fig.  8.  It  is  there  observed  that  the  spaces  occupied  by  the  sarcode-body  and 
bounded  by  the  shell,  though  far  from  regular,  conform  to  a certain  general  plan. 
Each  lamina  is  made-up  (as  the  surface-furrowing  and  the  marginal  pores  indicate) 
of  a succession  of  bands  of  superimposed  cells,  of  elongated  form  ; each  band  answer- 
ing to  one  of  the  annuli  of  OrbitoUtes.  At  each  point  coiresponding  with  the 
external  furrow,  the  superficial  layer  of  shell  sends  a prolongation  inwards  (a,  a,  a), 
which  thus  marks-oflf  the  superficial  cells  more  completely  from  each  other  than  is 
the  case  with  the  subjacent  cells  ; just  below  this  projection  is  a rounded  perforation 
(6,  b,  b),  which  marks  the  passage  of  a longitudinal  channel ; and  at  a little  distance 
beneath  this  is  another  (c,  c,  c),  which  is  of  very  considerable  dimensions.  Some- 
times there  are  more  than  two  such  channels;  but  this  is  comparatively  rare.  These 
channels  must  have  given  passage  to  longitudinal  bands  of  sarcode,  running  from 
one  end  of  the  lamina  to  the  other,  and  freely  connecting  together  all  the  segments 
occupying  the  piles  of  elongated  cells  of  which  it  is  composed.  The  marginal  pores 
are  the  orifices  of  the  chambers  of  the  last-formed  band ; and  it  will  be  observed  in 
Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  23,  that  one  row  of  them  is  contiguous  with  the  preceding  whorl 
of  the  spire,  along  which,  as  is  shown  in  Plate  XXIX.  fig.  8,  there  is  always  a free 
passage.  Thus  we  may  consider  the  sarcode-body,  as  in  the  case  of  Orbitolite,  to  be 
composed  of  a mass  of  closely-connected  segments,  between  which  a calcareous 
skeleton  grows-up  according  to  a certain  tolerably-regular  type.  It  seems  to  me 


GENUS  CYCLOCLYPEUS  : — ORGANIZATION. 


555 


probable  from  the  conformation  of  the  shell,  that  the  segments  formingsiiccessive  bands 
do  not  communicate  directly  with  each  other  so  much  as  with  the  great  longitudinal 
stolons  ; just  as  the  successive  annuli  of  superficial  cells  in  Orbitolites  communicate 
with  each  other,  not  immediately,  but  through  the  annular  stolons  28).  The 
pseudopodial  prolongations  issuing  from  the  marginal  orifices,  probably  first  coalesce 
into  a longitudinal  cord  of  sarcode,  when  a new  band  of  cells  is  to  be  formed  ; and 
from  this  another  series  of  segments  is  then  budded-olF. — In  the  texture  of  the  shell, 
in  the  relations  of  the  different  chambers,  in  their  mode  of  communication  with  the 
exterior,  in  all  (to  speak  concisely)  which  marks  the  physiological  condition  of  this 
organism,  its  conformity  to  the  types  previously  described  is  so  close,  tliat,  notwith- 
standing the  marked  difference  in  their  mode  of  increase  (on  which  depends  their 
form),  they  must  rank,  in  any  natural  classification,  in  very  close  proximity  with 
these*. 

Genus  Cycloclypeus. 

95.  The  organisms  which  1 have  now  to  describe,  and  to  which  I shall  give  the 
generic  designation  Cycloclypeus  (suggested  to  me  by  Dr.  J.  E.  Gray),  are  amongst 
the  most  interesting  of  all  the  Foraminifera  at  present  existing;  on  account  botli  of 
the  large  dimensions  which  they  sometimes  attain,  and  also  of  the  complexity  of  their 
structure.  The  only  specimens  of  them  yet  known,  were  dredged  by  Sir  Edward 
Belcher  from  a considerable  depth  of  water  off  the  Coast  of  Borneo.  Two  of  these, 
which  are  now  in  the  British  Museum'l-,  are  complete  disks  measuring  no  less  than 
2^  inches  in  diameter  ; and  by  the  kindness  of  Dr.  J.  E.  Gray,  I have  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  making  microscopic  sections  of  a fragment  of  a disk,  which,  when  entire, 
must  have  nearly  equalled  these  in  size.  Smaller  disks  of  various  dimensions  pre- 
sented themselves  in  the  same  dredgings. 

96.  Organization. — The  external  aspect  of  these  disks  is  sufficiently  like  that  of 
Orbitolites,  to  prevent  the  two  genera  from  being  readily  distinguishetl  by  a super- 
ficial examination,  especially  when  young  specimens  of  Cycloclypeus  are  compared 
with  Orbitolites  of  the  complex  type  ; since,  on  the  two  surfaces  of  the  former 
(Plate  XXX.  fig.  1),  there  can  be  distinguished  concentric  rings  of  oblong  cham- 
bers, which  are  not  at  all  unlike  the  similarly-disposed  superficial  cells  of  the  latter. 
The  peculiarly-compact  texture  of  the  shell  of  Cycloclypeus,  however,  gives  to  its  sur- 
face a smooth  and  glistening  appearance,  which  is  very  different  from  that  of  Orbi- 
tolites. And  further,  the  forms  of  the  two  disks  ordinarily  differ  in  this, — that  whilst 
the  centre  of  Orbitolite  is  usually  rather  depressed  than  elevated,  and  the  thickness 

* I have  confined  myself  to  an  account  of  the  existing  species,  as  I have  not  had  the  opportunity  of  making 
a similar  examination  of  any  large  number  of  fossil  forms  of  this  type.  It  is  well,  however,  for  me  to  mention, 
that  the  existing  species  seems  to  me  to  he  certainly  identical  with  the  A.  Boscii  of  the  Paris  tertiaries. 

t These  are  the  disks  referred-to  hy  Professor  Williamson  in  his  Memoir  on  Orbitolites,  &c.,  Trans,  of 
Microsc.  Soc.  ser.  1.  vol.  iii.  p.  127.  He  appears  to  have  considered  them  as  gigantic  Orbitolites,  not  being 
acquainted  with  their  peculiarities  of  internal  structure. 

4 D 


MDCCCLVI. 


556 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


of  the  disk  generally  increases  towards  the  periphery,  the  central  portion  of  Cyclo- 
clypeus  always  presents  a knobby  elevation,  on  the  surface  of  which  the  oblong 
boundaries  of  the  chambers  are  superseded  by  rounded  ‘punctations,’  whilst  the  thick- 
ness of  its  disk  gradually  diminishes  towards  its  margin,  where  it  is  so  reduced  as  to 
come  to  a sharp  edge.  In  older  specimens  of  Cycloclypeus,  the  boundary-markings 
of  the  chambers  are.  scarcely  distinguishable,  save  near  the  margin  ; their  concentric 
annuli  are  marked-out,  however,  by  rows  of  ‘ punctations,’  similar  in  appearance  to 
those  of  the  central  eminence.  In  either  case,  it  is  usually  observable  that  the 
breadth  of  the  annuli  is  far  from  constant;  and  that  the  annuli  are  not  unfrequently 
incomplete,  extending  round  only  a portion  of  the  disk.  This  irregularity  has  been 
noticed  in  Orhitolites  20)  as  of  rare  occurrence;  in  Cycloclypeus  it  is  so  common 
that  I have  not  yet  met  with  specimens  which  are  entirely  free  from  it. 

97.  Whilst  agreeing  with  Orhitolites  in  those  external  features  which  result  from 
the  cyclical  mode  of  growth  that  is  common  to  both  forms,  Cycloclypeus  presents  as 
wide  a contrast  to  it  in  every  other  feature  of  its  organization,  as  is  anywhere  known 
to  exist  within  the  limits  of  the  Foraminiferous  group.  For  whilst,  as  we  liave  seen, 
the  general  plan  of  structure  of  Orhitolites  removes  it  but  little  from  the  grade  of 
Sponges — the  several  segments  of  its  aggregate  body  being  but  very  imperfectly 
separated  one  from  the  other,  and  the  shell  which  grows-up  in  the  midst  of  them 
having  no  discoverable  organization, — that  of  Cycloclypeus  closely  approximates  to 
the  Nummulitic  type,  in  which  the  successive  segments  are  as  completely  isolated  as 
they  can  be  without  entire  disconnection,  and  in  which,  by  the  peculiarly-elaborate 
construction  of  the  shelly  covering,  a special  provision  is  made  for  their  independent 
nutrition. 

98.  On  making  horizontal  and  vertical  sections  of  the  Cycloclypeus-iW&k,  its  central 
plane  is  found  to  be  occupied  by  chambers,  disposed  (ordinarily  in  a single  layer)  in 
concentric  annuli ; these  being  covered-in  above  and  beneath  by  compact  plates  of 
shell,  which  are  thicker  towards  the  centre,  thinner  towards  the  circumference 
(Plate  XXX.  fig.  1).  The  typical  form  of  these  chambers  seems  to  be  a parallelo- 
gram with  its  angles  rounded  off,  whose  sides  are  to  each  other  as  1^  to  1,  or  as  2 or 
even  3 to  1,  the  longest  side  lying  in  the  direction  of  the  radius  of  the  disk  ; but 
owing  to  the  variation  in  the  length  of  the  chambers  which  results  from  the  before- 
mentioned  irregularity  in  the  breadth  of  the  annuli  (^  96),  the  breadth  of  the  cham- 
bers remaining  more  constant,  their  proportions  vary  greatly  in  different  parts  of  the 
same  annulus,  or  in  adjacent  parts  of  different  annuli,  as  shown  in  Plate  XXIX. 
fig.  12.  I have  occasionally  met  with  chambers  whose  length  was  to  their  breadth 
as  4 to  1 (Plate  XXXI.  fig.  3).  The  vertical  thickness  or  depth  of  the  chambers, 
seems  usually  to  be  pretty  constant  in  different  parts  of  the  disk,  except  near  its  centre; 
the  thinning-away  towards  its  margin  being  due,  not  so  much  to  a diminution  in 
the  vertical  height  of  the  chambers,  as  to  the  reduction  of  the  thickness  of  the  shelly 
plates  that  enclose  them  above  and  below. 


GENUS  CYCLOCLYPEUS  : — ORGANIZATION. 


557 


99.  But  although  the  existence  of  only  a single  layer  of  chambers  is  obviously  the 
rule  in  this  species,  yet  exceptions  to  it  are  not  unfrequent ; a subdivision  of  the  entire 
stratum  into  two  or  three  presenting  itself  when  its  thickness  is  above  the  average, 
as  is  shown  in  Plate  XXXI.  fig.  8,  a.  Occasionally  one  or  two  chambers  only  are 
thus  subdivided,  as  shown  in  figs.  4, 5.  The  cavity  of  each  chamber  is  surrounded  by  a 
proper  wall  of  its  own,  quite  distinct  from  that  of  the  chambers  which  it  adjoins  ; and 
hence  the  septum  by  which  each  chamber  is  divided  from  the  adjacent  one  on  either 
side,  is  formed  of  at  least  two  lamellae  (Plate  XXIX.  fig.  12).  These  come  into  close 
contact  with  each  other  at  the  junction  of  the  vertical  septum  with  the  horizontal 
roof  and  floor  of  the  chamber,  as  shown  in  Plate  XXXI.  figs.  2,  4,  5 ; but  elsewhere 
they  diverge  from  one  another,  leaving  an  interseptal  space,  which  is  partly  filled-up 
by  an  interposed  lamina  of  shell-substance,  but  is  partly  occupied  by  the  interseptal 
canals  to  be  presently  described.  A thicker  space  of  the  same  kind  is  in  like  man- 
ner left  between  the  proper  walls  of  the  chambers  forming  one  annulus,  and  those  of 
the  chambers  forming  the  annuli  internal  and  external  to  it : this  space  is  almost 
entirely  filled-up  by  a shelly  deposit,  the  interseptal  canals  which  pass  between  the 
successive  annuli  being  less  numerous  than  those  which  run  between  the  chambers 
of  the  same  annulus  105). 

100.  As  in  OrhitoUtes,  the  chambers  of  each  annulus  usually  alternate  in  position 
with  those  of  the  annuli  internal  and  external  to  it.  But  this  is  by  no  means  con- 
stantly the  case  ; since  additional  chambers  are  ‘ interpolated’  here  and  there,  so  as  to 
increase  the  number  according  to  the  augmented  diameter  of  the  annulus;  and  such 
an  interpolation  disturbs  the  regular  arrangement  of  the  neighbouring  chambers. 

101.  The  adjacent  chambers  of  the  same  annulus  have  not,  so  far  as  I have  been 
able  to  ascertain,  any  direct  communication  with  each  other;  an  indirect  communi- 
cation, how'ever,  is  perhaps  established  through  the  system  of  interseptal  canals. 
But  each  chamber  normally  communicates  with  two  chambers  of  the  annulus  within 
it,  and  also  with  two  of  that  which  surrounds  it,  by  large  passages  (shown  in  horizon- 
tal section  in  Plate  XXIX.  fig.  12,  and  in  vertical  section  in  Plate  XXXI.  fig.  2,  c,  c, 
and  represented  in  perspective  view  in  Plate  XXX.  fig.  4,/y’and  g g),  which  traverse 
the  annular  septa ; of  these  passages  there  seems  to  be  normally  but  a single  one  for 
eaeh  pair  of  chambers  thus  to  be  brought  into  communication  ; but  I have  frequently 
met  with  two,  and  occasionally  three,  one  placed  directly  or  obliquely  above  the 
other.  Thus  at  each  extremity  of  the  oblong  chamber,  there  are  normally  two  pas- 
sages leading  to  two  chambers  of  the  annulus  next  internal  or  external  to  it  ; but  since 
to  each  of  these  chambers  there  may  be  two  or  even  three  passages,  the  total  number 
at  eaeh  end  may  be  three,  four,  five,  or  six.  The  variations  as  to  this  point  of  strueture 
which  are  presented  in  adjacent  chambers,  are  shown  in  Plate  XXXI.  fig.  2.  But 
since,  on  the  other  hand,  each  of  the  ‘ interpolated’  chambers  communicates  with 
only  one  chamber  in  the  annulus  next  internal  to  it,  there  may  be  but  a single  passage, 
in  place  of  two  or  more. 


4 D 2 


558 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


102.  The  shelly  plates  which  hound  the  chambered  plane  above  and  below,  are 
formed  of  a succession  of  superimposed  lamellae  (Plate  XXXI.  fig-.  10).  These  lamellae, 
which  are  of  tolerably  uniform  thickness,  are  most  numerous  in  the  older  or  more  cen- 
tral portions  of  the  disk,  and  diminish  in  number  towards  the  marginal  or  last-formed 
])ortions  ; so  that  it  seems  pretty  certain  that  new  lamellae  must  be  added  from  time 
to  time,  as  the  disk  is  augmented  by  the  formation  of  new  annuli.  I have  often  met 
with  appearances,  which  might  seem  to  indicate  that  the  formation  of  a new  lamella 
over  the  entire  surface  of  the  disk,  and  the  addition  of  a new  annulus  at  its  margin, 
were  parts  of  one  and  the  same  act  of  growth,  the  new  lamella  being  continued  into 
the  annular  septum;  but  if  this  were  constantly  the  case,  the  number  of  lamellae 
which  form  the  ceiling  or  floor  of  any  chamber,  would  always  correspond  with  the 
number  of  annuli  external  to  it,  which  I do  not  find  to  hold-good. 

103.  Each  of  these  lamellae  is  perforated  by  an  assemblage  of  parallel  tubull  very 

closely  set-together,  which  pass  from  its  inner  towards  its  outer  surface  (Plate  XXXI. 
figs.  9,  10);  and  there  is  such  a continuity  between  the  tubuli  of  successive  lamellae, 
that  a communication  is  thus  established  between  the  cavity  of  the  thickest-walled 
chamber,  and  the  external  surface  of  the  disk.  These  tubuli,  how’ever,  are  very  mi- 
nute, tlieir  diameter  being  not  above  inch.  They  are  wanting  in  cer- 

tain parts  of  the  shell,  whicli  then  presents  a transparence  that  contrasts  strikingly 
w^ith  the  semi-opacity  produced  by  the  tubular  perforations.  By  the  comparison  of 
vertical  with  horizontal  sections  taken  in  different  planes,  it  appears  that  these  trans- 
])arent  portions  of  the  shell  have  a conical  form,  the  base  of  each  being  on  the  sur- 
face of  tlie  shell,  and  its  apex  pointing  to  one  of  the  angles  at  the  outer  margin  of  a 
chamber  (Plate  XXX.  fig.  4,  cc,  c?c?).  Their  gradual  widening  towards  the  surface 
causes  the  diameter  of  their  bases  to  increase  w^ith  every  addition  to  the  thickness  of 
the  shell ; and  thus  it  is  on  the  older  portion  of  the  shell,  and  especially  on  its  cen- 
tral protuberance,  that  they  become  most  conspicuous  as  lounded  ‘ punctations  ’ 
(§96).  In  horizontal  sections  of  the  superficial  lamellae,  they  form  a large  proportion 
of  the  area  (Plate  XXXI.  fig.  G) ; whilst  in  similar  sections  near  the  chambered  plane 
(fig.  9),  they  become  blended  with  angular  projections  of  the  annular  partitions,  that 
fill-uj)  the  spaces  left  between  tbe  proper  walls  of  the  chambers  by  the  rounding-off 
of  their  angles. 

104.  The  lamellated  structure  is  seen  in  these  conical  pillars  (Plate  XXXI.  fig. 
10,  Z/),  the  lamellae  being  continuous  with  those  of  the  tubular  part  of  the  shell;  so 
that  at  each  increase  in  thickness,  a tubular  and  a non-tubular  portion  must  be  super- 
imposed upon  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  preceding  lamella.  Both  in  the  tubular 
structure  of  the  shell,  and  in  the  j)resence  of  these  non-tubular  columns,  there  is  an 
exact  conformity  to  the  structure  N'ummidite  and  its  congeners*. 

* I avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  of  correcting  a mistake  into  which  I fell  in  my  original  description 
of  the  structure  of  Nummulite  (Quart.  Journ.  of  Geol.  Soc.,  1850,  p.  26),  in  regarding  the  non-tubular 
columns  of  the  shell  as  having  been  passages  which  had  become  filled-up  by  the  infiltration  of  carbonate  of  lime 


GENUS  CYCLOCLYPEUS  : — ORGANIZATION. 


559 


105.  I have  now  to  speak  of  another  feature  in  the  structure  of  this  organism, 
which  most  strikingly  differentiates  it  from  OrhitoUtes  and  its  congeners,  and  at  the 
same  time  furnishes  an  additional  proof  of  its  close  approximation  to  Nummulites, 
notwithstanding  the  difference  in  its  plan  of  increase.  I allude  to  the  system  of 
interseptaL  canals,  which  establish  a direct  communication  between  the  external  sur- 
face, and  the  parts  of  the  interior  most  removed  from  it.  Such  radial  canals  are  seen 
both  in  horizontal  and  vertical  sections  (Plate  XXIX.  fig.  10,  Plate  XXXI.  fig.  4,  c) 
excavated  in  that  shelly  substance,  which  occupies  part  of  the  space  that  intervenes 
in  the  radiating  partitions  between  the  proper  walls  of  adjacent  chambers  of  the 
same  annulus.  When  the  canal  reaches  the  end  of  the  radial  septum,  it  usually  sub- 
divides into  two,  which  diverge  at  a considerable  angle  from  each  other,  so  as,  by 
traversing  the  annular  septum,  to  reach  the  two  alternating  radial  partitions  of  the 
next  annulus  ; and  as  each  branch,  before  entering  the  partition  towards  which  it 
runs,  unites  with  another  branch  that  inclines  towards  it  from  the  radial  canal  next 
adjacent,  it  follows  that  just  as  every  chamber  communicates  (normally)  with  the 
two  alternating  chambers  in  the  annuli  internal  and  external  to  it,  so  do  the  inter- 
septal  canals  of  every  radiating  partition  communicate  with  those  of  the  partitions 
alternating  with  it  in  the  internal  and  external  annuli.  This  arrangement,  which 
cannot  be  described  verbally  without  some  complexity,  will  be  readily  comprehended 
by  an  inspection  of  Plate  XXIX.  fig.  11.  In  each  radial  partition  there  are  at  least 
two,  and  very  commonly  three  tiers  of  such  canals,  as  is  best  seen  in  vertical  sections 
that  cross  the  radial  partitions  transversely  (Plate  XXXI.  figs.  4,  5).  Short  trans- 
verse branches,  apparently  communicating  with  the  cavity  of  the  chambers  (Plate 
XXIX.  fig.  1 1),  are  sometimes  seen  to  proceed  from  the  longitudinal  canals  ; in  regard 
to  these  communications  I would  not  speak  with  confidence  from  what  I have  seen  in 
Cycloclypeus  ; but  that  they  exist  in  other  organisms,  hereafter  to  be  described,  is  un- 
questionable. There  can  be  no  doubt,  moreover,  that  the  horizontal  radiating  canals 
communicate  with  vertical  canals  which  pass  directly  towards  the  two  surfaces  of  the 
disk,  whereon  they  open  (Plate  XXXI.  fig.  5,  c) ; these  canals  are  best  seen  in  hori- 
zontal sections  taken  near  the  upper  or  under  surfaces  of  the  chambers  (Plate  XXXI. 
figs.  3,  9),  in  which  they  present  themselves  in  regular  rows,  d,  d,  corresponding  to 
the  radial  partitions  ; whilst  in  similar  sections  taken  nearer  the  surface,  they  are  seen 
to  be  less  regularly  disposed,  in  consequence  of  their  following  a somewhat  oblique 

in  the  process  of  fossilization.  I was  led  to  this  by  the  very  marked  contrast  which  exists  in  Nummulite  be- 
tween the  tubular,  and  non-tubular  portions  of  the  shell,  and  the  peculiarly  inorganic  semi- crystalline  appear- 
ance of  the  latter,  closely  resembling  that  of  the  calcareous  infiltration  which  usually  occupies  the  interior  of 
the  chambers.  Subsequent  examination,  however,  of  Nonionina  and  other  recent  forms  most  closely  allied  to 
Nummulite,  has  satisfied  me  that  these  columns  were  part  of  the  original  shell,  as  my  friend  Professor  William- 
son maintained  from  the  first.  It  is  not  a little  curious,  however,  that  in  certain  other  species  of  Nummulite 
described  by  MM.  D’Archiac  and  Haime,  a system  of  passages  should  exist,  verj'^  analogous  to  those  which 
I thought  I had  discovered  in  N.  laevigata. 


560 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


direction.  Still  their  continuity  is  maintained  through  all  the  successive  layers  of 
which  even  the  thickest  part  of  the  shelly  disk  may  be  composed. 

106.  Besides  the  radial  and  vertical  systems  of  canals,  there  is  an  annular  system, 
which  traverses  the  thick  band  of  shell-substance  that  usually  intervenes  between  the 
successive  annuli,  and  which  is  continually  brought  into  view  in  horizontal  sections 
(Plate  XXIX.  figs.  10,  12).  It  appears  from  vertical  sections  traversing  the  annular 
septa,  that  several  tiers  of  these  annular  canals  may  exist.  I have  frequently, traced 
them  running  continuously  for  a considerable  distance,  without  appearing  eitlier  to 
give  off  any  branches,  or  to  communicate  with  the  radial  canals;  but  I have  occa- 
sionally seen  appearances  which  indicate  that  such  a communication  is  established 
by  means  of  canals  passing  vertically  downwards  at  the  angles  of  the  chambers,  so 
as  to  unite  the  three  sets  of  canals  into  one  continuous  system,  furnished  with  a mul- 
titude of  orifices  upon  the  surface  of  the  disk.  A representation  of  the  whole  canal- 
system,  as  I believe  it  to  exist  in  this  organism,  is  given  in  Plate  XXX.  fig.  4. 

107.  The  uses  of  this  canal-system  can  only  be  a matter  of  speculation.  Not  having- 
had  the  opportunity  of  examining  specimens  in  which  the  soft  animal  substance  had 
been  preserved,  I am  unable  to  affirm  whether  the  interseptal  canals  of  Cycloclypeus 
are  occupied  in  the  living  state  by  a portion  of  the  sarcode-body,  or  whether  they  are 
empty ; but  as  I have  unquestionable  evidence  that  the  former  is  the  case  in  Poly- 
stomella,  I should  think  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  is  also  true  of  this  genus. 
Now  if  we  come  to  examine  the  purpose  of  this  canal-system,  we  are  at  once  struck 
with  the  fact,  that  it  can  scarcely  be  requisite  for  the  nutrition  of  the  segments  of  the 
sarcode-body  enclosed  within  the  chambers;  since  the  mutual  communication  which 
these  segments  have  with  each  other,  seems  fully  as  adequate  for  the  purpose  in 
Cycloclypeus,  as  it  is  in  Orhitolites,  Orhiculina,  ov  Alveolina.  If  we  examine  wherein 
this  organism  so  differs  from  the  foregoing  as  to  require  such  an  additional  system, 
we  may  find  a not  improbable  answer  in  the  possession  of  that  additional  skeleton 
which  intervenes  between  the  proper  walls  of  the  chambers ; for  the  canal-system, 
excavated  in  the  very  substance  of  this,  would  seem  to  furnish  the  appropriate  chan- 
nel for  its  nutrition.  And  that  such  is  its  object,  will  be  shown  in  a future  memoir 
to  be  almost  certainly  proved,  by  the  comparison  of  facts  then  to  be  adduced  from 
the  structure  of  other  genera. 

108.  Monstrosities. — Although  the  number  of  specimens  of  this  type  which  I have 
had  the  opportunity  of  examining  is  but  small,  yet  two  among  them  exhibited  the 
same  kind  of  monstrosity  as  that  which  is  common  in  Orhitolites  ; namely,  the  super- 
position of  a vertical  plate  upon  the  horizontal  disk  (Plate  XXX.  fig.  3).  And  in  each 
it  is  sufficiently  apparent  that  this  plate  has  originated  from  the  central  cell,  and  that 
its  increase  has  taken  place  pari  passu  with  that  of  the  horizontal  disk. 

109.  General  Summary. — If,  now,  we  review  the  principal  facts  relating  to  the 
structure  of  Cycloclypeus,  and  compare  them  with  those  furnished  by  Orhitolites  on 
the  one  hand  and  by  Nummulites  on  the  other,  we  shall  see  that,  notwithstanding 


GENUS  CYCLOCLYPEUS: — GENERAL  SUMMARY. 


561 


its  resemblance  to  the  former  in  external  aspect  and  plan  of  growth,  it  is  far  more 
closely  allied  to  the  latter  in  those  features  of  its  organization  which  indicate  its 
physiological  condition.  It  has  been  shown  that  in  Orhitolites  the  communication 
between  the  different  portions  of  the  sarcode-body  is  so  free,  that  the  whole  may  be 
regarded  as  a continuous  mass  in  which  the  segmental  division  is  but  imperfectly 
indicated  (*|[  67);  and  this  view  is  in  complete  harmony  with  the  fact,  that  every 
addition  made  to  the  shelly  disk  forms  (save  in  a few  rare  cases)  an  entire  annulus. 
In  Cycloclypeus,  on  the  other  hand,  the  chambers  are  so  completely  separated  from 
each  other  laterally,  that  no  other  communication  exists  between  them  than  such  as 
may  be  established  by  the  interseptal  canals;  and  the  communications  between  the 
chambers  forming  successive  annuli,  are  only  large  enough  to  allow  the  passage  of 
narrow  bands  of  sarcode.  Hence  we  see  that  there  is  here  as  much  segmental  inde- 
pendence as  is  consistent  with  the  existence  of  these  animals,  which  involves  the 
maintenance  of  a communication  between  the  innermost  and  outermost  chambers, 
for  the  transmission  of  nutriment  to  the  segments  of  the  sarcode-body  contained 
within  the  former.  And  this  independence  is  strikingly  manifested,  by  the  frequency 
with  which  incomplete  annuli  are  added  to  the  previous  margin  of  the  disk,  extend- 
ing (it  may  be)  along  not  more  than  a third,  a half,  or  two-thirds  of  the  entire  circum- 
ference. The  want  of  constancy  in  the  number  and  position  of  the  communications 
between  the  chambers  (^  101),  even  in  this  high  type  of  Foraminiferous  structure,  is 
a point  of  fundamental  importance  in  the  determination  of  the  value  of  the  shape  of 
the  aperture,  as  a character  of  discrimination  between  genera  and  species  in  this  group 
of  organisms.  I have  elsewhere  shown  that  a like  want  of  constancy  exists  in  Nurn- 
mulites  {op.  cit.  p.  24),  the  different  septa  of  one  and  the  same  specimen  having  aper- 
tures of  very  varied  forms.  We  are  not  in  a condition  to  assign  a positive  function 
to  the  minute  tubuli  that  traverse  the  shelly  layers  intervening  between  the  chambers 
and  the  two  surfaces  of  the  disk.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that  these  tubuli  may  give 
passage  to  pseudopodial  prolongations  of  extreme  minuteness,  which  may  spread 
themselves  forth  from  the  whole  surface  of  the  disk,  as  we  know  that  they  do  from 
the  larger  pores  of  Rotalia,  and  may  coalesce  so  as  to  form  upon  it  a continuous  layer 
of  sarcode,  by  whose  instrumentality  a lamina  of  shell  is  added  from  time  to  time  to 
those  previously  existing.  That  either  by  giving  passage  to  threads  of  sarcode,  or 
by  conveying  organizable  fluid,  they  furnish  the  means  for  progressive  increase  of 
the  shell  in  thickness,  would  seem  a very  probable  account  of  their  use.  Whether 
this  hypothesis,  however,  be  correct  or  not,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that 
the  minute  organization  of  these  shelly  layers  in  Cycloclypeus  and  Numtnulites, — an 
organization  as  high  as  that  of  dentine, — is  a feature  of  high  elevation,  as  compared 
with  the  simple  concretionary  condition  of  the  calcareous  skeleton  in  the  three  genera 
previously  examined. 

110.  Thus,  then,  in  the  almost  complete  isolation  of  the  segments,  in  the  enclosure 
of  each  of  them  in  its  own  proper  wall,  in  the  interposition  of  an  intermediate  skele- 


562 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


ton  and  of  a canal-system  between  the  contiguous  walls  of  adjacent  chambers,  and  in 
the  minutely-tubular  structure  of  the  shell, — all  of  them  points  of  high  physiological 
importance, — Cycloclypeus  differs  entirely  from  Orbitolites,  and  agrees  with  Nummu- 
Iftes ; whilst  it  agrees  with  Orbitolites,  and  differs  from  Nummulites,  in  the  single 
circumstance  that  its  mode  of  increase  is  cyclical  instead  of  helical, — a difference 
which  we  have  seen  to  present  itself  at  two  different  periods  of  life  of  the  very  same 
specimens  of  Orbitolites  and  Orbiculina,  and  which  must,  therefore,  be  a character  of 
quite  subordinate  importance. 

Genus  Heterostegina. 

111.  The  correctness  of  the  views  just  advanced  is  fully  borne-out  by  the  occur- 
rence of  a type,  which  bears  precisely  the  same  relation  to  Cycloclypeus,  that  Orbicu- 
lina bears  to  Orbitolites-,  one,  namely,  in  which — the  form  and  connexions  of  the 
individual  chambers,  the  minute  structure  of  the  shell,  and  the  distribution  of  the 
canal-system,  being  essentially  the  same — the  plan  of  growth  is  helical,  at  least 
during  the  earlier  period  of  life.  This  is  the  case  with  the  genus  Heterostegina, 
which  was  established  by  M.  d’Orbigny  in  his  memoir  of  1825,  but  the  essential 
structure  of  which  he  has  altogether  misapprehended.  In  his  latest  classification  of 
the  Foraminifera*,  he  ranks  this  genus  in  his  order  Entomostegues,  which  is  com- 
posed of  Foraminifera,  whose  segments  are  disposed  in  a spiral,  but  in  two  different 
planes  alternating  with  each  other,  so  as  to  render  the  entire  shell  inequilateral. 
Of  the  genus  Heterostegina,  which  he  ranks  in  close  approximation  to  Amphistegina, 
he  gives  this  definition: — “ Coquille  a spire  embrassante,  dont  les  loges  sont  sepa- 
rees  interieureraent  par  des  cloisons  transversales.”  Now  in  the  first  place,  I am 
quite  satisfied  that  the  chambers  of  Heterostegina  do  not  alternate  one  with  another, 
but  are  arranged  in  one  plane  about  the  same  axis,  as  is  shown  in  figs.  1,  7,  Plate 
XXXI.;  and  secondly,  it  gives  by  no  means  a correct  idea  of  its  strueture,  to  liken  its 
chambers  to  those  of  Amphistegina  save  for  their  division  by  transverse  partitions. 

112.  I have  had  the  opportunity  of  examining,  by  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Cuming,  a 
very  extensive  series  of  specimens  of  this  genus  (belonging,  apparently,  to  the  species 
H.  costata,  D’Orb.-I-),  from  the  Philippine  islands ; many  of  these  are  of  large  size, 
attaining  as  much  as  half  an  inch  in  diameter ; and  the  appearance  of  the  adult  speci- 
mens scarcely  differs  less  from  that  of  the  young  (which  latter  are  alone  figured  by 
M.  d’Orbigny),  than  it  does  in  the  case  of  Orbiculina.  The  dredgings  of  Mr.  Jukes 
have  furnished  me  with  numerous  specimens  of  Heterostegina  from  the  Australian 
coast ; these  closely  correspond  with  the  figures  of  M.  d’Orbigny,  being  of  compara- 
tively small  size,  and  not  exhibiting  that  peculiar  mode  of  development  which  is 
characteristic  of  the  adult.  As  the  Australian  forms  correspond  precisely  with  the 
young  of  the  Philippine,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  their  specific  identity.  I recognise 
the  shells  of  the  same  species  as  almost  the  sole  components  of  a fossilized  deposit, 

* Cours  ^lementaire  de  Paleontologie,  tom.  ii.  p.  201.  f Foram.  Foss,  de  Vienne,  p.  212. 


GENUS  HETEROSTEGINA  ORGANIZATION. 


56,S 

which  I understand  to  be  very  commonly  met-with  in  Malta  in  fissures  of  the  rocks, 
but  of  which  the  age  is  uncertain. 

113.  Organization.- — The  older  specimens  of  Heterostegina  (Plate  XXX.  fig.  2)  pre- 
sent a form  Avhich,  when  regular,  may  be  characterized  as  discoidal.  There  is,  how- 
ever, a knobby  elevation  or  nucleus,  which  is  usually  somewhat  excentric ; and  from 
this  the  turns  of  a spire  are  seen  to  commence,  the  last  of  which  usually  becomes  con- 
tinuous with  one  part  of  the  margin  of  the  disk  {a  be),  which  there  possesses  a thick 
and  defined  border.  As  this  spire  opens-out,  however,  it  becomes  thinner  and  flatter; 
and  this  thinning  is  especially  noticeable  at  that  part  of  the  margin  of  the  disk  {adc) 
which  corresponds  with  the  opening  of  the  spire.  An  examination  of  this  portion  of 
the  disk  shows  that  it  precisely  corresponds  in  structure  with  Cycloclypeus  the  form 
and  disposition  of  the  chambers,  their  mode  of  communication,  the  structure  of  their 
shelly  walls,  and  the  interposition  of  the  intermediate  skeleton  and  of  its  canal-system, 
being  all  points  of  such  close  resemblance,  that,  as  there  is  positively  no  other  point 
of  difference  than  a somewhat  inferior  thickness  of  the  intei  mediate  skeleton  between 
the  successive  rows  of  chambers  in  Heterostegina,  a fragment  of  this  marginal  por- 
tion of  the  spirally-formed  disk  of  Heterostegina  might  be  taken  for  a fragment  of 
the  cyclical  disk  of  Cycloclypeus,  without  the  possibility  of  certainly  distinguishing 
them,  and  vice  versa.  It  is  interesting  to  observe,  moreover,  how  close  is  the  con- 
formity of  these  two  types,  even  as  regards  their  irregularities ; for  it  will  be  seen, 
on  an  inspection  of  the  figure,  how  little  uniformity  there  is  in  the  breadth  of  the 
successive  rows  of  chambers,  and  how  frequently  it  happens  that  a row  is  incomplete, 
just  as  in  Cycloclypeus  96). 

1 14.  If,  now,  we  examine  the  structure  and  arrangement  of  that  spirally-coiled  por- 
tion of  the  disk,  which  constitutes  its  nucleus,  and  which  is  best  shown  in  younger 
specimens,  we  see  that,  as  in  the  other  cases,  the  first  chamber  (Plate  XXXI.  fig.  1,  a) 
is  globular,  that  the  second  {h)  buds-forth  from  one  side  of  this,  and  each  successive 
chamber  from  the  outer  side  of  the  preceding,  just  as  in  Nummulite  or  any  other 
simple  helical  form.  But  before  one  turn  of  the  spire  is  completed,  each  newly- 
formed  chamber  is  seen  to  be  double  (cc)  instead  of  single,  a small  portion  being 
divided-olF  (as  it  were)  near  the  marginal  part  of  the  whorl ; and  just  about  the  part 
where  the  second  turn  is  completed,  the  gradual  opening- out  of  the  spire  gives  room 
for  the  interposition  of  a third  chamber  in  each  ro  {d)  •,  and  the  number  is  soon 
further  augmented,  in  accordance  with  the  progressive  increase  in  the  breadth  of  the 
spire,  the  dimensions  of  the  individual  chambers  retaininga  pretty  close  conformity  to 
a constant  average.  An  examination  of  this  figure  will  further  show,  that  the  increase 
in  the  number  of  chambers  in  successive  rows  always  takes-place  at  the  inner  margin 
of  the  spire;  some  of  those  nearest  the  outer  margin  dying-out,  as  it  were,  without 
giving  origin  to  new  chambers  in  the  next  row.  This  may,  I think,  be  connected 
with  the  fact,  that  there  is  always  a large  free  opening  {e,  e)  between  one  row  of 
chambers  and  the  next,  at  the  inner  margin  of  each  spire  (the  situation  of  the  open- 

4 E 


MDCCCLVI. 


564 


DR.  CARPENTER’S  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


ing  in  NmnmuUte),  and  that  the  chamber  of  the  row  abutting  on  the  preceding  whorl 
is  nearly  always  much  larger  than  the  rest,  and  gives  origin  to  two  or  even  three 
chambers  in  the  next  row.  Further,  it  is  sliown  by  vertical  sections  (Plate  XXXI. 
fig.  7),  that  the  innermost  chambers  of  the  whorl  are  not  only  broader  but  thicker, 
their  upper  and  under  walls  diverging  from  each  other  where  they  are  to  be  con- 
tinued over  the  spire  they  invest.  Hence  it  is  pretty  obvious,  that  this  portion  of  the 
whorl  is  that  wherein  the  most  active  nutrition  takes  place  ; and  it  is  here  that  the 
marked  accession  to  the  number  of  chambers  occurs,  Vv^hich  tends  to  carry  the  later 
rows  around  the  whole  circumference  of  the  disk. 

1 15.  Each  of  the  early  turns  of  the  spire  not  only  surrounds,  but  completely  invests 
its  predecessor;  as  is  best  shown  by  a vertical  section,  such  as  that  represented  in 
fig.  7-  The  investing  whorl  does  not,  in  the  younger  part  of  the  spire,  come  into 
immediate  contact  with  the  two  surfaces  of  that  which  it  includes,  but  is  separated 
from  it  by  the  prolongation  of  the  chambers  and  of  their  septa,  very  much  as  in 
ordinary  NiimmuUtes.  But  between  the  later  whorls,  there  are  no  such  interspaces. 
4’he  successive  layers  come  into  absolute  continuity  with  one  another  ; both  the  tubuli 
and  the  cones  of  non-tubular  substance  being  continued  from  each  into  the  one 
external  to  it.  From  the  time  that  the  rapid  thinning-away  and  opening-out  of  the 
spire  commences,  the  investment  of  the  previously-formed  whoi'ls  seems  to  discon- 
tinue, It  is  at  the  margin  of  each  whorl,  that  we  find  the  intermediate  or  additional 
skeleton  most  remarkably  developed  ; and  the  canal-systefn  sometimes  forms  quite  a 
network  in  its  substance  (fig.  11). 

1 16.  General  Summary. — It  is  obvious,  from  the  foregoing  details,  that  the  physio- 
logical condition  of  each  individual  segment  of  the  animal  of  Heterostegina  must  be 
essentially  the  same  as  that  of  each  segment  of  Cycloclypeus  \ and  that  the  only 
difference  in  the  condition  of  the  two  organisms  arises  out  of  the  mode  in  which 
these  segments  are  increased  in  number.  In  Cycloclypeus,  in  which  each  row  of  seg- 
ments is  (normally  at  least)  a complete  annulus,  a new  annulus  is  formed  around  its 
predecessor  by  gemmation  from  its  several  segments  along  the  entire  circumference; 
and  this  mode  of  increase  may  be  traced-back  to  the  central  cell,  which  buds-out 
equally  on  all  sides.  But  in  Heterostegina,  each  row  is  limited  by  the  breadth  of  the 
spire;  and  while  most  of  its  chambers  are  formed  by  the  like  kind  of  gemmation 
from  their  predecessors,  there  is  a special  provision  for  an  augmentation  in  the 
number  of  chambers  at  the  end  of  the  row  nearest  the  previous  whorl.  Tracing-back 
the  spire  to  its  origin,  we  find  that  it  commences  in  the  one-sided  gemmation  of  the 
central  cell,  just  as  we  found  it  to  do  in  Orbicidina  (^  85)  and  in  those  forms  of 
Orhitolites  which  have  a spiral  commencement  (^  54).  lienee  there  is  nothing  but 
the  plan  of  increase,  which  separates  Heterostegina  from  Cycloclypeus  and  their 
relation  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  Orhiculina  and  Orhitolites.  For  in  Heterostegina, 
as  in  Orhiculina,  the  first-formed  portion  is  a spire,  of  which  each  turn  invests  its 
predecessors;  but  after  three  or  four  turns  have  been  made,  the  spire  spreads-out, 


CONCLUDING  REMARKS. 


565 


tends  to  surround  the  whole  disk  with  its  mouth  or  growing  margin,  and  thencefor- 
ward the  growth  is  cyclical,  as  in  Cycloclypeus  and  OrhitoUtes. 

Concluding  Remarks. 

117.  Looking  now  to  the  general  organization  of  the  five  genera  which  I have 
described,  and  to  the  peculiarities  by  which  I have  shown  that  each  is  characterized, 
I think  that  we  are  in  a position  to  inquire  into  the  value  of  the  system  of  classifica- 
tion which  has  been  erected  by  M.  d’Orbigny  on  the  exclusive  basis  of  plan  of 
growth  ; on  which  inquiry,  the  facts  which  I have  now  brought  together  have  an 
obvious  and  direct  bearing. 

I.  The  very  close  physiological  relationship  which  has  been  shown  to  exist  between 
OrhitoUtes  and  OrhicuUna,  requires  that  they  should  be  associated  in  the  same  Family, 
if  not  in  the  same  Genus.  In  the  classification  of  M.  d’Orbigny  they  are  ranked  under 
different  Orders  {Cyclostegues  and  Helicostegues). 

II.  In  like  manner,  the  close  physiological  relationship  which  has  been  shown  to 
exist  between  Cycloclypeus  and  Heterostegina  requires  that  they  should  be  associated 
in  the  same  Family,  if  not  in  the  same  Genus.  In  the  classification  of  M.  d’Orbigny 
they  would  be  ranked  under  different  Orders  {Cyclostegues  and  Entomostegues). 

III.  Again,  the  strongly-marked  physiological  difference  which  has  been  shown  to 
exist  between  OrhitoUtes  and  Cycloclypeus,  would  seem  to  require  that  they  should 
be  separated  by  the  widest  possible  interval ; yet  the  system  of  classification  adopted 
by  M.  d’Orbigny  would  have  forced  him  to  associate  them  (if  he  had  been  acquainted 
with  the  last-named  type)  side  by  side  in  the  same  Order  {Cyclostegues). 

IV.  In  like  manner,  the  corresponding  difference  which  has  been  shown  to  exist 
between  OrhicuUna  and  Heterostegina,  would  seem  to  require  that  they  should  be 
separated  by  the  widest  possible  interval ; yet  the  system  of  classification  adopted  by 
M.  d’Orbigny  would  have  forced  him  to  associate  them  (if  he  had  been  acquainted 
with  the  real  plan  of  structure  of  the  last-named  type)  side  by  side  in  the  same  Order 
{Helicostegues) . 

V.  The  doctrine  which  I base  on  the  foregoing  facts, — that  physiological  con- 
formity in  the  condition  of  each  individual  segment,  as  indicated  by  the  structure  of 
its  shelly  investment,  is  a character  of  primary  importance,  whilst  the  plan  of  growth, 
that  is,  the  mode  of  increase  in  the  number  of  chambers,  is  a character  of  subordi- 
nate importance, — is  further  borne-out  by  the  following  considerations : 

1.  In  OrhitoUtes,  the  general  plan  being  cyclical,  the  early  plan  of  growth  is  fre- 

quently spiral. 

2.  In  OrhicuUna,  while  the  early  plan  of  growth  is  uniformly  spiral,  and  this  is 

sometimes  continued  throughout  life,  it  is  very  commonly  exchanged  in 

adult  age  for  the  cyclical. 

3.  In  Alveolina,  whose  physiological  approximation  to  OrhitoUtes  and  OrhicuUna 

is  unquestionable,  a plan  of  growth  is  followed,  which  differs  more  from 

4 E 2 


506 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMINIFERA. 


that  of  either  of  them,  than  the  plans  of  the  two  latter  dilfer  from  each 
other, 

4.  In  Heterostegina,  as  in  Orhiculina,  the  early  plan  of  growth  being  uniformly 
spiral,  there  is  a tendency  in  adult  age  to  the  assumption  of  the  cyclical. 

1 18.  I think  myself  justified,  therefore,  by  the  foregoing  comparisons,  in  asserting 
that  the  system  of  classification  proposed  by  M.  d’Orbignv  is  founded  on  an  estima- 
tion of  the  value  of  characters,  which  is  entirely  erroneous  ; and  that  any  classifica- 
tion which  shall  be  really  natural,  must  be  based  on  an  order  of  facts  relating  to  the 
economy  of  the  animal,  of  which  his  imperfect  methods  of  observation  have  left  him 
in  entire  ignorance*.  It  is  not  my  intention,  in  this  stage  of  the  inquiry,  to  propose 
the  erection  of  any  new  system  ; my  sole  aim,  at  present,  being  to  establish  the  funda- 
mental principles  upon  which  alone  can  a natural  arrangement  be  securely  built-up. 


Explanation  of  the  Plates. 

PLATE  XXVIII. 

Figs.  1-5.  Successive  stages  of  growth  of  the  ordinary  type  of  Orhiculina  adunca, 
showing  the  change  from  the  spiral  to  the  cyclical  plan  of  development : — 
1 6 diam. 

Fig.  6.  Edge  of  a disk  of  Orhiculina  adunca,  showing  but  a single  row  of  apertures, 
as  in  the  simple  type  of  Orhitolites : — -50  diam. 

Fig.  7-  Edge  of  a disk  of  Orbiculina  adunca,  showing  three  rows  of  apertures,  as  in 
the  complex  type  of  Orhitolites — 50  diam. 

Figs.  8-10.  Successive  stages  of  growth  of  the  less  common  type  of  Orhiculina  adunca, 
in  which  the  spiral  plan  of  development  is  retained  throughout  life; — 16 
diam. 

Fig.  11.  Horizontal  section  of  a disk  resembling  fig.  5: — 16  diam. 

Fig.  12.  Horizontal  section  of  a spiral  resembling  fig.  10: — 16  diam. 

Figs.  13-16.  Portions  of  the  superficies  of  Orhiculina  adunca,  showing  varieties  in  the 
surface-markings  : — 50  diam. 

Fig.  17-  Central  portion  of  a disk  of  a fossil  Orhiculina  {Orhitolites  Malaharicus,  Car- 
ter), showing  its  spiral  commencement  on  the  plan  of  fig.  8: — 16  diam. 

Fig.  18.  Marginal  portion  of  a similar  disk,  showing  the  investment  of  the  early 
whorl  by  the  later,  with  the  characters  of  the  surfaces  and  edge  : — 50  diam. 

Fig.  19.  Marginal  portion  from  a similar  fossil  disk,  which  had  extended  itself  like 
fig.  5 ; — 50  diam. 

* 1 am  constrained  to  make  a similar  remark  respecting  the  classification  proposed  by  Professor  Schultzr 

(Ober  den  Organismus  der  Polythalamien)  ; which,  although  in  many  respects  an  improvement  upon  that  of 

M.  ij’Orbigny,  is  almost  equally  far  from  representing  the  natural  affinities  of  these  organisms,  as  revealed 

by  minute  investigation  of  the  structure  of  their  testa. 


EXPLANATION  OF  PLATES. 


567 


Fig.  20.  Inner  surface  of  one  of  the  annuli  of  a similar  fossil  disk,  showing  the  differen- 
tiation of  the  superficial  from  the  intermediate  layers  of  cells : — 50  diam. 

Figs.  21,  22.  Portions  of  the  superficies  from  similar  fossil  disks,  showing  varieties  in 
the  surface-markings  : — 50  diam. 

Fig.  23.  External  aspect  of  Alveolina  Boscii  (recent);  a,  a,  growing  margin,  showing 
multiple  apertures  resembling  those  at  the  margins  of  Orhitolites  and  Orhi- 
cuUna: — 40  diam. 

Fig.  24.  Longitudinal  section  of  Alveolina  Boscii,  showing  its  internal  structure  and 
the  successive  stages  of  its  growth  : — 40  diam. 

PLATE  XXIX. 

Fig.  1.  Section  of  disk  of  Orhiculina  adunca  parallel  to  the  surface,  showing  the  cells 
and  their  communications  : — 100  diam. 

Fig.  2.  Surface-layer  of  disk  of  Orhiculina  adunca,  showing  its  punctuated  appear- 
ance : — 100  diam. 

Fig.  3.  Vertical  section  of  disk  of  Orhiculina  adunca,  passing  through  its  central 
nucleus,  and  showing  columnar  arrangement  of  its  cells,  and  the  manner  in 
which  the  earlier  whorls  of  the  spire  are  invested  by  the  later : — 100  diam. 

Figs.  4-7.  Transv^erse  sections  of  Alveolina  Boscii,  showing  the  increase  in  the  num- 
ber of  turns  of  the  spire  from  its  terminal  to  its  central  portion  : — 40  diam. 

Fig.  8.  Portion  of  a similar  transverse  section  enlarged;  showing — a,  a,  a,  internal 
prolongations  of  the  surface-layer  ; h,  h,  h,  outer  longitudinal  canals  ; 
c,  c,  c,  inner  longitudinal  canals  : — 80  diam. 

Fig.  9.  Portion  of  a longitudinal  section  (Plate  XXVIII.  fig.  24)  similarly  enlarged ; 

showing  1,  2,  3,  4 successive  layers  formed  by  the  involution  of  the  spire; 
and  in  each  the  passages  a a,  h h,  and  c c,  between  one  band  and  the 
next.  (N.B.  The  variation  in  the  appearances  presented  by  the  other 
layers,  depends  upon  the  difference  of  relative  direction  in  which  the  sec- 
tion traverses  each  of  them  respectively) : — 80  diam. 

Fig.  10.  Thin  section  of  Cycloclypeus,  taken  parallel  to  the  surface,  and  close  to  the 
covering  of  the  chambers  ; showing  part  of  the  system  of  interseptal  canals  : 
— 50  diam. 

Fig.  11.  Diagram  of  a single  chamber  of  Cycloclypeus,  showing  its  relations  to  other 
chambers,  and  to  the  interseptal  system  of  canals:  a,  cavity  of  chamber; 
h,  h',  adjacent  chambers  of  the  same  annulus,  each  separated  from  a by  a 
double  septum;  cdanddd',  chambers  of  internal  and  external  annuli, 
separated  from  a by  the  annular  partitions  ee,  e'  e',  but  communicating  with 
it  by  the  passages  /,  f,  f,  /*;  in  the  septa  between  a and  h,  V are  seen  the 
interseptal  canals,  each  of  which  sends  two  oblique  branches  across  the 
annular  septa,  to  communicate  with  corresponding  canals  in  the  septa 


568 


DR.  carpenter’s  RESEARCHES  ON  THE  FORAMIN IFERA. 


dividing  cc'  and  dd' these  interseptal  canals  seem  to  communicate  by 
short  lateral  twigs  with  the  cavities  of  the  adjacent  chambers,  whilst  at 
g,  g,  g become  connected  with  vertical  branches,  which  unite  them 
with  those  of  other  planes:  at  hh,  h'  h'  are  seen  the  canals  proper  to  the 
annular  septa. 

Fig.  12.  Thin  section  of  Cycloclypeus,  passing  through  its  central  plane,  showing  por- 
tions of  four  annuli,  1 1,  2 2,  3 3,  4 4,  with  the  general  relations  and  con- 
nexions of  their  chambers,  the  double  septa  by  which  they  are  separated, 
and  (in  parts)  the  interseptal  system  of  canals: — 36  diam. 

PLATE  XXX. 

Fig.  1.  General  view  of  a disk  of  Cycloclypeus,  showing  the  aspect  of  its  surface,  and 
the  appearances  presented  by  horizontal  and  vertical  sections: — 12  diam. 

Fig.  2.  Surface-view  of  a full-grown  specimen  of  Heterostegina,  showing  its  tendency 
to  assume  the  discoidal  form  by  the  opening-out  of  the  spire:  ah  c,  the  thick- 
ened margin  of  the  spire  ; cda,  its  growing  edge  or  mouth  : — 10  diam. 

Fig.  3.  Monstrous  specimen  of  Cycloclypeus,  having  a vertical  plate  superimposed 
upon  the  horizontal  disk  : — 5 diam. 

Fig.  4.  Ideal  figure  of  a portion  of  a Cycloclypeus-6\s\i  laid-open  to  show  the  details 
of  its  structure:  a,  a,  a,  upper  stratum,  consisting  of  superimposed  tubular 
laminae  ; h,  h,  h,  portion  of  lower  stratum  ; c,  c,  c,  cones  of  non-tubular 
substance,  sometimes  perforated  by  larger  canals;  d,  d,  d,  their  bases  pro- 
jecting on  the  surface;  e,  e,  plates  of  non-tubular  substance,  continuous 
with  the  septa  between  the  chambers ; passages  of  communication 
between  the  chambers,  through  the  inter-annular  partitions,  as  seen  in 
section  ; g,g,  the  same  as  seen  from  the  interior  of  the  chambers  ; h,  h,  inter- 
septal canals  cut  across ; i,  a chamber  on  tlie  walls  of  which  the  system  of 
interseptal  canals  is  represented  as  fully  displayed  ; h,  k,  passage  of  the 
principal  canals  along  the  line  of  junction  between  the  roof  of  tlie  chambers 
and  the  vertical  septa: — 60  diam. 

PLATE  XXXL 

Fig.  1.  Section  of  a young  specimen  of  Heterostegina,  taken  parallel  to  the  surface, 
partly  through  the  chambered  plane  and  partly  (owing  to  a slight  inequality 
of  the  specimen)  through  the  shelly  investment  of  the  chambers,  the  boun- 
daries of  which,  however,  are  still  distinguishable,  owing  to  the  dilference 
of  texture  between  the  shell  that  covers  the  chambers  and  that  which  unites 
with  the  septa  : a,  first  cell ; h,  second  cell ; c c,  first  subdivision  ; d,  second 
subdivision  ; e,e,  large  passages  connecting  the  chambers  that  abut  on  the 
pre-forrned  whorl : — 60  diam. 


EXPLANATION  OF  PLATES. 


569 


Fig.  2.  Vertical  section  of  Cycloclypeus,  taken  in  the  direction  of  one  of  the  annuli, 
showing  the  upper  and  under  layers  ab,  a!  V,  with  the  septa  between  the 
chambers,  each  of  which  is  seen  to  be  composed  of  two  layers  with  an 
interposed  lamella,  pierced  by  two  or  more  canals  whose  orifices  are 
shown  ; on  the  left  side  of  the  figure,  the  chambers  are  seen  to  be  closed 
by  the  inter-annular  septum,  which  is  pierced  by  several  irregularly-disposed 
passages,  c,  c,  that  establish  communications  between  each  chamber  and 
those  of  the  annuli  internal  and  external  to  it: — 60  diam. 

Fig.  3.  Section  of  Cycloclypeus,  taken  horizontally  (or  parallel  to  the  surface  of  the 
disk)  through  the  shelly  covering  of  the  chambers,  showing  its  minutely 
tubular  structure,  and  its  junction  with  the  two  interannular  non-tubular 
septa  a 6,  a!b',  and  v/ith  the  intercameral  septa  c c,  d d,  along  the  course 
of  which  last  are  seen  the  divided  ends,  d,  of  vertical  interseptal  canals : the 
chamber  thus  inclosed  is  remarkable  for  its  great  length  in  comparison 
with  its  breadth  : — 100  diam. 

Figs.  4 & 5.  Vertical  sections  of  Cycloclypeus,  corresponding  with  fig.  2,  and  showing 
irregularities  in  the  division  of  the  chambers:  at  cc,  fig.  4,  are  seen  the 
orifices  of  the  interseptal  canals  laid  open ; and  at  c,  fig.  5,  is  shown  a part 
of  the  vertical  canal  system,  passing  upwards  and  downwards  towards  the 
two  surfaces  of  the  shell,  through  its  transparent  portions: — 60  diam. 

Fig.  6.  Section  of  Cycloclypeus,  taken  in  the  same  direction  as  fig.  3,  but  nearer  to 
the  surface,  showing  the  relation  of  the  tubular  and  non-tubular  portions 
of  the  shell,  and  the  orifices  of  rhe  canals  : — 100  diam. 

Fig.  7-  Vertical  section  of  young  specimen  of  Heterostegina,  showing  the  investment 
of  the  first-formed  whorls  by  those  which  succeed  them,  and  (on  the  right) 
the  commencement  of  the  thinning-out:  n,  a,  a,  passages  of  communica- 
tion between  the  successive  bands  of  which  each  whorl  is  composed  : — 
35  diam. 

Fig.  8.  Vertical  section  of  young  disk  of  Cycloclypeus,  showing  at  a an  irregular  sub- 
division into  two  or  three  layers  of  chambers  : — 22  diam. 

Fig.  9.  Horizontal  section  of  a portion  oi  Cycloclypeus,  corresponding  with  fig.  3,  but 
more  highly  magnified  : — 150  diam. 

Fig.  10.  Vertical  section  of  the  floor  of  one  of  the  chambers,  showing  its  lamellated 
arrangement,  the  minutely-tubular  structure  of  one  portion  of  it,  a a,  and 
one  of  the  non-tubular  cones,  bb,  which  is  continuous  with  the  annular 
septum  c: — 150  diam. 

Fig.  11.  Horizontal  section  of  a portion  of  Heterostegina,  taken  near  the  margin, 
showing  the  disposition  of  the  chambers,  the  communications  a a between 
those  of  successive  bands,  the  minutely-tubular  structure  of  their  roof,  the 
interseptal  canals,  and  the  high  development  of  the  canal-system  in  the 
thickened  non-tubular  margin,  bb\ — 150  diam. 


L 571  ] 


XXVIL  On  the  Megatherium  (Megatherium  Americanum,  Cuvier  awrZBLUMENBACH). 

Part  III. — The  Shull.  By  Professor  Owen,  F.R.S.  ^c. 

Received  November  8,  1850 — Read  May  8,  1851. 

/ 

The  vertebral  segments  which  coalesce  more  or  less  completely  to  form  the 
important  and  characteristic  part  of  the  skeleton  called  the  ‘ skull,’  constitute,  in  the 
Megatherium,  one  which  is  remarkable  for  its  small  relative  size  to  the  rest  of  the 
body,  for  the  slight  diminution  of  the  transverse  diameter  from  the  occiput  forward 
to  the  nasal  bones,  for  the  length  and  strength  of  the  ascending  and  descending  pro- 
cesses from  the  orbital  end  of  the  zygomatic  arch,  and  for  the  peculiar  depth  of  the 
lower  jaw,  especially  at  its  middle  part,  where  it  lodges  the  molar  teeth. 

The  widest  part  of  the  long  and  narrow  cranium  is  formed  by  the  zygomatic 
arches,  Plate  XXII.  fig.  2,  26,  27,  and  the  deepest  part  by  the  dentigerous  portion  of 
the  lower  jaw,  Plate  XXL  fig.  2,  d. 

In  the  skulls  and  portions  of  skulls  of  the  Megatherium  which  have  come  under 
my  observation,  all  the  cranial  and  most  of  the  facial  sutures,  save  those  that  unite 
the  tympanic  to  the  rest  of  the  temporal  bone,  had  been  obliterated,  and  the  origin- 
ally complex  assemblage  of  bones  forming  the  cranium  and  upper  jaw  had  been 
reduced  to  a continuous  whole. 

Viewed  from  behind  (Plate  XXIII.  i),  the  skull  shows  the  unusual  degree  to  which 
the  pterygoid,  24,  palatine,  and  maxillary  portions  descend  below  the  level  of  the  true 
‘ basis  cranii  ’ ( i ) : in  consequence  of  which  the  foramen  magnum  (o)  and  occipital 
condyles  (2)  appear  to  be  situated  in  the  upper  half  of  the  direct  back  view. 

The  basioccipital  (1)  is  a broad  depressed  plate  with  a thin,  smoothly  rounded, 
concave  posterior  border : it  slightly  increases  in  thickness  as  it  advances  forward 
to  blend  with  the  basisphenoid  (Plate  XXIV.  5),  but  developes  on  each  side  a rough 
low  triangular  protuberance,  z,  for  muscular  attachments,  anterior  to  the  occi- 
pital condyles.  In  a side  view  (Plate  XXL  fig.  1),  these  condyles  (2)  form  the 
most  prominent  parts  of  the  occipital  region,  which,  as  it  rises  above  them,  slopes 
forward,  giving  a low  character  of  intelligence  to  the  cranium  : the  plane  of  the 
posterior  surface  of  the  skull  forms  with  the  basal  plane  an  angle  of  105°.  Each 
condyle  (Plate  XXIII.  fig'.  1, 2, 2)  is  a conv’^exity  of  a subtriangular  form,  with  the  base 
straight  and  the  sides  curving  to  an  obtuse  apex:  the  extent  of  their  convex  curva- 
ture in  the  vertical  or  antero-posterior  direction  (Plate  XXL  fig.  1,2)  equals  that  of  a 
semicircle,  and  indicates  that  the  Megatherium  possessed  considerable  freedom  and 
extent  of  motion  of  the  head.  The  parallel  bases  of  the  condyles  are  turned  toward 
each  other  and  flank  the  sides  of  the  foramen  magnum,  Plate  XXIII.  fig.  1,  o.  This 

MDCCCLVI.  4 F 


572 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


foramen  is  a wide  or  full  ellipse  with  the  longer  axis  transverse,  and  the  plane, 
through  the  greater  prominence  of  the  upper  border,  inclined  backward  and  down- 
ward at  an  angle  of  135°  with  the  basioccipital.  The  occipital  region  (lb.  1,3, 8,3) 
is  semicircular,  its  contour  being  formed  by  a thick  rugged  ridge  continued  from 
the  superoccipital  (3)  on  each  side  to  the  mastoid,  s:  the  osseous  wall  included  be- 
tween this  arched  ridge  and  the  condyles  (2),  is  divided  into  four  shallow  depres- 
sions, by  a sharp  median  vertical  ridge  terminating  below  at  a venous  foramen  just 
above  the  upper  border  of  the  foramen  magnum,  and  by  a pair  of  thick  obtuse 
ridges  (r)  extending  from  the  sides  of  the  arched  ridge  obliquely  inwards  to  near  the 
apices  of  the  occipital  condyles,  and  thence  to  the  paroccipitals  (4).  The  depressions 
so  defined  are  roughened  by  muscular  implantations. 

The  paroccipital  (Plate  XXIII.  fig.  1,4)  is  a moderately  developed  triangular  tube- 
rosity abutting  against  the  back  part  of  the  articular  cavity  for  the  stylohyal  (Plate 
XXIV.  16),  and  separated  by  the  outer  occipital  depression  from  the  mastoid  (s). 
The  precondyloid  canals  (Plate  XXIV.  ja),  or  those  that  transmit  the  rnotory-lingual 
or  ninth  pair  of  nerves,  begin  by  a large  oblique  aperture  at  the  middle  of  the  inner 
side  of  the  base  of  the  condyles,  and  extend  along  a course  of  2^  inches  in  extent 
forward  and  outward  to  open  upon  the  back  part  of  the  rough  fossa  between  the  par- 
occipital  (4)  and  petrosal  (le)  externally,  and  the  basioccipital  and  basisphenoid  in- 
ternally, which  fossa  answers  to  the  ‘foramen  lacerum  in  basi  cranii’  of  ordinary 
mammals.  The  carotid  foramina  (c)  open  upon  the  fore-part  of  this  fossa.  The  ex- 
ternal precondyloid  foramina  {p,  p)  are  situated  on  the  inner  side  of  the  paroccipitals, 
are  each  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  thus  indicate  the  considerable  muscular  develop- 
ment of  the  tongue,  and  its  great  use  in  stripping  off  the  leaves  and  smaller  branches 
of  the  trees  affording  the  nourishment  of  the  Megatherium. 

The  basisphenoid  (Plate  XXIV.  5)  presents  on  each  of  its  hinder  angles  a low 
rugged  subcircular  protuberance  (<r)  for  muscular  insertions ; in  advance  of  which  it 
slightly  expands,  the  lateral  margins  inclining  downwards  so  as  to  form  the  begin- 
ning of  the  smooth  channel  that  contracts  and  deepens  as  it  advances  towards  the 
posterior  aperture  of  the  bony  nostrils.  The  broad  subvertical  pterygoid  plates  (24)  are 
continued  insensibly  from  the  deflected  margins  of  the  basisphenoid  ; they  are  smooth 
on  the  inside,  irregularly  channelled  for  muscular  attachments  on  the  outside.  The 
posterior  aperture  of  the  bony  nasal  canal  (Plate  XXIII.  fig.  I,  n)  is  a long  and  nar- 
row vertical  oval,  bounded  below  by  a low  transverse  ridge  (Plate  XXIV.  r),  which 
extends  from  the  hinder  boder  of  the  bony  palate  about  two  inches  backwards  upon 
the  smooth  surface  of  the  pterygoid  plates,  where  it  gradually  subsides : this  ridge 
forms  the  angular  termination  of  the  bony  palate  {ih.  20)  behind.  The  substance  of 
the  basisphenoid  is  excavated  by  air-sinuses,  continued  backward  from  the  ordinary 
position  of  the  sphenoidal  sinuses,  and  extending  into  the  basioccipital  as  far  back 
as  the  jugular  foramina, j.  They  are  exposed  by  fracture  of  the  walls  in  the  pro- 
tuberances marked  .r,  x,  in  Plate  XXIV. 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


573 


From  the  state  of  the  sutures  already  alluded  to,  the  limits  of  the  superoccipital, 
parietal,  and  frontal  bones  cannot  be  defined.  Above  the  arched  superoccipital  ridge 
(Plate  XXII.  fig.  2, 3)  there  are  two  semielliptical  rough  depressions  (a,  a)  for  mus- 
cular attachments  ; and,  in  advance  of  these,  the  upper  surface  of  the  cranium  shows 
two  other  similar  but  shallower  muscular  impressions,  b,  h.  The  smooth  surface  of  the 
parietal,  gradually  narrowed  to  an  inch  in  width  ( 7)  between  the  temporal  ridges  {t), 
again  as  gradually  expands  into  the  frontal  region  (u),  and  it  is  perforated,  a little 
anterior  to  the  middle  of  the  temporal  fossa,  by  a submedian  vascular  (venous?) 
foramen  (v),  about  half  an  inch  in  diameter.  The  temporal  fossae  (Plates  XXL  & 
XXII.  27,  f,  12)  are  remarkable  for  their  great  antero-posterior  extent,  and  for  the 
encroachment  upon  them  by  the  peculiar  process  (c)  sent  upward  and  backward 
from  the  malar  bone,  26.  They  are  partially  defined  anteriorly  by  the  extension  of  a 
postorbital  process  (Plate  XXL  fig.  1, 12,  Plate  XXII.  fig.  2, 12)  downward  to  the  malar 
bone  (26);  but,  beneath  and  within  this  slender  process,  they  communicate  freely  with 
the  orbits,  0.  The  posterior  boundary  ridge,  continued  from  that  on  the  parietal  bone, 
curves  forward  below  and  is  continued  into  the  sharp  upper  border  of  the  zygoma, 
Plate  XXI.  fig.  1,27.  The  surface  of  the  temporal  fossae  is  grooved  and  perforated 
posteriorly  by  large  vessels,  and  is  everywhere  strongly  impressed  by  the  attachments 
of  muscular  fasciculi.  The  base  of  the  zygomatic  process  of  the  temporal  bone  has 
an  extensive  origin  (Plate  XXII.  fig.  2,  t,  27),  not  less  than  6 inches  in  antero-poste- 
rior extent ; its  free  portion,  to  where  it  joins  the  malar,  being  3 inches  in  length. 
It  is  a strong  trihedral  bar  of  bone,  rather  concave  on  the  upper  and  outer  sides,  and 
forming  on  the  underside  the  glenoid  articular  cavity  for  the  lower  jaw.  This  cavity 
(Plate  XXIV.  g),  of  an  oval  form  with  the  long  axis  transverse,  measures  3 inches  by 
2f  inches,  and  is  half  an  inch  in  depth.  Behind  this  cavity  the  base  of  the  zygoma 
(Plate  XXL  fig.  ,1,27)  has  coalesced  w'ith  the  mastoid  (s)  and  petrosal  (le)  elements  of 
the  temporal,  which  combine  to  form  the  meatus  auditorius  externus,  e.  This  canal 
is  subcircular,  about  10  lines  in  diameter  at  the  deeper  part,  where  it  is  formed  by 
the  above  elements,  but  doubtless  wider  at  its  outer  part,  where  it  was  completed  by 
the  tympanic  bone.  This  bone  is  wanting  in  the  skulls  of  the  Megatherium  hitherto 
transmitted  to  England  : the  absence  of  any  fractured  surface  upon  the  contour  of 
the  orifice  of  the  auditory  canal  indicates,  however,  that  the  bone  was  a free  element 
of  the  temporal  in  the  Megatherium  as  in  the  Mylodon*  and  Glossotherium'f. 
The  mastoid  (Plate  XXII.  fig.  1,3)  forms  a rugged  process,  in  depth  or  length  not 
exceeding  the  pai  occipital  (4),  but  of  greater  breadth  and  thickness  ; above  it,  exter- 
nally, and  probably  in  the  line  of  the  primitive  suture  with  the  squamosal,  is  a venous 
foramen,  Plate  XXL  fig.  1, 27.  The  petromastoid — probably  the  petrosal  part  in  a 
greater  degree — forms  the  hemispheric  articular  cavity  (Plate  XXIV.  le)  for  the  stylo- 
hyal  (33),  the  anterior  rugged  wall  of  which  cavity  extends  downwards  farther  than  any 

* Description  of  the  Skeleton  of  an  Extinct  Gigantic  Sloth  (Mylodon  robustus,  Owen),  4to,  1S42,  p.  28. 

t Zoology  of  the  Voyage  of  the  Beagle,  ‘ Fossil  Mammalia,’  4to,  1840,  p.  59.  pi.  16.  fig.  4. 

4 F 2 


574 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


other  part  of  the  proper  basis  cranii,  Plate  XXL  fig.  1,  le:  the  petrosal,  anterior  to 
this,  sends  down  a shorter  rough  pyramidal  process.  The  carotid  foramen  (Plate 
XXIV.  c),  a full  ellipse  with  diameters  of  5 lines  and  4 lines,  is  situated  between  the 
petrosal  and  basisphenoid  at  the  fore-part  of  that  oblong  depression  which  is  termi- 
nated behind  by  the  large  precondyloid  foramen. 

The  stylohyal  (ss)  has  the  form  of  a hammer,  with  a long,  slightly  bent  handle,  ter- 
minated by  an  obliquely  truncated  rough  surface  for  syndesmosis  with  the  ceratohyaL 
At  the  opposite  end  the  handle  is  subcompressed,  and  the  head  is  formed  by  a sudden 
expansion  in  the  vertical  direction,  terminated  posteriorly  by  a straight  but  rugged 
margin,  and  with  the  upper  end  produced,  thickened,  and  forming  a smooth  con- 
vexity, or  condyle,  adapted  to  the  cavity  above  described  in  the  petromastoid.  The 
lower  end  of  the  head  or  expanded  part  of  the  hammer-shaped  bone  is  more  pro- 
duced, more  rugged,  and  terminates  obtusely.  The  outer  surface  has  a wide  depres- 
sion at  the  middle,  which  is  rough,  with  several  short  and  well-marked  ridges.  The 
length  of  the  specimen  described  is  8 inches,  the  breadth  or  depth  of  the  expanded 
end  is  3 inches  and  a half. 

The  upper  part  of  the  coalesced  frontals  (Plate  XXIL  fig.  2,  n)  forms  a smooth  tri- 
angular plate,  rapidly  expanding  to  the  postorbital  processes  (12)  and  very  slightly 
convex.  Some  indistinct  traces  of  the  fronto-nasal  suture  seem  to  show  that  the 
nasal  bones  (Plate  XXII.  fig,  2, 15)  extended  backward  beyond  the  transverse  parallel 
of  the  postorbital  processes ; more  distinct  traces  of  the  naso-maxillary  sutures  (21), 
show  that  the  coalesced  nasals  were  2 inches  9 lines  across  at  their  narrow  posterior 
part,  where  they  are  flat  above : at  first  slightly  contracting,  they  then  gradually  ex- 
pand, and  become  more  and  more  convex  transversely  to  their  anterior  extremity. 
Here  the  nasal  bones  are  also  thickened,  are  rugged  for  the  firmer  attachment  of  the 
cartilaginous  parts  of  the  nose,  and  their  under  surface,  being  excavated  by  two  longi- 
tudinal grooves,  the  thickened  terminal  surface  is  divided  into  a middle  (Plate  XXIII. 
fig.  2,  m)  and  two  lateral  {n,  n)  parts,  the  latter  being  convex  and  subangular,  and 
the  middle  expansion  slightly  excavated.  As  in  the  Two-toed  Sloth  {Choloepus  didac-^ 
tyliis),  the  under  surface  of  each  nasal  bone  sends  off  a terminal  plate  or  process  for 
the  attachment  of  a turbinal  cartilage  or  ossicle.  A narrow  median  groove  indi- 
cates ihe  original  suture  between  the  nasal  bones  along  their  anterior  half. 

The  cranial  cavity  of  the  Megatherium  is  considerably  smaller  than  the  cranial 
part  of  the  skull,  the  outer  wall  or  plate  of  bone  being  separated  by  large  irregular 
air-cells  from  the  vitreous  plate,  or  that  case  of  bone  which  immediately  invested  the 
brain  and  its  membranes.  The  vertical  diameter  of  the  cranial  cavity  is  4 inches 
8 lines;  its  transverse  diameter,  which  is  greatest  at  the  posterior  third  part  of  the 
cavity,  corresponding  with  the  posterior  part  of  the  cerebrum,  is  6 inches.  The 
brain  of  the  Megatherium,  to  judge  from  its  bony  case,  must  have  been  less,  by 
nearly  one  half,  than  that  of  the  Elephant ; but  with  the  cerebellum  relatively  larger 
and  situated  more  posteriorly  to  the  cerebral  hemispheres : whence  it  may  be  inferred 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


575 


that  the  Megatherium  was  a beast  of  less  intelligence,  and  with  the  command  of  fewer 
resources,  or  less  varied  instincts,  than  the  Elephant. 

The  ‘ maxilla  superior,’  or  maxillary  bone,  may  be  divided  into  a palatal,  alveolar, 
and  facial  portion:  the  latter  (Plate  XXI.  fig.  1,  21)  is  remarkable  for  the  excess 
of  its  vertical  over  its  antero-posterior  extent : it  forms,  with  the  coalesced  lacry- 
mal  (/),  the  anterior  and  part  of  the  inferior  boundary  of  the  orbit  by  a strong  sub- 
vertical outstanding  plate,  curved  with  the  convexity  forward,  perforated  at  the 
middle  part  of  its  base  by  the  antorbital  canal  (r),  which  is  double  on  the  left  side,  and 
near  the  upper  part  of  its  thick  obtuse  margin  by  the  lacrymal  canal  (/) : it  is  smooth 
behind,  or  next  the  orbit,  rather  rough  and  irregular  in  front:  a rough,  shallow  de- 
pression (Plate  XXIII.  fig.  2,  s)  near  the  upper  part  of  this  surface  indicates  the  origin 
of  a strong  labial  muscle.  The  outer  surface  of  the  facial  plate  of  the  maxillary  is 
smooth  and  slightly  undulated ; it  evidently  extends  as  far  as  the  postorbital  process 
upwards  and  backwards,  in  connexion  with  the  nasal  bone : its  anterior  border 
(Plate  XXL  fig.  1,  n),  terminating  the  side  of  the  nostril,  is  vertical,  slightly  concave 
and  sharp,  and  is  smoothly  excavated  on  the  inner  side  or  towards  the  nasal  cavity. 
The  lower  part  of  this  nasal  wall  presents  a deep  and  rough  sutural  notch  for  articu- 
lation with  the  premaxillary  bone. 

The  alveolar  part  of  the  maxillaiy  (Plate  XXIV.  i,  v)  extends  about  an  inch  below 
the  suborbital  process.  The  extent  of  the  alveolar  tract  is  10  inches;  its  greatest 
breadth  is  2 inches  4 lines,  viz.  between  the  second  and  third  teeth.  The  number  of 
alveoli  is  five.  The  first  (i)  has  a subtriangular  transverse  section,  with  the  apex  very 
obtusely  rounded  off  and  turned  forward  ; the  borders  of  this  alveolus  are  sharp  and 
somewhat  produced  below  the  level  of  the  surrounding  bone.  The  second  alveolus  {ii) 
is  close  to  the  first,  and  the  corresponding  teeth  are  nearly  in  contact ; its  transverse 
section  is  quadrate,  the  hinder  side  being  the  broadest,  the  outer  side  the  narrowest; 
the  fore-side  is  more  curved  than  the  back  one.  The  partition  between  this  and  the 
third  alveolus  is  thicker  than  the  preceding  one,  and  the  teeth  stand  further  apart. 
The  third  and  fourth  sockets  are  most  nearly  of  a square  form,  but  the  transverse 
diameter  predominates  ; the  fifth  socket  (v)  is  suddenly  reduced  in  size,  and  re- 
sembles most  the  first  in  form,  but  with  the  rounded  apex  of  the  triangle  turned 
backwards. 

No  trace  of  the  suture  between  the  maxillary  (21)  and  palatine  (20)  bones  remains : 
the  alveolar  border  beyond  the  fifth  socket  (y)  rapidly  contracts  to  the  thin  vertical 
pterygoid  plate  (24). 

The  bony  palate  terminates  behind  in  an  angular  notch,  formed  by  the  ridges  (r,  r) 
before  described.  The  bony  palate  forms  a narrow  tract,  with  parallel  lateral  borders 
gently  diverging  at  the  fore  and  back  part  of  the  tract,  which  is  very  slightly  concave 
transversely:  it  is  perforated  by  numerous  foramina;  two  long  ones,  like  fissures 
(Plate  XXIV.  V,  v),  opposite  the  interspace  between  the  third  and  fourth  molars, 
seem  to  represent  the  post-palatal  foramina ; there  are,  also,  some  large  foramina  {ii,  u) 


576 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


between  the  first  alveoli.  The  extent  of  the  palatal  part  of  the  maxillary  in  advance 
of  these  alveoli  is  about  1 inch  to  the  hindmost  part  of  the  premaxillary,  22,  and  2^ 
inches  to  the  apex  of  the  process  (21)  articulating  with  that  bone. 

The  premaxillaries  (Plates  XXIV.,  XXI.  fig.  1,  and  XXII.  figs.  1 & 2, 22)  have  coa- 
lesced along  the  major  part  of  their  extent,  leaving  only  a median  fissure  on  their  upper 
surface  (Plate  XXII.  fig.  2, 22),  of  about  1^  ineh  in  length,  at  about  the  same  distance 
from  their  slightly  expanded  anterior  ends ; at  their  under  surface  (Plate  XXIV.) 
the  same  fissure  is  more  advanced,  and  contracts  to  a few  foramina.  They  form  a 
slender,  elongated,  subdepressed,  four-sided  portion  of  bone,  and  constitute  a singular 
anterior  termination  of  the  skull. 

At  the  base  or  back  part  this  portion  of  bone  measures  4^  inches  across  ; the  fore- 
end  is  2 inches  9 lines  across ; the  narrowest  part,  near  this  end,  is  2 inches  4 lines 
across ; the  vertical  diameter  is  pretty  nearly  throughout  1 inch  6 lines,  but  decreases 
anteriorly.  The  posterior  third  of  the  bone  sends  upwEird  from  its  median  line  a 
ridge,  which  enlarges  as  it  approaches  the  corresponding  ridge  from  the  maxillaries, 
and  there  presents  a smooth  and  gradually  expanding  groove  at  its  upper  part,  for 
the  support  of  the  vomer  or  its  cartilaginous  septal  prolongation  (Plate  XXIII.  fig.  2). 
Anterior  to  the  median  ridge  begins  the  groove  which  sinks  into  the  fissure,  and  is 
then  again  continued  forward  as  a groove  to  within  an  inch  of  the  fore-end  of  the 
bone ; this  part  (Plate  XXIV.  22)  seems  crossed  by  a rough  plate  or  cap  of  bone,  flat, 
and  about  an  inch  in  breadth  at  its  upper  part,  and  there  terminating  behind,  as  it 
does  below,  in  a free  margin. 

The  under  surface  of  the  premaxillary  mass  (Plate  XXIV.  22)  is  rather  convex  antero- 
posteriorly,  as  also  transversely  along  its  middle  third  : the  groove  indicating  the 
primitive  suture  runs  along  the  whole  of  this  surface,  and  sinking  into  its  fore-part, 
opens  by  two  or  three  foramina  into  the  fissure  which  is  seen  on  the  upper  surface. 
The  baek  part  of  the  under  surface  of  each  premaxillary  is  notched  to  receive  a 
triangular  process  of  the  palatine  part  of  the  maxillary  (21):  the  more  slender  median 
parts  of  the  notehes  partly  divide  the  prepalatal  or  incisive  fissure  (a),  which  thus 
presents  the  form  of  a chevron. 

The  malar  (Plate  XXI.  fig.  1,26)  is  a singularly  developed  mass  of  bone,  and  has 
always  attracted  attention  as  one  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  the  skull, 
from  the  period  of  the  earliest  notices  of  the  Megatheriuin.  Its  bulk  and  complex 
shape  appear  to  relate  to  the  unusual  share  which  a modified  and  largely  developed 
inasseter  muscle  must  have  taken  in  the  aet  of  mastication. 

Firmly  articulated  by  extensive  reciprocally  indented  sutures,  at  one  end  with  the 
maxillary  (31),  at  the  other  end  with  the  zygomatic  bones  (27),  and  giving  an  extensive 
surface  of  attachment,  by  a peeuliar  upward  prolongation,  to  fasciculi  of  the  temporal 
muscle,  it  afforded  the  requisite  fixity  for  the  origins  of  the  large  and  complex  mas- 
seter. 

The  suture  with  the  maxillary  is  in  great  part  obliterated  in  the  skull  under  descrip- 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


577 


tion ; but  a portion  remaining  on  both  sides  shows  that  the  malar  ascended  to  the 
level  of  the  antorbital  foramen,  Plate  XXIII.  fig.  2,  r : it  forms  the  lower  and  a great 
part  of  the  hinder  boundary  of  the  orbit ; the  latter  by  a triangular,  slightly  bent 
postorbital  process  (Plate  XXI.  fig.  I,  a),  which  almost  touches  the  corresponding 
more  slender  process  of  the  frontal  (ib.  12).  The  ascending  process  (ib.  c)  is  a long, 
narrow,  unequal-sided  triangle  with  an  obtuse  apex ; the  descending  process  {d)  is  a 
longer  and  stronger  one,  extending,  when  the  mouth  is  shut,  outside  and  for  three 
inches  below  the  alveolar  border  of  the  lower  jaw : its  extremity  is  obtuse  and  re- 
curved. The  fourth  process  (ib.  h),  which  may  be  called  the  ‘zygomatic’  one,  ex- 
tends beneath  the  end  of  the  corresponding  process  of  the  temporal  bone,  but  the 
obliteration  of  the  suture  in  the  present  skull  prevents  a precise  definition  of  its 
limits.  The  whole  outer  surface  of  the  malar  is  slightly  convex,  moderately  smooth, 
with  a defined  surface  for  muscular  attachment  near  the  back  part  of  the  base  of 
the  descending  process.  The  inner  surface  shows,  by  its  well-marked  ridges  and 
depressions,  the  vigorous  action  of  the  muscular  fasciculi  which  derived  their  origin 
from  that  part. 

The  orbit  (Plate  XXL  fig.  1,  0),  of  proportionally  small  size,  as  in  all  large  mam- 
malian quadrupeds,  presents  a long  vertically  oval  form ; or  rather,  by  the  convex 
border  of  the  malar  (a),  is  reniforra.  Its  peripheral  contour  is  almost  completed  by 
the  descending  postorbital  process  of  the  frontal  (ib.  12)  in  tbe  present  skull ; anterior 
to  which  the  prominent  boundary  is  effaced  by  a broad  smooth  channel,  where  the 
orbital  surface  is  more  directly  continued  upon  the  facial  surface  of  the  maxillary : 
this  part  answers  to  the  supraciliary  notch  in  quadrupeds.  The  lacrymal  bone  being 
completely  coaleseent,  if  not  connate,  with  the  maxillary,  is  recognisable  only  by  the 
lacrymal  foramen  (ib.  /),  which  is  just  within  or  behind  the  obtuse  anterior  border  of 
the  orbit.  Admitting  the  essential  presence  of  the  lacrymal  by  this  character,  it  then 
combines  with  the  frontal,  maxillary  and  malar  bones,  to  form  the  contour  of  the 
orbit.  Within  this  frame,  the  orbit,  as  already  remarked,  communicates  extensively 
with  the  temporal  fossa. 

The  anterior  aperture  of  the  bony  nasal  canal  (Plate  XXIII.  fig.  2,  m,  n,  22)  is  sub- 
circular,  and  is  formed  by  the  nasals,  inaxillaries  and  premaxillaries  ; the  deep  ver- 
tical sides  being  contributed  wholly  by  the  inaxillaries. 

The  formation  of  the  external  bony  aperture  of  the  organ  of  hearing  has  already 
been  described. 

Mandible. — The  chief  characteristic  of  the  mandible  or  lower  jaw  is  the  near 
equality  of  its  vertical  to  its  horizontal  or  longitudinal  extent,  due  to  the  height  of 
the  coronoid  process,  and  more  especially  to  the  depth  of  the  dentigerous  part  of  the 
bone.  The  latter  dimension  relates  to  the  interesting  modification  of  the  principle 
of  maintenance  of  the  efficiency  of  the  masticating  machinery,  as  contrasted  with  that 
in  the  great  proboscidian  quadrupeds  with  a similar  diet  to  the  Megatherium. 

The  condyle  of  the  jaw  (Plate  XXV.  fig.  1,  a)  is  transversely  elliptical,  3 inches  in 


578 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


the  long,  1 inch  10  lines  in  the  short,  diameter:  it  is  moderately  convex,  and  least  so 
from  behind  forwards  : it  seems  but  a small  surface  for  the  articulation  of  so  massive 
a bone,  laden  with  large  teeth,  to  the  cranium ; but  the  adequate  firmness  of  suspen- 
sion was  afforded  by  the  enormous  muscles  which  seem  to  have  embraced  every  other 
part  of  the  ascending  ramus  of  the  mandible.  The  coronoid  process  (Plates  XXI. 
and  XXV.  fig.  2,  h)  was  lofty  compared  with  its  antero-posterior  diameter:  it  is 
mutilated  in  the  present  skull,  but  seems  to  be  entire  in  that  of  the  skeleton  at 
Madrid ; and  its  form  and  extent  may  be  appreciated  in  the  figures  published 
by  Bru  * and  Pander 'I'.  It  is  much  compressed,  begins  to  curve  upward  imme- 
diately anterior  to  the  neck  of  the  condyle,  being  continued  from  the  middle  of  that 
part.  The  angular  process  (ib.r)  of  the  lower  jaw  curves  backward  4^  inches  below 
the  condyle : it  is  a broad  triangular  plate,  moderately  convex  externally,  concave 
internally  and  chiefly  by  a slight  inward  bending  of  the  lower  margin,  Plate  XXV. 
fig.  2,  c.  A few  ridges  on  the  comparatively  smooth  outer  surface  indicate  the  inser- 
tions of  muscles ; but  the  inner  surface  is  strongly  sculptured  by  pits  and  grooves 
with  strong  intervening  bony  crests.  The  oblique  beginning  of  the  dentary  canal 
(e)  is  situated  6 inches  below  the  condyle,  and  the  foramen  is  2 inches  from  the  last 
alveolus,  but  above  its  level.  The  anterior  border  of  the  base  of  the  coronoid  pro- 
cess is  below  the  interspace  between  the  fourth  and  fifth  alveolus ; on  its  inner  side 
is  a large  elliptical  outlet  of  a division  of  the  dentary  canal,  Plate  XXL  fig.  2,/'.  The 
outer  and  inner  surfaces  of  the  coronoid  process  present  characters  analogous  to 
those  on  the  same  surfaces  of  the  angular  process,  in  regard  to  muscular  traces,  but 
the  concavity  is  on  the  outer  side  of  the  coronoid. 

The  contour  line,  which  is  usually  continued  forward,  straight,  or  with  a gentle 
curve  or  undulation  in  ordinary  quadrupeds,  is  interrupted  in  the  Megatherium  about 
one  foot  from  the  apex  of  the  angular  process  by  a notch,  from  which  the  contour  line 
describes  an  abrupt  deep  convex  curve  below  the  molar  teeth,  and  then  as  suddenly 
rises  and  passes  by  a concave  curve  to  the  under  side  of  the  long  and  slender  sym- 
physis, d,  d.  The  depth  of  the  dentigerous  part  of  the  horizontal  ramus  is  9 inches 
6 lines ; it  is  slightly  convex  externally,  and  forms  a flat  deep  vertical  wall  inter- 
nally, Plate  XXV.  fig.  2,  d,  Hi. 

The  antero-posterior  extent  of  the  alveolar  border  is  9 inches  (Plate  XXV.  fig.  1). 
The  first  socket  is  irregularly  four-sided,  the  front  side  being  the  shortest,  slightly 
convex,  and  with  the  angles  rounded  off  between  it  and  the  outer  and  inner  sides : 
the  outer  side  forms  rather  an  acute  angle  with  the  hinder  side.  The  area  of  the 
second  socket  is  tnore  regularly  quadrate,  with  the  transverse  diameter  the  longest; 
that  of  the  third  socket  is  nearly  a true  square;  the  fourth  and  last  is  similar  to,  but 

* Gaeriga,  J.  Descripcion  del  esqueletto  de  un  quadrupedo  muy  coriDulento  y raro,  &c.  fol.  Madrid, 
1796,  tab.  i.  and  ii. 

t Das  lliesen-Faulthier  {Bradypus  giganteus),  fol.  trans.,  Bonn,  1821,  tab.  iii.  See  also  Cuvier,  ‘ Ossemens 
Fossiles,’  4to,  tom.  v.  part  1.  pi.  16.  figs.  1 and  2. 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


579 


smaller  than,  the  first,  with  the  shortest  and  most  curved  side  at  the  back  part,  and 
with  the  antero-posterior  diameter  a little  exceeding-  the  transverse  one.  The  inter- 
vals between  the  alveoli  are  narrow  and  subequal. 

The  rami  of  the  jaw  are  blended  together  at  the  symphysis,  which  is  of  great  extent, 
Plate  XXI.  fig.  2,  Plate  XXV.  fig.  it  begins  posteriorly  at  the  fore-part  of 

the  mandibular  convexity,  opposite  the  second  alveolus,  whence  the  symphysis 
rapidly  contracts  to  the  shape  of  a scoop  or  spout,  which  is  prolonged  8^  inches 
from  the  alveolar  part,  and  terminates  in  a thick,  rough,  rounded  and  emarginate 
extremity : the  canal  at  the  upper  part  of  this  spout-like  symphysis  is  semicylindrical, 
slightly  bent  down  at  the  end,  and  3 inches  in  diameter ; it  becomes  roughened  by 
numerous  small  vascular  impressions  near  the  end,  but  elsewhere  is  smooth,  and  has 
obviously  served  for  the  support,  during  acts  of  protrusion  and  retraction,  of  a long 
cylindrical  tongue.  The  margins  of  the  canal  are  thick  and  rounded.  The  ^mental 
foramina,’  or  anterior  outlets  of  the  dental  canal  (P’ate  XXV.  g),  are  two  on  the  right 
side  and  three  on  the  left,  from  4 lines  to  8 lines  in  diameter. 

The  teeth  are  of  one  kind,  molars,  five  on  each  side  of  the  upper  jaw  (Plate  XXIV. 
and  Plate  XXVI.  fi  g.  2,  i,  ii,  Hi,  iv,  v),  four  on  each  side  of  the  lower  jaw  (Plate  XXV. 
fig.  1,  Plate  XXI.  fig.  2,  i,  ii,  Hi,  iv),  eighteen  in  total  number. 

In  the  upper  jaw,  the  first  or  anterior  molar  {i)  is  the  second  in  point  of  size,  the 
last  {v)  being  the  least.  The  first  molar  (Plate  XXVI.  fig.  2,  i)  is  8^  inches  in  length ; 
the  pulp-cavity  extends  six  inches  from  the  base ; it  presents  two  slight  curvatures, 
one  having  the  convexity  turned  forward,  and  the  other  inward.  The  transverse 
section  (Plate  XXIV.  i)  gives  an  irregular  semicircle,  with  the  convexity  turned  for- 
ward, and  the  flat  side  next  the  second  tooth  ; the  angles  at  which  this  side  joins  the 
curve  are  rounded ; the  outer  angle  is  somewhat  produced,  and  the  outer  side  of  the 
curve  is  flattened.  The  central  axis  of  the  tooth,  formed  by  the  vaso-dentine  *,  is 
irregularly  tetragonal ; the  cement  is  thick  on  the  anterior  and  posterior  surfaces, 
thill  on  the  sides  of  the  tooth. 

The  second  molar  (Plate  XXIV.,  Plate  XXVI.  fig.  1 & fig.  2,  H)  is  the  largest  of  the 
upper  series  ; it  exceeds  9 inches  in  length,  is  of  a tetragonal  form,  with  two  slight 
curvatures,  as  in  the  first  molar.  The  posterior  and  broadest  side  is  nearly  flat,  the 
anterior  side  somewhat  convex,  the  outer  and  narrowest  side  is  concave,  the  inner  side 
is  sinuous,  having  a median  longitudinal  eminence  between  two  longitudinal  concavi- 
ties. The  central  axis  of  vaso-dentine  (Plate  XXVI.  fig.  2,  v)  is  more  compressed  from 
before  backwards  than  in  the  preceding  tooth,  and  its  posterior  surface  is  concave ; 
the  two  transverse  ridges  of  the  grinding  surface  of  the  tooth  formed  by  the  dentine 
(ib.  d,  d)  are  nearly  equal ; but  the  sloping  side  formed  by  the  vaso-dentine  is  larger 
than  that  formed  by  the  cement  (ib.  c). 

The  third  tooth  (Plate  XXIV.  Hi,  Plate  XXVI.  fig.  2,  Hi)  is  of  nearly  the  same  size 


* See  ‘ Odontography/  and  Art.  Teeth  in  ‘ Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy,’  vol.  iv.  for  the  definition  of  the  different 
dental  tissues. 


4 G 


MDCCCLVI. 


580 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIU3I. 


and  form  as  the  second,  but  is  somewhat  narrower ; the  anterior  and  outer  angle  is 
less  rounded  off,  and  the  external  longitudinal  depression  is  deeper:  it  is  further 
removed  from  the  second  tooth  than  this  is  from  the  first. 

The  fourth  molar  (Plate  XXIV.  iv,  Plate  XXVI,  fig.  2,  iv)  is  smaller  than  the  two 
preceding,  but  of  nearly  equal  length,  viz,  8^  inches,  and  is  distinguished  from  the 
other  teeth  by  being  curved  in  only  one  direction,  and  that  in  a very  slight  degree, 
the  concavity  looking,  as  in  the  other  teeth,  outward : the  central  axis  of  the  tooth, 
in  reference  to  the  anterior  and  posterior  planes  of  the  skull,  is  straight : the  anterior 
and  posterior  layers  of  cement  decrease  in  thickness  as  they  approach  the  base  of  the 
tooth,  so  as  to  describe  a slight  curve,  the  convexity  of  which  is  turned,  on  both  sides, 
towards  the  adjoining  tooth.  The  fourth  molar  is  tetragonal,  and  with  more  equal 
sides  than  the  two  preceding  teeth  ; the  outer  and  inner  sides  are  concave,  the  ante- 
rior and  posterior  ones  convex ; the  angles  are  rounded,  but  the  anterior  and  inner 
angle  is  more  produced  than  the  rest.  The  grinding  surface  presents  two  equal  trans- 
verse ridges,  the  contiguous  sides  of  which  are  the  longest. 

The  fifth  molar  (Plate  XXIII.  fig.  1,  Plate  XXIV.  v,  Plate  XXVI.  fig,  2,  .s)  is  5 
inches  in  length,  1 inch  2 lines  in  transverse,  and  10^  lines  in  antero-posterior  diame- 
ter: its  principal  curvature  presents  its  concavity  forward,  or  toward  that  of  the  ante- 
rior tooth  ; the  curve  in  the  transverse  axis  of  the  skull  is  scarcely  appreciable.  The 
transverse  section  of  this  tooth  is  rhomboidal,  with  the  angles  rounded,  and  with  the 
longest  diameter  intersecting  the  antero-internal  and  the  postero-external  angles. 
The  dentinal  axis  is  transversely  quadrilateral,  with  the  posterior  angles  entire,  and 
the  posterior  surface  concave : the  layer  of  cement  which  covers  this  surface  is  the 
thickest,  and  its  posterior  surface  is  convex:  the  layers  which  cover  the  outer  and 
inner  sides  of  the  tooth  are,  as  in  the  rest,  the  thinnest ; the  anterior  layer  is  less  than 
one-third  the  thickness  of  the  posterior  layer.  The  anterior  ridge  of  dentine  is 
slightly  prominent,  and  the  posterior  alone  forms  the  summit  of  a transverse  emi- 
nence with  sloping  sides,  but  these  diverge  at  a more  open  angle  than  in  the  pre- 
ceding teeth. 

At  the  date  of  the  publication  of  my  ‘ Odontography,’ no  specimen  of  the- lower 
jaw  of  the  Megatherium  had  reached  England,  and  certain  detached  teeth  with  slight 
differences  from  those  known  to  belong  to  the  upper  jaw  were  conjecturally  referred 
to  the  lower  one*.  The  entire  bone,  with  the  dental  series  complete  (Plate  XXV., 
Plate  XXI.  fig.  2,  i,  ii,  Hi,  iv),  shows  that  three  of  those  teeth  were  rightly  so  referred; 
but  that  the  small  molar  alluded  to  at  p.  342,  op.  cit.,  does  not  belong  to  the  lower 
jaw,  which  has  only  four  teeth  in  each  ramus. 

The  first  molar  (Plate  XXV.  and  XXI.  fig.  2,  z)  is  8 inches  in  length,  with  a 
pulp-cavity  of  5 inches  in  depth ; it  presents  a curve,  with  the  convexity  forwards, 
which  is  more  marked  than  in  any  of  the  upper  molars.  The  anterior  surface  is  so 
much  less  convex  transversely  than  in  the  first  upper  molar,  that  the  transverse  sec- 


* Odontography,  p.  341. 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


581 


tion  presents  a tetragonal  rather  than  a semicylindrical  figure ; the  anterior  side, 
however,  being  only  three-fourths  the  breadth  of  the  posterior  one,  by  which  the  first 
lower  molar  may  be  distinguished  from  all  the  tetragonal  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw. 
Both  the  inner  and  outer  sides  are  slightly  concave  transversely,  the  posterior  side  is 
moderately  convex.  The  posterior  ridge  has  a base  twice  as  thick  as  the  shorter 
anterior  ridge.  The  greatest  transverse  breadth  of  the  crown  is  2 inches,  the  great- 
est fore  and  aft  breadth  is  1 inch  7 lines. 

The  second  molar  (Plates  XXV.  and  XXI.  fig.  2,  ii)  is  the  largest,  at  least  the 
broadest  transversely,  of  those  of  the  lower  jaw.  It  is  9 inches  in  length,  with  a 
minor  curvature,  convex  forward.  The  anterior  side  is  the  broadest,  being  more 
extended  inward  than  the  posterior  side : its  transverse  diameter  is  2 inches  3 lines, 
the  fore  and  aft  diameter  of  the  crown  is  1 inch  10  lines:  the  base  of  the  hinder 
eminence  in  the  latter  diameter  exceeds  that  of  the  front  eminence  chiefly  by  the 
greater  extent  of  dentine  exposed. 

The  third  molar  (Plates  XXV.  and  XXI.  fig.  2,  in)  is  of  the  same  length  as  the 
second,  but  has  its  two  diameters  more  nearly  equal,  the  transverse  section  being 
nearly  square,  the  anterior  division  being  rather  the  broadest  transversely,  and  of 
equal  thickness  from  before  backwards.  Both  this  and  the  preceding  tooth  are  con- 
vex transversely  before  and  behind,  concave  at  the  sides. 

The  last  lower  molar  (Plates  XXV.  and  XXI.  fig.  2,  iv),  with  an  equal  antero- 
posterior diameter  to  the  preceding,  is  shorter  and  narrower  transversely,  especially 
in  regard  to  its  posterior  division,  which  is  more  rounded,  or  convex  transversely, 
behind,  than  in  any  of  the  antecedent  teeth.  The  hinder  slope  of  the  hinder  ridge 
is  more  nearly  horizontal,  and  those  towards  the  middle  of  the  tooth  are  less  deep : 
the  modification  of  the  grinding  surface  of  this  tooth  relating  to  the  flatter  surface 
of  the  fifth  molar  above,  and  its  greater  antero-posterior  extent  as  compared  with  its 
breadth  compensating  for  the  absence  of  a fifth  molar  in  the  lower  jaw.  The  grind- 
ing surface  of  the  four  lower  molars  equals  that  included  between  the  anterior  ridge 
of  the  first  molar  and  the  posterior  ridge  of  the  last  molar  in  the  upper  jaw. 

Each  molar  has  its  base  undivided,  but  excavated  by  a deep  conical  pulp-cavity 
(Plate  XXVI.  fig.  2,  p,])),  from  the  apex  of  which  cavity  a fissure  is  continued  to  the 
middle  of  the  grinding  surface  of  the  tooth,  where  it  is  more  conspicuous  in  the  upper 
(Plate  XXIV.)  than  in  the  lower  molars.  Plate  XXVI.  fig.  2,  exhibits  a longitudinal 
section  of  the  five  molars  of  the  upper  jaw,  in  situ.  The  central  axis  of  vaso-dentine 
{v)  is  surrounded  by  a thin  layer  of  true  or  hard  dentine  {d),  and  this  is  coated  by 
cement  (c,  c),  which  is  of  great  thickness  on  the  fore  and  hind  surfaces,  but  is  thin 
where  it  covers  the  outer  and  inner  sides  of  the  tooth. 

As  the  outer  layer  of  the  vaso-dentine  is  first  formed  by  the  centripetal  calcification 
of  the  pulp,  the  thin  crust  of  that  substance  at  the  open  base  of  the  tooth  includes  a 
space  equal  to  the  vaso-dentine  at  the  crown  of  the  tooth  : the  contraction  of  the 
base  of  the  tooth  is  due  to  the  progressively-diminishing  thickness  of  the  cement  asi 

4 G 2 


582 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


it  approaches  that  part ; the  intervening  vacancy  {m,  m)  in  the  socket  indicating  the 
primitive  thickness  of  the  vascular  capsule,  by  the  ossification  of  which  the  cement 
is  formed. 

The  vaso-dentine  (Plate  X^iVI.  fig.  3,  v)  is  traversed  throughout  by  medullary 
canals,  s^^th  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  which  are  continued  from  the  pulp-cavity  and 
proceed,  at  an  angle  of  50°  to  the  plane  of  the  hard  dentine,  parallel  to  each  other, 
with  a slightly  undulating  course,  having  regular  interspaces,  equal  to  one  diameter 
and  a half  of  their  own  area,  generally  anastomosing  in  pairs  by  a loop  (ib.  /,  Z),  the 
convexity  of  which  is  turned  toward  the  origin  of  the  tubes  of  the  hard  dentine, 
forming  a continuous  reflected  canal. 

The  loops  are  situated  near,  and  for  the  most  part  close,  to  the  hard  dentine.  In 
a few  places  one  of  the  medullary  canals  may  be  obse^’ved  to  extend  across  the  hard 
dentine,  and  to  anastomose  with  a corresponding  canal  in  the  cement.  The  inter- 
spaces of  the  medullary  canals  of  the  vaso-dentine  are  principally  occupied  by  den- 
tinal tubes,  which  have  an  irregular  course,  form  reticulate  anastomoses,  and  termi- 
nate in  very  minute  cells,  at  least  one  hundred  times  smaller  than  the  calcigerous 
radiated  cells  of  the  cement. 

The  more  regular  and  parallel  tubes,  which  traverse  the  thin  layer  of  unvascular 
dentine  (ib.  d),  are  given  off  from  the  convexity  of  the  terminal  loops  of  the  medullary 
canals.  The  course  of  these  tubes  is  more  directly  transverse  to  the  axis  of  the  tooth 
than  is  that  of  the  medullary  canals  from  which  they  are  continued.  They  run  par- 
allel with  each  other,  but  with  fine  undulations  throughout  their  course.  They  have 
a diameter  of  j^-^^-  ^th  of  an  inch,  and  have  interspaces  of  about  twice  that  diameter. 
As  the  dentinal  tubes  approach  the  cement  they  divide  and  subdivide,  and  become 
more  wavy  and  irregular;  their  terminal  branches  take  on  a bent  direction  and  form 
anastomoses,  dilate  into  small  cells,  and  many  are  seen  to  become  continuous  with 
the  radiating  tubes  of  the  cells  of  the  contiguous  cement. 

The  cement  (ib.  c),  which  enters  so  largely  into  the  composition  of  the  grinders  of 
the  Megatherium,  is  characterized  in  that  extinct  animal  by  the  size,  number,  and 
regularity  of  the  vascular  or  medullary  canals  (ib.  m,  m)  which  traverse  it.  They  pre- 
sent the  diameter  of  T^^th  of  an  inch,  and  are  separated  by  intervals  equal  to  from 
four  to  six  of  their  own  diameters.  Commencing  at  the  outer  surface  of  the  cement, 
they  traverse  it  in  a direction  slightly  inclined  from  the  transverse  axis  towards  the 
crown  of  the  tooth,  running  parallel  with  each  other;  they  divide  a few  times  dipho- 
tomously  in  their  course,  and  finally  anastomose  in  loops,  the  convexity  of  which  is 
directed  towards,  and  in  most  cases  is  in  close  contiguity  with,  the  layer  of  hard 
dentine.  Fine  tubules  are  sent  off,  generally  at  right  angles,  from  the  medullary 
canals,  which  quickly  divide  and  subdivide,  form  anastomosing  reticulations,  and 
communicate  freely  with  the  similar  tubules  that  radiate  from  the  lacunse  or  calci- 
gerous cells,  ib.  r,  r.  These  cells  are  dispersed  throughout  the  dentine,  and  present 
an  oblong  form,  with  the  long  axis  transverse  to  that  of  the  tooth,  measuring 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


583 


of  an  inch  in  diameter.  The  cavity  of  the  cell,  which  is  not  quite  occupied  by  their 
opake  contents,  is  often  very  clearly  demonstrated.  The  tubes,  which  radiate  from 
the  cells  nearest  the  hard  dentine,  and  from  the  terminal  loops  of  the  vascular  canals, 
intercommunicate  freely  with  the  tubes  of  the  hard  dentine.  The  tooth  of  the  Mega- 
therium thus  offers  an  unequivocal  example  of  a course  of  nutriment  from  the  den- 
tine to  the  cement,  and  reciprocally. 

In  the  structure  which  the  fossil  teeth  of  the  Megatherium  and  its  extinct  con- 
geners clearly  demonstrate,  we  have  striking  evidence  of  the  rich  organization  of 
those  once-deemed  extravascular  parts,  and  that  they  were  pervaded  by  vital  activity. 
All  the  constituents  of  the  blood  freely  circulated  through  the  vascular  dentine  and 
the  cement,  and  the  vessels  of  each  substance  intercommunicated  by  a few  canals 
continued  across  the  hard  or  unvascular  dentine. 

With  respect  to  those  minuter  tubes,  the  more  important  as  being  more  imme- 
diately engaged  in  nutrition,  which  pervade  every  part  of  the  tooth,  characterizing 
by  their  difference  of  length  and  course  the  three  constituent  substances,  they  form 
one  continuous  and  freely  intercommunicating  system  of  strengthening  and  repara- 
tive vessels,  by  which  the  plasma  of  the  blood  was  distributed  throughout  the  entire 
tooth  for  its  nutrition  and  maintenance  in  a healthy  state*. 

The  grinding  surface  of  the  molars  of  the  Megatherium  differs,  on  account  of  the 
greater  thickness  of  the  cement  on  their  anterior  and  posterior  surfaces,  from  those 
of  all  the  smaller  Megatherioids,  in  presenting  two  transverse  ridges ; one  of  the 
sloping  sides  of  each  ridge  being  formed  by  the  cement,  the  other  by  the  vascular 
dentine;  whilst  the  unvascular  dentine,  as  the  hardest  constituent,  forms  the  sum-- 
mit  of  the  ridge,  like  the  plate  of  enamel  between  the  dentine  and  cement  in  the 
Elephant’s  grinder.  The  great  length  of  the  teeth  and  concomitant  depth  of  the 
jaws,  the  close-set  series  of  the  teeth,  and  the  narrow  palate,  are  also  strong  features 
of  resemblance  between  the  Megatherium  and  Elephant  in  their  dental  and  maxillary 
organization.  In  both  these  gigantic  phyllophagous  quadrupeds  provision  has  like- 
wise been  made  for  the  maintenance  of  the  grinding  machinery  in  an  effective  state ; 
but  the  fertility  of  the  Creative  resources  is  well  displayed  by  the  different  modes  in 
which  this  provision  has  been  effected : in  the  Elephant,  it  is  by  the  formation  of 
new  teeth  to  supply  the  place  of  the  old  when  worn  out ; in  the  Megatherium,  by  the 
constant  repair  of  the  teeth  in  use,  to  the  base  of  which  new  matter  is  added  in  pro- 
portion as  the  old  is  worn  away  from  the  crown.  Thus  the  extinct  Megatherium  had 

* The  first  statement  of  the  continuation  of  filamentaiy  processes  of  the  pulp  into  the  tissue  of  the  growing 
tooth  was  published  in  the  ‘ Comptes  Rendus  de  I’Academie  des  Sciences,’  Paris,  1839,  p.  787,  and  the  earliest 
observation  of  their  continuation  into  the  dentinal  tuhuli  was,  I believe,  recorded  in  the  following  passage : — 

“ I had  the  tusk  and  pulp  of  the  great  Elephant  at  the  Zoological  Gardens  longitudinally  divided,  soon  after 
the  death  of  that  animal  in  the  summer  of  1847.  Although  the  pulp  could  be  easily  detached  from  the  inner 
surface  of  the  pulp-cavity,  it  was  not  without  a certain  resistance ; and  when  the  edges  of  the  co-adapted  pulp 
and  tooth  were  examined  by  a strong  lens,  the  filamentaiy  processes  from  the  outer  surface  of  the  pulp  could 
be  seen  stretching  as  they  were  withdrawn  from  the  dentinal  tubes  before  they  broke.” — Art.  Teeth,  Cyclo- 
psedia  of  Anatomy,  vol.  iv.  p.  929. 


584 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


both  the  same  structure  and  mode  of  growth  and  renovation  of  the  molar  teeth, 
as  are  manifested  in  the  present  day  by  the  diminutive  Sloths. 

Comparison  of  the  Skull  and  Dentition. 

The  important  affinity  indicated  by  the  dentition  is  confirmed  by  the  characters 
of  the  skull.  In  no  other  edentate  family,  save  the  Bradypodidce,  is  the  cheek- 
bone so  nearly  developed  to  the  megatherioid  proportions  of  that  bone ; in  no  other 
does  it  ascend  above  the  zygoma  into  the  temporal  fossa  or  descend  below  the  level 
of  the  molar  teeth.  The  large  and  complex  malar  bone  is  also  associated,  in  the 
Sloths,  with  a terminal  position  of  the  great  anterior  and  posterior  orifices  of  the 
cranium,  with  terminal  occipital  condyles,  and  in  the  Ai  {Bradypus  tridactylus)  with 
a sloping  occipital  region.  The  cranial  division  of  the  skull  is  relatively  as  great  in 
the  Sloths  as  in  the  Megatherium  ; and  the  actual  capacity  of  the  cerebral  cavity  is 
masked  by  a similar  expansion  of  the  air-cells,  which  almost  everywhere  surround 
that  cavity,  and  raise  the  outer  plate  of  its  bony  parietes  above  the  inner  one.  The 
occiput  presents  the  same  expanded  proportions,  the  same  broad  depressed  basilar 
plate,  and  the  anterior  condyloid  foramina  are  of  large  relative  size.  The  tympanic 
is  small ; it  nearly  completes  a circular  frame  for  the  ear-drum,  to  which  function  it 
is  limited,  and  it  long  remains  a separate  bone.  The  detached  and,  in  the  skull  de- 
scribed, lost  tympanies  of  the  Megatherium  have  been  evidently  restricted  to  the 
same  office.  The  temporal  fossa,  in  the  Sloths,  is  long  and  large,  and  communicates 
freely  with  the  orbit,  the  outer  boundary  of  which,  however,  is  not  completed  in  any 
living  species  of  Sloth.  The  nasals  become  confluent  in  old  Sloths,  and  develope 
turbinal  larainse  from  their  under  surface.  The  premaxillaries  are  edentulous  and 
without  any  ascending  process.  The  rami  of  the  lower  jaw  expand  and  branch  out 
behind  into  a coronoid,  a condyloid,  and  a long  and  deep  angular  process,  and  they 
are  anchylosed  anteriorly  at  a broad  sloping  symphysis.  Only  in  the  genus  Bradypus, 
amongst  known  existing  quadrupeds,  do  the  alveoli  of  both  jaws  correspond  in  num- 
ber, simplicity,  relative  depth  and  position  with  those  of  the  Megatherium.  The 
still  more  important  agreement  between  these  existing  and  extinct  Bruta,  in  the 
peculiar  structure  of  the  teeth,  yields  the  crowning  proof  that  it  is  to  the  diminutive 
ai’boreal  Sloths  that  the  gigantic  Megatherium  and  its  less  bulky  though  larger  extinct 
congeners  have  the  closest  natural  affinity. 

The  chief  differences  observable  in  the  cranial  anatomy  of  the  Sloths,  as  compared 
with  that  of  the  Megatherium,  are  the  greater  relative  depth  and  breadth,  and  the 
more  convex  outline  of  the  coronal  aspect  of  the  skull ; but  this  difference  would  be, 
doubtless,  much  less  marked  in  the  immature  than  in  the  adult  Megatherium.  The 
zygomatic  process,  in  the  Sloths,  is  relatively  shorter,  and  does  not  attain  the  malar 
bone ; this,  therefore,  has  not  the  middle  process  for  supporting  the  zygoma,  and  is  two- 
pronged, instead  of  being,  as  in  the  Megatherium,  four-pronged.  The  chief  characters 
by  which  the  Megatherium  deviates,  in  its  cranial  structure,  from  the  bradypodal  and 
approaches  to  the  rnyrmecophagal  type,  are  the  elongation  of  the  slender  edentulous 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


585 


fore-part  of  the  upper  jaw,  and  of  the  corresponding  grooved  slender  edentulous  part 
of  the  lower  one : but  the  prolongation  of  the  upper  jaw  is  due  to  relatively  longer 
premaxillaries  than  are  developed  in  any  of  the  true  Edentata.  The  zygomatic 
arches,  moreover,  are  more  defective  in  the  Anteaters  and  Pangolins  than  in  the 
Sloths ; the  malar  part  especially  being  minute  or  obsolete.  Only  in  the  Orycterope 
and  Armadillos,  amongst  the  existing  Bruta^  is  the  zygomatic  arch  complete,  but  it  is 
simple,  without  ascending  or  descending  processes.  The  great  Glyptodon,  indeed, 
exemplifies  that  tendency  to  community  of  characters  so  often  presented  by  extinct 
species,  in  an  inferior  prolongation  of  the  malar  bone  analogous  to  that  of  the  Sloths 
and  Megatherium.  With  other  existing  mammals  than  those  of  the  Edentate  order, 
it  would  be  lost  time  to  pursue  the  present  comparison  with  a view  to  the  elucidation 
of  the  affinities  of  the  Megathere.  It  needs  only  to  place  the  skull  of  this  animal  by 
the  side  of  those  of  the  Elephant,  Rhinoceros,  Sivatherium,  Ox,  Elk,  Horse,  Dugong, 
or  other  vegetable-feeding  mammal  of  corresponding  or  approximate  size,  to  be  struck 
with  the  peculiarities  of  the  fossil,  and  to  be  convinced  that  the  habits  and  mode  of 
feeding  of  the  Megatherium  had  been  such  as  are  no  longer  manifested  by  the  larger 
Herbivora  of  the  present  day. 

It  remains  then  to  inquire  whether,  among  the  extinct  forms  of  the  mammalian 
class  to  which  was  assigned  the  office  of  restraining  the  too  luxuriant  vegetation  of  a 
former  world,  there  be  any  that,  from  their  cranial  or  dental  characters,  may  be  con- 
cluded to  have  resembled  the  Megatherium  in  the  mode  of  performing  that  task. 

The  skull  of  the  Mylodon,  while  it  presents  all  the  essential  resemblances  to  that  of 
the  Megatherium  which  have  been  pointed  out  in  the  skull  of  the  Sloth,  as,  e.  g.  the 
long  cranium,  the  terminal  position  of  the  occipital  condyles,  and  of  the  occipital 
and  nasal  apertures,  and  the  large  and  complicated  malar  bones,  approximates  still 
more  closely  to  the  Megatherium  in  the  junction  of  the  malar  with  the  zygomatic 
process  of  the  temporal,  and  in  the  relative  depression  and  flatness  of  the  elongated 
cranium.  But  in  thus  receding  from  the  existing  Sloths,  the  Mylodon  does  not 
approach  any  other  existing  genus,  but  only  another  member  of  its  own  peculiar 
extinct  family. 

The  most  marked  differences  in  the  skulls  of  the  Mylodon  and  Megatherium  de- 
pend on  the  minor  length  of  the  teeth  and  consequent  depth  of  their  sockets  in  the 
smaller  species,  which  require  a less  vertical  extent  of  the  maxillary  bone  in  the 
molar  region  and  of  the  corresponding  part  of  the  lower  jaw,  the  lower  border  of 
whieh  is  consequently  nearly  straight  in  the  Mylodon,  as  it  is  in  the  existing  Sloths. 
So  great  a proportional  extent  of  the  descending  process  of  the  malar  bone  is  con- 
sequently not  required,  and  this  process  is  more  oblique  in  direction,  and  is  relatively 
broader  and  thinner  than  in  the  Megatherium.  In  these  differences  also  the  Mylo- 
don shows  its  closer  resemblance  to  the  Sloths.  The  basioccipital  is  relatively 
broader,  and  the  occipital  condyles  are  wider  apart  in  the  Mylodon ; the  occipital 
plane  is  more  inclined  and  the  zygomatic  process  proportionally  weaker  than  in  the 


586 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


Megatherium.  The  minor  depth  of  the  lower  jaw  and  the  lighter  grinding  instru- 
ments call  for  a less  extensive  origin  of  the  temporal  muscles,  and  accordingly  the 
superior  boundaries  of  their  fossse  are  separated  in  the  adult  Mylodon  by  a wide  and 
smooth  parietal  tract*,  as  in  the  Sloths.  The  postfrontal  process  is  rudimentary  in 
the  Mylodon,  and  the  postorbital  process  of  the  malar  bone  is  obsolete ; the  orbit  is 
consequently  without  any  bony  boundary  behind  ; the  malar,  accordingly,  has  but 
th  ree  processes,  and  is  thus  less  complicated  than  in  the  Megatherium.  The  inter- 
orbital part  of  the  skull  is  relatively  narrower,  the  maxillary  part  relatively  broader, 
than  in  the  Megathere.  No  trace  of  premaxillaries  was  present  iti  the  skull  of  the 
Mylodon  i^ohustus  described  by  me,  and  the  broad  truncated  symphysis  of  the  lower 
jaw  indicates  that  they  must  have  been  very  small  if  they  existed  : the  peculiar  length 
of  the  premaxillaries  in  the  Megatherium,  and  the  corresponding  prolongation  of  the 
long  and  narrow  symphysis  mandibulm,  offer  the  most  conspicuous  differences  in  the 
conformation  of  the  skull,  and  proportionally  remove  that  genus  from  the  existing 
Sloths.  The  bony  palate  is  absolutely  broader  in  the  much  smaller  skull  of  the 
Mylodon  than  in  the  Megatherium,  and  it  gradually  contracts  from  the  first  to  the 
fifth  molar : it  is,  e.  g.  5 inches  in  breadth  between  the  first  molars  in  the  Mylodon 
rohustus,  and  only  2 inches  in  breadth  between  the  same  teeth  in  the  Megatherium. 

The  opportunity  of  a comparison  of  the  skull  of  the  Megalonyx  with  that  of  the 
Megatherium  is  yet  a desideratum  : it  would  probably  demonstrate  some  inter- 
mediate modifications  between  the  latter  and  the  Mylodon. 

The  extinct  megatherioid  animal  of  which,  after  the  Mylodon  and  the  Megathe- 
rium, the  most  complete  cranium  has  hitherto  been  obtained,  is  the  Scelidotherium-J'. 

In  many  respects  the  skull  of  this  animal  resembles  that  of  the  Megatherium  more 
than  does  that  of  the  Mylodon.  The  plane  of  the  occiput  is  rather  less  inclined 
from  below  forward  than  in  the  Megatherium,  but  more  resembles  that  part  than  in 
the  Mylodon : the  upper  boundaries  of  the  temporal  fossse  more  nearly  approximate 
than  in  the  Mylodon  : the  bony  palate  is  narrower,  and  its  sides  more  parallel  than  in 
the  Mylodon  ; but  instead  of  being  concave  transversely,  as  in  the  Megatherium,  it 
is  convex:  the  alveoli  are  nearer  together  than  in  the  Mylodon,  and  the  first  is  not 
separated  by  a wider  diastema  than  the  rest.  The  symphysis  of  the  lower  jaw  is  much 
prolonged,  but  is  less  deeply  channelled  above  than  in  the  Megatherium,  and  is  not 
so  distinctly  defined  by  the  abrupt  increase  of  depth  of  the  ramus  behind  it  which 
characterizes  the  Megatherium ; the  molar  part  of  the  mandible  makes,  however,  a 
greater  convexity  below  than  in  the  Mylodon. 

With  these  marks  of  approximation  to  the  Megatherium  there  are,  however,  the 
same  differences  as  in  the  Mylodon  in  regard  to  the  widely  open  orbit,  the  more  simple, 
trifurcate,  malar  bone,  the  minor  depith  of  the  alveolar  portions  of  the  jaws,  and  the 
straighter  outline  of  the  lower  border  of  the  mandible.  In  both  the  Mylodon  and 

* Memoir  on  the  Mylodon,  4to,  1842,  pi.  3. 

t Fossil  Mammalia  of  the  ‘ Voyage  of  the  Beagle,’  p.  73.  pis.  20,  21,  & 22. 


PROFESSOR  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


587 


Scelidothere  the  coronoid  process  is  relatively  shorter  than  in  the  Megathere,  and 
the  foramen  near  the  fore-part  of  the  base  of  that  process  is  outside  and  below  that 
base,  not  on  the  inside  of  it  as  in  the  Megatherium.  The  mastoid  process  is  relatively 
shorter  and  the  stylohyal  pit  is  shallower ; the  lacrymal  bone  is  more  distinct,  and 
the  foramen  is  larger  in  the  Scelidothere  than  in  the  Mylodon  or  Megatherium.  In 
all  the  essential  characters  of  the  lower  jaw,  as  in  the  number,  structure  and  kind  of 
teeth,  the  extinct  megatherioid  quadrupeds  more  closely  resemble  each  other,  and  the 
existing  Sloths,  than  any  other  known  existing  or  extinct  animals. 

The  number  of  the  teeth,  their  length,  equable  breadth  and  thickness,  and  absence 
of  fangs,  their  deeply  excavated  base,  and  the  unlimited  growth  resulting  from  the  per- 
sistent matrix,  together  with  their  composition  of  cement,  dentine  and  vaso-dentine, 
without  any  true  enamel,  are  characters  common  to  the  Megatherioids  and  Sloths. 
The  form  of  the  teeth  differs  in,  and  characterizes,  each  genus.  It  would  seem  that 
the  Megalonyx,  in  the  elliptical  or  subcylindrical  shape  of  such  of  its  teeth  as  are 
known,  more  closely  resembled  the  existing  Sloths  than  do  the  other  Megatherioids. 
The  Unau  {Choloepus  didactylus)  resembles  the  Mylodon  in  the  distance  between  the 
first  and  the  second  molars  of  the  upper  jaw;  but  the  advanced  molar  assumes,  in 
that  existing  Sloth,  the  form  and  proportions  as  well  as  the  position  of  a canine,  and 
the  corresponding  tooth  of  the  lower  jaw  is  similarly  developed  and  separated  from 
the  other  three  teeth  by  a nearly  equal  interval.  In  the  Ai  {Bradypus  tridactylus) 
the  first  molar  in  both  jaws  presents  nearly  the  same  proportionate  size  to  the  rest,  as 
in  the  Megatherium,  and  is  not  separated  from  them  by  a wider  interval  than  the 
rest,  as  it  is  in  the  Unau  and  Mylodon.  In  both  species  of  existing  Sloth,  the  last 
molar  of  the  lower  jaw  is  as  simple  in  form  as  in  the  Megatherium  : in  the  Mylodon 
and  Scelidotherium  it  is  larger  and  more  complex  in  shape,  the  grinding  surface 
being  divided  into  two  lobes  by  two  oblique  channels,  which  traverse  longitudinally 
one  the  outer  the  other  the  inner  side  of  the  tooth  : these  grooves  are  more  shallow 
in  the  Scelidothere  than  in  the  Mylodon,  and  the  lobes  of  the  tooth  are  more  equal 
and  more  compressed.  The  grinding  surface  itself,  in  all  the  molars  of  both  Mylo- 
don and  Scelidothere,  resembles  that  in  the  Sloths ; the  two  transverse  ridges  are 
developed  only  in  the  teeth  of  the  Megatherium,  which  are  longer  in  proportion  to 
their  thickness  than  in  the  Mylodon,  Megalonyx,  or  Scelidothere.  These  modifica- 
tions, with  the  narrow  palate,  the  close-set  series  of  teeth,  their  great  length,  and  the 
concomitant  depth  of  the  jaws,  are  features  of  resemblance  to  the  maxillary  and  dental 
characters  of  the  Elephant ; but  the  fundamental  structure  of  the  teeth,  not  only  of 
the  Megatherium,  but  of  all  its  extinct  congeners,  is  manifested  in  the  present  day 
exclusively  by  the  restricted  and  diminutive  family  of  the  Bradypodidce.  I conclude, 
therefore,  the  present  section  of  this  memoir  by  repeating  the  remark  which  I was 
led  to  make  in  a former  memoir*,  relative  to  the  existing  Sloths: — “These  Mammals 


MDCCCLVI. 


♦ On  the  Mylodon  rohuslus,  4to,  p.  45. 
4 H 


588 


professor  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


present  to  the  zoologist,  conversant  only  with  living  species,  a singular  exception  in 
their  dental  characters  to  the  rest  of  their  class ; but  there  has  been  a time  when 
this  peculiar  dentition  was  manifested  under  as  various  modifications  as  may  now  be 
traced  in  some  of  the  more  common  dental  types  in  existing  orders  of  Mammalia.” 


Comparative  Table  of  Dimensions  of  the  Skull  of  Megathere,  Mylodon,  and 

SCELIDOTHERE. 


Megatherium 

Americanum. 

Mylodon 

robustus. 

Scelidotherium 

leptocephalum. 

Cranium. 

ft. 

iu. 

lin. 

ft. 

iu. 

lin. 

ft. 

in. 

lin. 

Length  fiom  the  occipital  condyles  to  the  fore-end  of  the  upper 

jaw  

2 

7 

0 

1 

6 

6 

1 

8 

4 

Length  from  the  occipital  condyles  to  the  fore-part  of  the 

malar  bone  

1 

8 

0 

1 

2 

0 

0 

11 

6 

Lengtli  from  the  fore-part  of  the  malar  bone  to  the  fore-end 

of  the  upper  jaw 

0 

10 

6 

0 

5 

0 

0 

8 

8 

Breadth  across  the  widest  part  of  the  zygomatic  arches 

0 

10 

9 

0 

7 

0 

Least  breadth  at  the  interspace  of  those  arches  

0 

6 

0 

0 

5 

4 

0 

3 

7 

Breadth  of  the  fore-part  of  the  nasal  bones 

0 

4 

6 

0 

3 

3 

0 

2 

8 

Mandible. 

• 

Length  

2 

3 

0 

1 

3 

6 

1 

6 

6 

Breadth  between  the  hinder  ends  (angles)  of  the  rami  

0 

7 

0 

0 

6 

3 

0 

4 

7 

Breadth  between  the  condyles 

0 

4 

0 

0 

4 

2 

0 

1 

8 

Breadth  between  the  posterior  sockets  of  the  teeth  

0 

2 

3 

0 

2 

10 

0 

1 

6 

Breadth  between  the  anterior  sockets  of  the  teeth 

0 

1 

9 

0 

4 

0 

0 

1 

8 

Breadth  across  the  fore-part  of  the  symphysis 

0 

4 

5 

0 

5 

4 

0 

2 

5 

Depth  of  ascending  ramus  from  the  upper  part  of  the  condyle 

1 

5 

0 

0 

5 

7 

0 

5 

8 

Depth  of  ascending  ramus  at  the  fore-part  of  the  base  of  the 

coronoid  process 

0 

9 

0 

0 

3 

7 

0 

3 

7 

Depth  of  horizontal  ramus  at  the  fore-part  of  the  first  socket.. 

0 

8 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

2 

7 

Length  of  the  symphysis  following  the  outer  curve  

1 

1 

0 

0 

4 

3 

0 

7 

3 

Fore  and  aft  extent  of  base  of  coronoid  process 

0 

9 

0 

0 

3 

8 

0 

3 

9 

From  the  back  part  of  the  condyle  to  the  end  of  the  angular 

process 

0 

6 

0 

0 

3 

2 

0 

3 

6 

From  the  end  of  the  angular  process  to  the  last  socket 

0 

9 

7 

0 

6 

6 

0 

6 

5 

From  the  first  socket  to  the  anterior  margin  of  the  jaw 

0 

9 

0 

0 

3 

6 

0 

7 

10 

Extent  of  the  alveolar  series 

0 

9 

0 

0 

5 

4 

0 

4 

4 

Breadth  of  the  condyle 

0 

3 

0 

0 

2 

6 

0 

1 

10 

PROFESSOR,  OWEN  ON  THE  MEGATHERIUM. 


589 


Description  of  the  Plates. 

All  the  figures,  save  where  otherwise  expressed,  are  one-fourth  the  natural  size. 

PLATE  XXL 

Fig.  1.  Side  view  of  the  skull  of  the  Megatherium. 

Fig.  2.  Inner  side  view  of  the  mandible  and  of  the  section  of  the  symphysis. 

PLATE  XXII. 

Fig.  1.  The  opposite  and  more  mutilated  side  view  of  the  same  skull,  showing  the 
surface  of  the  temporal  fossa. 

Fig.  2.  Upper  view  of  the  same  skull. 

PLATE  XXIII. 

Fig.  1.  Back  view  of  the  same  skull. 

Fig.  2.  Front  view  of  the  same  skull. 

Fig.  3.  Back  view  of  the  mandible. 

Fig.  4.  Front  view  of  the  same  mandible. 

PLATE  XXIV. 

Base  view,  natural  size,  of  the  same  skull,  and  grinding  surface  of  the  upper  teeth. 

PLATE  XXV. 

Fig.  1.  Upper  view  of  the  mandible,  and  grinding  surface  of  the  lower  teeth. 

Fig.  2.  Side  view  of  the  mandible. 


PLATE  XXVI. 

Fig.  1.  The  second  upper  molar  tooth: — natural  size. 

Fig.  2.  Longitudinal  section  of  the  alveolar  part  of  the  upper  jaw  and  of  the  five 
upper  molars,  in  situ: — three-fourths  of  the  natural  size. 

Fig.  3.  Transverse  section  of  a portion  of  a molar  tooth  of  the  Megatherium  : — mag- 
nified 500  linear  diameters. 

The  letters  and  ciphers  on  the  several  figures  are  explained  in  the  text. 


3s?’' !«■•!• 


,. . ’’'.v  ' 

; V • ■ . ■' • ■ 'Vv  ■'  ■l.riv-  ' ■ ' • ' 

. N")v>'r  ■'  . ' 

' ■_  S^^  ’ w':', 


.iUr.^jC-r /:.  ^;,;^  'L,-  r,., y;'i' 


T r'y'#  ; ■<  ri’ 

> •>.  -r  -/V,  .'WA  ' .-  ■-  i 
h.  •■■'■nw 


(■ , -j 


y:,^  y.: 
■(/,■  ,■„ 


- ■,  . '•.,  ■■  ■■  •■y--'  . ■ ■■-'  ■ '^'V 'v‘kf''i!'’.!'”''  ■ i-k-:.v '^t 

■ ./"Ai  , ; '5,  , ^ . . 


■-  ,.  ,vy..^"‘  ^ »■  „■■  ■• 


/■■l:<  'A'/.  A -'■ 


..  .,  ■0"A  -a 

. '-;M 


x.^ 


;;  ■ , y ' ‘sy-. 

' »■ ' 


■■  ■ y .;,'  ‘:>  •"■ 

',  ' '"sSS 


■ify.  ‘ • 

l.j-V«  ^ ^ . ■ 

V X--  ■ ix-r^' 

. M / 

t ’ ,/■.  1 . , 1 

* ■;  • -'  ■ *■-,  ^ ■ 

;,’  \ A ■ ' '''':,  1 V ■«  _ ..  . . • ■ '*■■  ’ ■ '' 

I ;;  yy  ki 

V>  ' 

. ,, .y  ■'  V ' 

, , w.#: 

X.  X ^ V'"'  '■'.;  . k: 

. ■ • !■  j'/i  '■'.  ' '•  S'.  V.  , !' 

vlr/'  ■'  ,v  .'  y'f;''.  hrn:  , yy,  ■ y; 

.;(  .iVi 

V,...'..;,  " ' .., ..  .,:’  /'  '' 

• . yi^v  V./\t  ‘ , 

A'  ■ , 

''•' ' "■'  ',  ","•'  '.  '}"'  ' ^ • ■5;'' 

':AA;^rAA.i 

■ • ' '■  :‘"  - y .'' 

y-yf'  •>.',; 

A,-,  -Dcn 

w.  S\v, 

'h.;  ^.!  >.  HAf 

\<)  H'  '.  '•< 

■- •■  ■ SV}^A''iPi 

//''y<;.'’\«,'./vV' 

!i  •U.-.iif!:  C 

* 

t:i •':  '.;i:l  iU)  < 

■'■i.uix!',) 

' ' .'1 '■''  '’ 

' 

V • • • ' '*■!:■, 

- 

' 

- 

[ «91  ] 


XXVIII.  On  the  Deflection  of  the  Plumhdine  at  Arthurs  Seat,  and  the  Mean  Specific 
Gravity  of  the  Earth.  Communicated  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  James,  R.E.,  F.R.S., 
M.RJ.A.  &^c.,  Superintendent  of  the  Ordnance  Survey. 

Received  February  11, — Read  February  21,  1856. 

The  Royal  Society  has,  from  the  very  commencement  of  the  Ordnance  Survey  of 
the  United  Kingdom,  taken  a deep  interest  in  its  progress.  I have  therefore  great 
pleasure  in  announcing  to  the  Society  the  completion  of  all  the  computations  con- 
nected with  the  Primary  Triangulation,  the  measurement  of  the  Arcs  of  Meridians, 
and  the  figure  and  dimensions  of  the  Earth. 

The  account  of  all  the  operations  and  calculations  which  have  been  undertaken 
and  executed  is  now  in  the  press,  and  will  shortly  be  in  the  hands  of  the  public. 

After  determining  the  most  probable  spheroid  from  all  the  astronomical  and 
geodetic  amplitudes  in  Great  Britain,  we  find  that  the  plumb-line  is  considerably 
deflected  at  several  of  our  principal  Trigonometrical  Stations,  and  at  almost  every 
station  the  cause  of  the  deflection  is  apparent  in  the  configuration  of  the  surrounding 
country. 

The  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  at  Arthur’s  Seat  is  5"'25,  and  at  the  Royal  Obser- 
vatory at  Edinburgh  it  amounts  to  5"'63  to  the  South.  The  unequal  distribution  of 
matter  here,  the  great  trough  of  the  Firth  of  Forth  being  on  the  North,  and  the  range 
of  the  Pentland  on  the  South,  presents  a tangible  cause  for  the  deflection  ; but  as  the 
contoured  plans  of  the  county  of  Edinburgh  are  published,  and  we  have  the  most 
perfect  data  that  it  is  possible  to  obtain  for  estimating  the  amount  of  local  attrac- 
tion at  Arthur’s  Seat  and  the  Calton  Hill,  and  as  it  appeared  to  me  that  an  investiga- 
tion of  this  matter  was  not  only  necessary  to  confirm  and  establish  the  results  arrived 
at  from  the  previous  investigation  of  all  the  observed  latitudes,  but  would  also  prove 
highly  interesting  to  science,  I decided  on  having  observations  taken  with  Airy’s 
Zenith  Sector  on  the  summit  of  Arthur’s  Seat,  and  at  points  near  the  meridian  on 
the  North  and  South  of  that  mountain,  at  about  one-third  of  its  altitude  above  the 
surrounding  country. 

The  observations  were  made  by  Serjeant-Major  Steel  of  the  Royal  Sappers  and 
Miners,  during  the  months  of  September  and  October  last;  220  double  observations 
of  stars  were  taken  at  each  Station,  and  the  I'esults  have  justified  my  confidence  in 
him  as  an  observer. 

To  Captain  Clarke,  R.E.,  I entrusted  all  the  reductions  and  computations  con- 
nected with  these  observations,  as  well  as  the  computations  of  the  local  attraction  at 

4 I 


MDCCCLVI. 


592 


ON  THE  DEFLECTION  OF  THE  PLUMB-LINE  AT  ARTHUR’S  SEAT, 


Calton  Hill.  The  following  communication  has  been  drawn  up  by  him,  and  I trust  it 
will  prove  acceptable  to  the  Royal  Society,  and  do  him  credit  as  a mathematician. 

I have  myself  examined  the  geological  structure  of  Arthur’s  Seat  and  the  whole  of 
the  county  of  Edinburgh,  and  have  had  the  specific  gravity  of  all  the  rocks  ascer- 
tained, with  the  view  of  estimating  the  mean  specific  gravity  of  the  whole  mass ; 
but  although  the  geological  structure  of  Arthur’s  Seat  is  well  exposed,  and  we  have 
deduced  from  its  mean  specific  gravity  (2'75)  the  mean  specific  gravity  of  the  earth, 
viz.  5’316,  it  is  not  such  a mountain  as  I should  have  selected  for  this  special  object. 
Since  these  observations  were  made,  on  examining  the  correspondence  connected 
with  the  Survey,  with  the  view  of  drawing  up  an  historical  sketch  of  its  progress  for 
publication,  I was  agreeably  surprised  to  find  that  the  late  Dr.  Macculloch  had 
been  employed  for  six  years,  from  1814  to  1819,  in  examining  the  whole  of  Scotland 
for  the  purpose  of  selecting  a mountain  which,  from  its  homogeneous  structure,  size, 
and  form,  would  be  best  suited  for  observations  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the 
mean  specific  gravity  of  the  earth,  and  that  he  considered  the  Stack  Mountain  in 
Sutherlandshire  admirably  suited  for  the  purpose.  The  transfer  of  the  whole  force 
of  the  Survey  from  the  North  of  England  and  Scotland  to  Ireland,  prevented  the  late 
General  Colby  from  undertaking  this  investigation  ; but  as  the  Survey  of  Scotland  is 
now  in  full  progress,  1 purpose  early  in  the  spring  to  go  down  to  the  Stack  Moun- 
tain, to  have  it  and  the  surrounding  country  surveyed  and  contoured,  and  to  have 
the  observations  taken  for  determining  the  attraction  of  its  mass,  and  I trust  at  the 
close  of  the  present  year  to  lay  the  results  before  the  Royal  Soeiety, 

I forward  herewith  a model  of  Arthur’s  Seat,  made  from  the  contoured  plan  on  the 
seale  of  6 inches  to  a mile,  and  also  an  impression  of  the  plan  itself,  with  sections 
showing  the  geological  structure  of  Arthur’s  Seat,  and  a table  of  the  specific  gravity 
of  the  rock  of  which  it  is  composed. 

Henry  James, 

Feb.  7,  1856.  Lieut. -Col.  R.E. 


In  deducing  from  the  observations  made  at  the  three  stations  on  Arthur’s  Seat, 
with  the  zenith  sector,  the  latitudes  of  those  stations,  if  we  assign  to  the  resulting 
latitude  given  by  any  one  star  a weight  equal  to  the  number  of  observations  of  that 
star,  the  final  latitudes  of  the  three  stations  will  stand  thus: — ■ 


Stations. 

Designated. 

Latitude. 

Number  of 
observations. 

South  Station  

S 

65  56  26-69 

427 

Artliur's  Seat  (summit*) 

A 

55  56  43-95 

425 

North  Station  

N 

55  67  9*50 

411 

* The  station  on  the  summit  of  the  hill  was  14  feet  from  the  Ordnance  Trigonometrical  Station,  and  bear- 
ing 18®  North-west;  the  former  is  therefore  0"‘13  North  of  the  latter. 


AND  THE  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


593 


The  latitudes  thus  obtained  bein^  affected  by  the  errors  of  the  assumed  declina- 
tions of  the  stars,  the  amplitudes  to  be  adopted  as  final  are  obtained  in  the  following 
manner.  Let  (p^  be  the  values  of  the  amplitudes  SA,  AN  to  be  determined,  and  let 
the  stars  observed  at  S and  A only,  give  these  values — 

<pi=a,  <?,=«',  <p,  = a" 

Let  stars  observed  at  A and  N only,  give  the  values — 

<p2=b,  <p^=b',  (p^=b" 

Let  stars  observed  at  S and  N only,  give  the  values — 

<P^-\-(p.2=c',  (pj-j-(p^Z=.c" 

And  let  stars  observed  at  S,  A,  and  N give  the  values — 

(p,  = a„  <p^  = a\,  <p,  — a".... 

‘Pi—blf  ‘p2“^15  ^2~bi  .... 


Let  d,  e,  and  the  same  letters  accented,  be  taken  to  denote  the  number  of  times  the 
stars  of  the  first  set  are  observed  at  S and  A respectively.  Let  f,  g and  h,  k repre- 
sent the  same  quantities  for  the  stars  of  the  second  and  third  set;  and  let  n,  p,  q, 
and  the  same  letters  accented,  be  taken  to  denote  the  numbers  of  times  the  stars  of 
the  fourth  and  last  set  are  observed  at  S,  A,  N respectively. 

The  values  of  cp^  <p^  adopted  are  those  which  render  the  quantity 

a minimum.  Making  the  differential  coefficients  of  this  quantity  with  respect  to 
and  ^2  respectively  =0,  we  obtain 


in  which  equations 


H^i  “L  — 0 

K(p,  + M^2— N=0, 


H=2 


L=2 


M=2 


N=2 


K=S 


If !«/  be  any  number,  the  value  of  <pi-\-[/j(p2  is 

, (-f;.K  + M)L-F(-K  + iaH)N 

^i-t(^^2 — HM  — ’ 


hence  the  error  of  (pi+(i<p2  depends  upon  the  manner  in  which  the  errors  of  the  quan- 
tities aa^...b  b^...c enter  into  this  expression. 

4 I 2 


594 


ON  THE  DEFLECTION  OF  THE  PLUMB-LINE  AT  ARTHUR’S  SEAT, 


Let  (yj  and  (y*)  be  the  sums  of  the  errors  of  observation  at  S and  A,  of  a star  of 
the  first  set,  the  same  quantities  being-  accented  for  other  stars.  Let  (a*),  (aj  repre- 
sent corresponding  quantities  for  stars  of  the  second  set,  (|8„),  ((3^)  and  (sj,  (g^),  (gj  the 
same  quantities  for  the  third  and  fourth  sets  of  stars. 

Then  L and  N are  affected  with  the  errors 


L 

N 


^ d+e  h + k 

^ f+ff 

h+k  ^ 

n-\-p 


p-^rq 


From  these  expressions  we  may  derive,  finally,  the  following : if  E be  the  probable 
error  of  an  observation,  the  probable  error  of  ^i-l-|M<<p2  is 


j^j7j^2|M(MH-K^)+2PMK-2jt/,(K(HM-K^)-l-P(HM-|-K^))-l-//.^(H(HM-K^)+2PKl 


where 


P=2- 


npq 


n^p){p  + q) 

The  values  of  H,  M,  K,  P,  L and  N are  found  to  be 

H=  168-93  M = 168-52  K=46-06 


L =362-40  N = 182-20  P =49-34, 

whence  we  obtain 

^j=17"*00  (p,=25"-53  (p,-j-<p,=42''’53. 


Now  the  value  of  E is  to  be  deduced  from  the  differences  between  the  individual 
and  mean  results  given  by  the  different  stars.  The  sum  of  the  squares  of  these 
errors  is  found  from  the  whole  of  the  observations  to  be  712-1,  hence  the  mean  square 
of  an  error  of  observation  (1263  obs.)  is  0-56,  and  the  probable  error  of  an  observa- 
tion consequently  =0"-50  ( = -67\/0'56). 

We  have  therefore  the  probable  error  of  equal  to 

^^|520-48— 544-66  |(/.-l-522-04  ^"|'  = 0"-043|l  — 1-046 

so  that  the  probable  errors  of  (p,  and  (p^  are  each  equal  0"-043. 

As  the  differences  of  latitude  are  the  quantities  principally  required,  we  may  append 
these  amplitudes  to  any  one  of  the  observed  latitudes.  Thus  making  use  of  the 
observed  latitude  of  the  South  Station,  namely  55°  56'  26"-69,  there  will  result  by 
applying  the  above  most  probable  amplitudes  the  following  latitudes ; — 

Latitude  ofS=55°  56'  26"-69 
„ „ A =55°  56'  43"-69 

„ „ N=55°  57'  9"-22. 

The  last  two  latitudes  differ  from  those  in  the  first  table  by  about  a quarter  of  a 
second  each. 


AND  THE  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


595 


7'he  amplitudes  derived  from  the  latitudes  in  the  first  table,  when  compared  with 
those  we  have  considered  as  most  probable,  show  the  following  differences : — 

A-S  ....H-0"-26 
N— A....+0"*02 
N— S....  + 0"-28. 

Geodetical  Amiplitudes. 

By  means  of  a small  network  of  triangulation  connected  with  the  secondary  trian- 
gulation of  the  Ordnance  Survey  in  the  county  of  Edinburgh,  the  following  results 
were  obtained : — 


From 

To 

Distance. 

Bearing. 

Arthur’s  Seat,  Trigonometrical  Station  | 

S. 

N. 

ft. 

1426-7 

2490-0 

179  42  7 

6 0 17 

The  bearings  being  reckoned  from  North  round  by  East.  The  corresponding  ampli- 
tudes are  14"‘06  and  24"‘40  : in  order,  however,  to  the  comparison  of  these  with  the 
amplitudes  before  considered,  the  quantity  0"'13  must  be  added  to  the  first  of  the 
geodetical  amplitudes  and  deducted  from  the  second  for  the  difference  of  the  two 
stations  on  the  summit  of  the  hill.  The  geodetical  amplitudes  are  therefore 

A— S=14"-19 
N — A = 24"-27 
N — S =38"-46. 

By  comparing  these  amplitudes  with  the  actual  astronomical  amplitudes  we  find 
the  following  results  : — 

(1)  Between  the  vertex  of  the  hill  and  the  South  Station,  the  astronomical  ampli- 
tude exceeds  the  geodetical  by  2"'81. 

(2)  Between  the  vertex  of  the  hill  and  the  North  Station,  the  astronomical  ampli- 
tude exceeds  the  geodetical  by  l"'26. 

(3)  Between  the  North  Station  and  the  South  Station,  the  astronomical  amplitude 
exceeds  the  geodetical  by  4"'07. 

Geodetical  Latitudes, 

The  latitude  of  the  Trigonometrical  Station  on  the  summit  of  Arthur’s  Seat,  is, 
when  referred  to,  or  projected  on  that  spheroidal  surface  which  best  represents  all 
the  astronomically  determined  points  in  Great  Britain, 

55°  56'  38"-31, 

from  which,  by  the  application  of  the  geodetical  amplitudes,  we  obtain  the  latitudes 


596  ON  THE  DEFLECTION  OF  THE  PLUMB-LINE  AT  ARTHUR’S  SEAT, 

of  the  Other  two  points,  shown  in  the  following  Table,  in  contrast  with  the  observed 
latitudes : — 


Station. 

Astronomical 

Latitude. 

Geodetical 

Latitude. 

A-G. 

s 

55  56  26’69 

55  56  24-25 

2-44 

A 

55  56  43-69 

55  56  38-44 

5-25 

N 

55  57  9-22 

55  57  2-71 

6-51 

It  might  have  been  anticipated,  that,  on  account  of  the  attraction  of  the  hill  at  the 
South  Station,  the  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  would  have  been  to  the  north,  which 
by  throwing  the  zenith  to  the  south  would  have  caused  the  observed  latitude  to  be 
less  than  its  true  value.  The  contrary,  however,  takes  place,  for  the  observed  lati- 
tude is  greater  than  the  geodetical.  On  proceeding  next  to  the  second  station, 
namely,  that  on  the  summit  of  the  hill,  a similar  anomaly  is  observed  ; there  is  an 
attraction  or  deflection  to  the  south  of  more  than  five  seconds,  which  can  by  no 
means  be  attributed  to  the  hill,  as  its  attraction  upon  any  object  at  its  vertex  is  very 
nearly  equal  north  or  south.  A similar  anomaly  is  visible  at  the  North  Station ; 
there  is  a deflection  to  the  south  of  6"'5,  which  is  considerably  more  than  that  due  to 
the  mass  of  the  hill,  as  will  appear  hereafter. 

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  there  is  some  other  disturbing  force  acting  at  each  of 
these  stations  besides  the  attraction  of  Arthur’s  Seat,  and  which  appears  to  produce 
a general  dejlection  to  the  south  of  about  five  seconds. 

The  comparison  of  the  observed  and  calculated  latitudes  of  the  observatory  on  the 
Calton  Hill  serves  to  corroborate  this  fact.  The  latitude  of  this  observatory,  as 
determined  by  observation,  is 

55°  57'  23"-20. 

The  latitude  of  the  Trigonometrical  Station  on  this  hill,  when  referred  to  the  same 
spheroidal  surface  we  have  before  mentioned,  namely,  that  agreeing  most  nearly  with 
all  the  astronomically  determined  points  in  Great  Britain,  is  55°  57'  17"'51  : the 
difference  of  latitude  of  these  two  points  (taking  the  centre  of  the  Altitude  and  Azi- 
muth instrument  of  the  observatory  as  the  point  whose  latitude  is  above  given)  is  0"’06, 
so  that  the  calculated  latitude  of  the  Calton  Hill  observatory  is 

55°  57'  17"-57, 

which  is  less  than  the  astronomical  by  5"‘63  ; showing  a deflection  to  the  south  of 
that  amount  in  existence  at  the  Calton  Hill.  Now  the  attraction  of  the  mass  of 
Arthur’s  Seat  upon  the  Calton  Hill  is  easily  calculated  to  be  between  0"T  and  0"'2, 
consequently  the  deflection  here  visible  is  certainly  not  due  to  Arthur’s  Seat. 

It  seems  therefore  very  probable  that  the  general  deflection  of  five  seconds  to  the 
south,  brought  out  at  all  these  stations,  is  due  to  one  and  the  same  cause. 

An  explanation  of  this  phenomenon  immediately  offers  itself  in  the  existence  of  the 
hollow  of  the  Forth  to  the  north,  and  the  Pentland  Hills  and  other  high  ground  to 


AND  THE  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


597 


the  south,  but  whether  these  may  be  sufficient  to  produce  the  effect  observed  muU  be 
considered  hereafter. 


Deflection  caused  hy  an  Attracting  Mass. 

Let  it  be  required  to  find  the  attraction  exercised  by  a given  mass  placed  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth  upon  a given  point  on  the  surface,  the  distance  being  supposed 
so  small  that  the  sphericity  of  the  earth  need  not  be  considered.  Let  the  position  of 
any  point  of  the  attracting  mass  be  determined  by  the  coordinates  r,  d,  z-,  r and  6 
originating  in  the  attracted  point  and  being  measured  in  the  horizontal  plane  passing 
through  that  point,  jz  being  measured  perpendicular  to  this  plane.  Let  also  the  value  of 
^=0  correspond  to  the  meridian  line,  then  the  volume  of  an  indefinitely  small  element 
of  the  attracting  mass  being  rdd.dr.dz,  if  ^ be  its  density,  its  attraction  will  be 


'.qdr .d^  .dz 


and  therefore  its  attraction  in  the  direction  of  the  meridian  is  equal  to  this  quantity 
multiplied  by  r.(r^+2^)**^-cos  ^ ; so  that  the  attraction  of  the  whole  mass  is  equal  to 


cos  Qdd 


A dr . dz 

{r'^  + zfl 


In  order  to  perform,  the  integrations  here  indicated,  the  equation  of  the  surface  of  the 
attracting  mass  is  required  to  determine  the  limits ; this  cannot  be  expressed,  nor 
can  which  is  also  a function  of  rOz.  But  it  is  easy  to  find  the  attraction  of  a mass 
of  uniform  density  included  within  the  following  surfaces : — The  horizontal  planes 
2 = 0,  z — h,  the  two  cylindrical  surfaces  defined  by  the  equations  r=ri,  r=r2, 
being  constants,  and  two  vertical  planes  determined  by  the  equations  0 — 6^,  6=0^,  0A 
being  constants  ; § being  supposed  also  constant.  Integrating  between  these  limits, 
the  attraction  of  the  mass  under  consideration  is  found  to  be 


^9  + xX  + 

A=oh(sm  0,-sm  0,) 

which  being  expanded  is  equal  to  (putting  ri-{-r2—2r) 
A=Kr,-r,)(sin  0,-sin 
Hence,  by  taking  sufficiently  small. 


A=^(r2— ri)(sin  0^ — sin 


h 


or  if  £ be  the  angle  of  elevation  of  the  centre  point  of  the  upper  horizontal  surface  of 
the  mass  in  question,  at  the  attracted  point 

A=^(r2— ri)(sin  ^2— sin  ^1)  sin  £. 

If  h be  small,  so  that  its  square  may  be  neglected. 


A 


=g'(sin  ^2  — sin  0^ 


598 


ON  THE  DEFLECTION  OF  THE  PLUMB-LINE  AT  ARTHUR’S  SEAT, 


The  ang-Ie  of  deflection  produced  by  any  horizontal  attracting  force  acting  on  the 
pliiinb-line  is  measured  by  the  ratio  of  the  attracting  force  to  the  force  of  gravity  or 
the  attraction  of  the  earth. 

The  attraction  of  the  earth  upon  any  point  on  its  surface  in  latitude  X is* 


62  V 


1 — e— 


where  b is  the  polar  semiaxis,  e the  ellipticity  of  the  surface,  and  m the  ratio  of  the 
centrifugal  force  at  the  equator  to  the  equatorial  gravity ; if  we  put  a for  the  radius 
of  the  equator,  the  attraction  may  also  be  expressed  thus : 


here  m=7j;Q5  sin^  nearly;  whence  it  will  follow  that  the  term  within 


289' 


the  bracket  will  only  influence  the  attraction  by  less  than  a six-hundredth  part  of  its 
amount,  and  will  therefore  only  affect  the  calculated  deflection  in  that  ratio.  There- 
fore it  is  sufficiently  exact  to  assume  the  attraction  equal  to  that  of  a sphere  whose 
radius  is  equal  to  the  mean  of  the  principal  semidiameters  of  the  earth,  or  3956  1 
miles:  hence  the  attraction  on  any  point  on  its  surface  7r.^(3956'l),  taking  the 

mile  as  the  unit  of  measure  linear.  The  defection,  therefore  (expressed  in  seconds), 
caused  by  any  attracting  force  A on  the  surface  of  the  earth  may  be  taken  as 


Itt.S. (3956-1) sin  1"—  8 ^ 

h being  the  mean  density  of  the  earth.  Consequently  the  deflection  caused  3y  such 
a mass  as  we  have  been  considering  at  the  origin  of  coordinates  or  attracted  point,  is 


D=|(r2  — ri).f  sin  g X 12''-447, 


or  log  — X I2"-447, 

where  s is  put  for  the  difference  of  the  sines. 

The  calculation  of  the  attraction  or  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  at  any  point  of  the 
hill  is  easily  effected  by  means  of  these  formulae.  If  through  any  one  of  the  stations 
observed  from,  we  draw  on  a contoured  plan  of  the  hill  and  surrounding  country,  a 

1 2 1112 

number  of  lines  the  sines  of  whose  azimuth  are  successively  9?  12’ T2’ T^’ 12’ 

counting  from  the  south  meridian  in  either  direction,  and  from  the  north  meridian  in 
either  direction  ; and  draw  also  a number  of  circles  whose  radii  are  500,  1000,  1500, 
2000  ....  feet,  being  in  arithmetical  progression  with  a common  difference  of  500  feet ; 
the  hill  will  be  thus  divided  into  a number  of  prisms,  the  deflection  caused  by  any 

* Airy’s  Mathematical  Tracts,  pp.  167,  173. 


AND  THE  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


599 


one  of  which  will  be,  putting  x for  the  unknown  ratio  of  the  density  of  the  hill  to  the 
density  of  the  earth, 

500  ,,  1 . 

I^=^^Xl2"*447XY^sin2, 

so  that  the  total  deflection  is  equal  to 

0"-0982  2 (sin  s)x. 

At  each  of  the  three  stations,  the  first  ring  of  500  feet  was  subdivided  by  rings  at 
the  distance  of  100  feet;  the  result  is  shown  in  the  following  Table : — 


South  Station. 


Sums  of  Sines. 

1st  Ring, 
100  feet. 

2ncl  Ring, 
200  feet. 

3rd  Ring, 
300  feet. 

4th  Ring, 
400  feet. 

5th  Ring, 
500  feet. 

S(sine)  for  Prisms  South  of  station  ...  ... 
S (sin  g)  for  Prisms  North  of  station  

-1*796 

+ 1*689 

-11-294 

+ 5-448 

-11-808 

+ 7*705 

— 11-360 

+ 9-038 

-10-001 

+ 8-845 

S(sin  e)=78*984  Deflect  North. 

Arthur’s  Seat. 

S (sin  e)  for  Prisms  North  of  station  

2 (sin  g)  for  Prisms  South  of  station  

-7*118 

-3-524 

-11-281 

- 9*164 

— 11-845 

- 8-603 

— 12-014 

- 7-436 

-11*719 

- 6-421 

2(sing)=18'829  Deflect  South. 

North  Station. 

2 (sin  g)  for  Prisms  South  of  station  

2 (sin  g)  for  Prisms  North  of  station  

+ 4-867 

-2-002 

+ 4-347 

-8-038 

+ 3-159 

-8-856 

+ 2-179 

—8-424 

+ 1-932 

-6-973 

2 (sin  g)  = 50'777  Deflect  South. 

By  drawing  twelve  rings  at  500  feet  apart  round  the  centre  station,  and  sixteen  rings 
round  each  of  the  other  two  stations,  the  results  contained  in  the  following  Table  are 
obtained : — 


Stations. 

2 

(sin  e). 

2nd 

Ring. 

3rd 

Ring. 

4 th 
Ring. 

5th 

Ring. 

6th 

Ring. 

7 th 
Ring. 

8th 

Ring. 

9th 

Ring. 

lOth 

Ring. 

nth 

Ring. 

12  th 
Ring. 

13  th 
Ring. 

14  th 
Ring. 

15th 

Ring. 

l6th 

Ring. 

South 

+ 6-614 

+3-187 

+ 1-088 

+0-025 

-0-095 

-0-088 

-0-418 

-0-926 

-1-004 

-1-037 

-1-004 

-0-908 

-0-843 

-0-828 

-0-806 

Station. 

x. 

- 6-299 

-3-531 

-2-536 

-2-026 

-1-713 

-1-488 

-1-309 

-1-149 

-0-985 

-0-844 

-0-729 

-0-625 

-0-539 

-0-472 

-0-434 

Arthur’s 

-10-560 

-7-996 

-5-850 

-4-656 

-4-474 

-4-570 

-4-209 

-3-839 

-3-467 

-3-119 

-2-883 

Seat. 

2, 

- 5 148 

-6634 

-7-715 

-6-425 

-5-295 

-4-549 

-3-994 

-3-587 

-3-234 

-2-931 

-2-667 

North 

- 4-644 

-3-094 

—2-859 

-2-361 

-1-954 

-1-623 

-1-422 

-1-258 

-1-176 

-1-117 

-1-048 

-0-996 

-0-941 

-0-935 

-0-894 

Station. 

2. 

+ 2-009 

+1-695 

+0-978 

+ 1-028 

+1-195 

+0-745 

-0-361 

-0-747 

-0-671 

-0-604 

-0-575 

-0-558 

-0-525 

-0-488 

-0-449 

where  2„  signifies  2 (sin  z)  for  the  prisms  north  of  the  station, 

2,  signifies  2 (sin  a)  for  the  prisms  south  of  the  station. 
4 K 


MDCCCLVI. 


600 


ON  THE  DEFLECTION  OF  THE  PLUMB-LINE  AT  ARTHUR’S  SEAT, 


Hence  we  obtain — 

South  Station. 
2„-2,=  +27-636 


Arthur’s  Seat.  North  Station. 

+3-441  +28-994. 


In  order  to  obtain  the  whole  effect  at  each  station,  we  must  add  to  these  the  fifth 
part  of  the  sum  of  the  sines  in  the  first  ringf  of  500  feet  at  each  of  these  stations : 
these  are,  respectively,  15-797,  3-766,  10-155  ; so  that  we  have — 

At  South  Station . . . 2(sin  s)  =43-433 

At  Arthur’s  Seat  . . . 2(sin2)=  7'207 

At  North  Station.  . . S(sin  £)=39-149 

Consequently, 

Deflection  at  South  Station  =4"-265x  North 
Deflection  at  Arthur’s  Seat  =0"-708j?  South 
Deflection  at  North  Station  =3"-845  x South. 


Comparison  of  observed  and  calculated  Deflection. 

We  may  now  determine  a value  of  x by  the  comparison  of  the  observed  effects  of 
the  action  of  the  hill  upon  the  amplitudes,  with  the  calculated  effects  in  terms  of  x. 
The  equations  thus  obtained  are 

4-973  x=  2-81 
8-110a:=  4-07, 

whence  90503  j?=46-982 

x=  -5191. 

This  solution  contains  tacitly  the  assumption  that  the  effect  of  the  general  south 
deflection  is  equal  at  each  of  the  three  stations;  if  we  put 3/  for  this  quantity  expressed 
in  seconds,  then  the  following  equations  will  result  from  the  comparison  of  the  ob- 
served and  geodetical  latitudes,  together  with  the  calculated  but  unknown  deflections 
in  X, 

y — 4-265  X — 2-44=0 
3/+0-708^— 5-25=0 
3/+3-845  a?— 6-51=0, 
which  give3/=4"-68  and  x=-5076. 

These  quantities  give,  when  supplied  in  the  equations,  the  following  errors : 

+ 0"-08;  — 0"-21;  +0"-13; 

SO  nearly  are  the  observations  represented  by  these  values  of  x and  y. 

Extension  of  the  Calculation  of  Deflection. 

The  result  just  obtained,  namely,  that  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  Arthur’s  Seat  to 


AND  THE  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


601 


the  mean  density  of  the  earth  is  equal  to  *5076,  is  somewhat  arbitrary,  from  this 
cause,  that  it  is  slightly  dependent  on  the  extent  to  which  the  calculation  of  the 
attraction  is  carried  out.  Had  there  not  existed  a marked  difference  in  the  mean 
height  of  the  ground  on  the  north  side  and  on  the  south  side  of  the  hill,  a smaller 
number  of  circles  would  have  been  sufficient.  The  existence  of  this  attracting  mass 
forbids  our  limiting  the  calculation  to  the  visible  extent  of  the  hill ; we  must,  there- 
fore, in  order  to  compare  with  what  we  have  already  obtained,  extend  the  calculation 
to  include  a circle  of  about  nine  miles  diameter  round  each  station. 

We  shall  now,  instead  of  drawing  the  circles  at  500  feet  apart,  make  the  radius  of 
the  (w-f-l)th  circle  equal  to  ^ of  the  radius  of  the  wth  circle,  so  that  they  shall  be  in 
geometric  progression.  We  have  already  drawn  twelve  circles  round  Arthur’s  Seat ; 
the  radius  of  the  13th  circle  will  therefore  be  f ’SOOT 2 = (f)  6000  feet,  that  of  the 
14th  will  be  (1^)^6000  feet,  and  so  on.  Around  each  of  the  other  two  stations  sixteen 
circles  have  been  drawn,  the  radii  of  the  17th  and  18th  will  therefore  be  (f)'8000 
and  (|^)^’8000  feet,  and  so  on. 

Now  if  h be  the  height  in  feet  of  any  one  of  the  compartments  thus  formed,  we 
have  shown  that  the  resulting  deflection  in  seconds  is 

12'447 5280 
= 0-00003027^A. 

The  following  Table  contains  the  sums  of  the  heights  of  the  surface  for  each  of  the 
additional  rings : — 


station. 

17th. 

18th. 

19th. 

20th. 

21st. 

22nd. 

23rd. 

Total. 

South 

Station, 

2(4)  north 
S(/t)  south 

+ 2385 
+ 6060 

+ 1685 
+ 6870 

+ 935 
+ 8295 

+ 630 
+ 9010 

+ 465 
+ 8925 

+ 180 
+ 8175 

- 10 
+ 10060 

+ 6270 
+ 57935 

North 

Station. 

S(A)  north 
S(A) south 

+ 520 
+ 4495 

+ 385 
+ 5045 

+ 277 
+ 5640 

— 15 

+ 6475 

- 200 
+ 8000 

— 320 
+ 8175 

- 375 

+ 8135 

+ 272 
+ 45965 

Arthur’s 

Seat. 

2(4)  north 
2(4) south 

13th. 

14  th. 

15th. 

16th. 

17th. 

18  th. 

19th. 

20th. 

21st. 

+ 2643 
+ 4645 

+ 2245 
+ 5025 

+ 1624 
+ 5460 

+ 904 
+ 6080 

+ 548 
+ 7460 

+ 427 
+ 8485 

+ 148 

+ 8845 

— 92 

+ 8550 

— 132 
+ 9595 

+ 8315 
+ 64125 

Consequently  the  effective  sums  of  the  heights  are, — 

South  Station 2(A)  = 5 1665 

Arthur’s  Seat 2(A)  = 558iO 

North  Station 2(A)  = 45693 

And  therefore,  multiplying  by  •00003027^^,  the  resulting  deflections  are, — 

South  Station T565a^ 

Arthur’s  Seat T691  x 

North  Station T393a^ 

4 K 2 


602 


ON  THE  DEFLECTION  OF  THE  PLUMB-LINE  AT  ARTHUR’S  SEAT, 


We  see  from  this  that  the  assumption  of  y being  constant  for  the  three  stations  was 
not  very  erroneous,  though  the  difference  is  perceptible. 

We  shall  now  form  the  equations  for  x and  y,  remarking  that  y is  not  now  the 
same  quantity  that  was  before  represented  by  that  symbol,  and  that  the  assumption 
of  its  being  constant  for  the  three  stations  is  now  almost  unobjectionable.  Taking 
into  consideration  the  deflections  before  obtained,  the  total  deflections  south  at  each 
of  the  stations  will  be — 

South  Station (1*565  — 4*265)a?=  — 2*700a? 

Arthur’s  Seat (0*708-1- l'691)a:;=  2*399j: 

North  Station (3*845 -1-1  *393).r=  5*238^ 


Hence  the  equations  are, — 

?/  — 2*7000^  — 2*44=0 
3/4-2*3990?— 5*25  = 0 
3/4-5*2380?— 6*51=0, 

which  give  for  the  most  probable  values  of  x and  y, 

o?=*5173  3/=3*8820. 


By  substituting  these  values  in  the  equations,  they  show  the  errors 

4-0"*04;  — 0"*13;  4-0"*08, 

showing  that  the  above  values  agree  very  well  with  the  observations.  From  a com- 
parison of  the  errors  of  these  equations  with  those  previously  solved,  it  would  appear 
that  the  probable  error  of  this  value  of  x is  considerably  less  than  that  of  the  value 
(*5076)  then  obtained.  The  two  values,  however,  are  as  close  as  could  be  expected. 
We  shall  adopt,  therefore,  as  most  probable,  so  far  as  resulting  from  these  observa- 
tions, a?=*5173. 

We  may  estimate  the  probable  error  of  this  quantity  dependent  upon  the  probable 
errors  of  the  observed  amplitudes  thus ; writing  the  three  equations  in  the  form 

y-\-ax-\-a!=Q 
y-\-bx-\-h'  — 0 
y-\-cx-{-d  =Q, 


we  have 


[a—b)  {a'  — b')  + {b  — c)  {b'  — c')  + {c—a){c' — a') 

{a—b)'^+  (6— c)^+  {c—a)^ 


If  now  X be  the  observed  latitude  of  the  South  station,  X„  Xj,  X3  the  geodetic  latitudes 
of  the  three  stations, — 

fl^  = X — X,  6^  = X4~^i“'X2  C?^  = X-}-<Pi4“*P2*~^3 

a'— Z>'=X2— Xi— (p, 

fc'— £?'=X3  — X2— <p2 

d — a^=Xi  — X3  4-<Pi4"?’2- 


AND  THE  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


603 


The  probable  error  of  x depends  on  the  probable  errors  of  a' — b',  b'  — d,  and  c'—a', 
that  is  supposing  the  geodetic  amplitudes  to  be  free  of  error,  on  the  probable  errors 

of  (Pi  and  p2.  The  part  of  x involving  p,  and  Pg  is  97!^  X (13’037p,+ 1 TO7OP2):  con- 
sequently the  probable  error  oi  x is  equal  to  the  probable  error  of  •1343(Pi-)-0’85p2), 
which,  by  means  of  the  expression  given  for  the  probable  error  of  Pi+i^?’25  becomes 
(making  jW»=0'85) 

probable  error  of  j;=  + 0'0053. 

Mean  Density  of  the  Earth. 

Having  now  ascertained  the  ratio  of  the  mean  density  of  Arthur’s  Seat  to  the 
mean  density  of  the  earth,  the  knowledge  of  the  latter  results  immediately  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  former.  Assuming  as  the  result  of  observation  2’75  for  the  mean 
densitv  of  Arthur’s  Seat,  it  follows  that 

2'75 

Mean  density  of  earth  =.-^y^=:5‘316. 

The  probable  error  of  the  divisor '5173  being '0053,  the  probable  error  of  the  resulting 
mean  density  is  +'054,  so  that,  considering  no  other  cause  of  error  than  those  of  the 
zenith  sector  observations,  we  have 

Mean  density  of  earth  =5'316+'054. 


The  General  Defection. 

We  proceed  now  to  examine  into  the  question  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  cause  before 
mentioned,  namely,  the  defect  of  matter  to  the  north  of  Edinburgh  and  the  accumu- 
lation of  matter  to  the  south,  to  produce  the  general  deflection  that  is  observed  to 
the  amount  of  5",  or  rather  more.  In  the  first  place,  let  it  be  required 
to  find  the  attraction  of  a rectangular  film  ABCD,  whose  thickness  is 
h and  density  g>,  upon  a point  P in  the  production  of  one  of  its  sides, 

AD.  Measure  x along  PA  and  y perpendicular  to  it  in  the  plane  of  the 
rectangle,  then  the  mass  of  a small  element  is  ^hdxdy,  and  therefore  its 
attraction  in  the  direction  AP  is 

qhxdxdy 

the  integral  with  respect  to  x between  the  limits  aa!  is 

dy  dy 


.{(d+y^Y  {a'^+y' 

which  being  integrated  from  y=-0  to  y=.h,  is 


a! 


604 


ON  THE  DEFLECTION  OF  THE  PLUMB-LINE  AT  ARTHUR’S  SEAT, 


If  now  we  put  the  angles  DCP=ip,  ABP=ip',  we  shall  get,  since 

V V 

-=COt®  =7=  cot®, 
a ^ a 


Attraction  = 


We  may  thus  determine  a sufficiently  close  approximation  to  the  effect  of  the  hollow 
of  the  Forth.  An  examination  of  a map  of  Scotland,  on  a sufficiently  large  scale, 
will  show  that  a rectangle  of  eighteen  miles  by  twelve,  having  its  longest  side  inclined 
40°  to  the  meridian,  may  be  placed  so  as  to  cover  the  greater  part  of  the  Forth  with 
some  exactness,  having  also  Edinburgh  opposite  to  the  middle  point  of  the  south  side 
and  Arthur’s  Seat  nearly  two  miles  from  this  side,  as  in  the  accompanying  diagram. 
The  angles  (p  and  <p'  will  be  found  to  be  73°  and  18°,  and  therefore  the 
attraction  of  a rectangular  stratum  of  these  dimensions  with  thickness 
h and  density  § will  be,  (2’302.'>  being  the  reciprocal  of  the  modulus 
of  the  common  system  of  logarithms) 


=2f 


h 

5280 


(2-3025)  log 


cot  9° 

cot  (36°  30') 


2-3025  X -6695 
5280 


and  therefore  the  corresponding  or  resulting  deflection  is 


2 


2-3025  X -6695  x 12-44-7 
5280 


|A=0"-00727|/i 


in  seconds,  h to  be  expressed  in  feet,  ^ the  mean  density  of  the  earth. 

An  inspection  of  a chart  of  the  Forth  will  show  that  the  depth  may  be  taken  at  a 
very  even  average  of  30  feet  below  mean  water-level ; so  that  the  attraction  of  the 
water  (^=1)  upon  Arthur’s  Seat  causes  a deflection  =0"-04  to  the  north-east  at  mean 
water ; the  latitude  of  points  in  the  neighbourhood  is  consequently  variable  to  the 
amount  of  about  0"-02,  depending  on  the  tide. 

We  may  now  suppose  the  water  to  be  removed  and  the  hollow  filled  up  with  rock 
to  a mean  level  of  70  feet.  Then  taking  2-5  for  the  mean  density  of  the  rock,  the 
attraction  of  this  stratum  would  be  0"-36,  or  resolved  in  the  direction  of  the  meridian, 
the  deflection  north  would  be  0"-28.  If  the  hollow  were  filled  up  to  a mean  level  of 
150  feet,  the  deflection  north  would  be  0"-50. 

From  this  we  conclude  that  the  existence  of  the  hollow  of  the  Forth  will  account 
for  but  a small  portion  of  the  deflection  of  5". 

To  the  south  of  Edinburgh  the  country  gradually  rises,  until  at  the  southern 
boundary  of  the  country  the  mean  level  is  about  1000  feet  with  peaks  rising  to  1750 
feet.  The  contours  for  the  county  of  Peebles  are  not  yet  sufficiently  advanced  to 
permit  the  calculation  of  the  attraction  of  the  hills  in  the  north  of  that  county.  We 
may  however  extend  the  calculation  to  the  southern  borders  of  Edinburghshire. 


AND  THE  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH. 


605 


The  number  of  circles  already  drawn  round  Arthur’s  Seat  is  21.  the  last  nine  being 
drawn  according  to  the  law  r„+i=fr„:  if  we  draw  seven  more  according  to  the  same 
law,  this  will  carry  us  slightly  beyond  the  boundary  of  the  county.  The  sums  of  the 
heights  in  the  different  rings  will  then  be  as  follows : — 


22nd. 

23rd. 

24th. 

25th. 

26  th. 

27th. 

28th. 

11850 

12050 

12850 

15950 

17100 

18750 

16800 

the  sum  of  which  is  105350.  The  consequent  deflection  will  be,  using  the  same  value 
of  X,  namely  '5173, 

0"*00003027  X 105350  x '5 173  = l"-64. 

To  this  we  have  to  add  the  quantity  obtained  for  the  preceding  nine  rings,  namely, 
1"'69j7  or  0"‘88,  making  altogether  2"’52  due  to  the  high  ground  to  the  south  within 
the  county  of  Edinburgh. 

From  the  height  of  the  country  in  the  north  of  Peebleshire,  it  seems  probable 
that  when  the  calculation  can  be  carried  into  that  county,  a sensible  addition  to 
the  quantity  above  determined  will  be  obtained,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  5"  may 
possibly  be  accounted  for. 

In  conclusion,  the  principal  results  arrived  at  are  these : — 

1st.  The  effect  of  the  attraction  of  the  Pentland  Hills  is  observed  in  nearly  equal 
amount  at  each  of  the  three  stations  on  Arthur’s  Seat. 

2nd.  The  calculated  attractions  of  the  mass  of  Arthur’s  Seat  at  the  three  stations  are. 


South  Station. 

Arthur’s  Seat. 

North  Station. 

2"‘21  North. 

0"*37  South. 

2"*00  South. 

and,  since  the  observed  deflection  at  Arthur’s  Seat  is  5"'25,  the  apparent  effect  of  the 
Pentlands  is  4"'88  at  the  summit  of  the  hill. 

3rd.  Of  this  deflection  of  4"’88,  the  computed  attraction  due  to  the  configuration 
of  the  ground  within  a radius  of  fifteen  miles  accounts  for  about  2"'5  ; and,  inasmuch 
as  we  know  that  the  igneous  rocks  of  Arthur’s  Seat  and  the  Pentland  Hills  have  an 
origin  at  a great  depth  below  the  surface  of  the  earth,  the  difference  between  the 
observed  and  computed  attraction  is  probably  owing  in  part  to  the  high  specific 
gravity  of  the  mass  of  rock  beneath  them. 

4th.  The  deflection  at  the  Royal  Observatory,  Calton  Hill,  being  5"’63  South, 
exceeds  that  at  Arthur’s  Seat  by  0"'70.  Of  this  deflection,  0"'60  is  due  to  the  con- 
figuration of  the  ground  comprised  within  a circle  of  a mile  and  a quarter  round  the 
Observatory. 

5tb.  The  latitude  of  Arthur’s  Seat  or  points  in  the  neighbourhood  varies  to  the 
amount  of  about  0"’02  between  high  and  low  water. 

6th.  The  mean  density  of  the  earth  determined  from  the  observations  at  the  three 


606  ON  THE  DEFLECTION  OF  THE  PLUMB-LINEAT  ARTHUR’S  SEAT,  ETC. 

stations  on  Arthur’s  Seat,  is  5-316,  with  a probable  error  of  +-054  (or  one  hundredth 
part)  due  to  the  probable  errors  of  the  astronomical  amplitudes.  If  S be  the  probable 
error  of  the  assumed  mean  density  of  Arthur’s  Seat,  the  probable  error  of  this  deter- 
mination of  the  mean  density  of  the  earth  is 

±V^3-725^"+-003. 

Remarks. 

In  the  original  paper  as  read  at  the  Meeting  of  the  Royal  Society  on  21st 
February,  the  mean  density  was  given  as  5' 14  with  a probable  error  of  +-07.  In  a 
subsequent  revision  of  the  calculations,  the  astronomical  amplitudes  and  their  pro- 
bable errors  were  determined  as  herein  explained.  These  amplitudes  exceed  those 
previously  used  by  0"’02,  0"-01,  0"-03,  tending  to  increase  the  density.  The  attrac- 
tion due  to  the  ground  within  100  feet  round  each  of  the  stations,  originally  omitted, 
is  now  included,  also  tending  to  increase  the  density. 


Explanation  of  the  Plates. 

PLATE  XXXII. 

Is  the  contoured  plan  of  Arthur’s  Seat,  on  the  scale  of  six  inches  to  a mile:  this  is 
part  of  one  of  the  sheets  of  the  plan  of  Edinburghshire  which  has  been 
published  on  that  scale.  The  zenith  sector  stations  and  the  lines  of 
sections  are  marked  on  this  plan.  The  contours  furnish  sufficient  data  to 
make  a model. 

PLATE  XXXIII. 

Contains  geological  sections  taken  on  the  three  lines  which  are  drawn  on  the  plan, 
and  also  a table  of  the  specific  gravity  of  the  rocks. 

These  plates  have  been  engraved  and  electrotyped  at  the  Ordnance  Survey  Office, 
and  form  part  of  the  series  of  plates  made  to  illustrate  the  account  of  the  Trigono- 
metrical Survey  of  Great  Britain  which  is  now  in  the  press. 


[ 607  ] 


XXIX.  On  the  Figure,  Dimensions,  and  Mean  Specific  Gravity  of  the  Earth,  as  derived 
from  the  Ordnance  Trigonometrical  Survey  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  Com  - 
municated  by  Lieut.- Colonel  James,  R.E.,  F.R.S.  8^c.,  Superintendent  of  the  Ord- 
nance Survey. 

Received  April  30, — Read  May  8,  1856. 


i.  HE  Trigonometrical  Survey  of  the  United  Kingdom  commenced  in  the  year  1784, 
under  the  immediate  auspices  of  the  Royal  Society;  the  first  base  was  traced  by 
General  Roy,  of  the  Royal  Engineers,  on  the  16th  of  April  of  that  year,  on  Houns- 
low Heath,  in  presence  of  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  the  then  President  of  the  Society,  and 
some  of  its  most  distinguished  Fellows. 

The  principal  object  which  the  Government  liad  then  in  view,  was  the  connexion 
of  the  Observatories  of  Paris  and  Greenwich  by  means  of  a triangulation,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  determining  the  tiifference  of  longitude  between  the  two  observatories. 

A detailed  account  of  the  operations  then  carried  on  is  given  in  the  first  volume 
of  the  ‘Trigonometrical  Survey,’  which  is  a revised  account  of  that  which  was  first 
published  in  the  ‘Philosophical  Transactions’  for  1785  and  three  following  years. 

At  the  time  when  these  operations  were  in  progress,  the  Suiwey  of  several  counties 
in  the  south-east  of  England,  including  Kent,  Sussex,  Surrey,  and  Hampshire,  was 
also  in  progress,  under  the  direction  of  the  Master  Geneial  of  the  Ordnance,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  military  maps  of  the  most  important  parts  of  the  kingdom  in  a 
military  point  of  view;  and  it  was  then  decided  to  make  the  triangulation  which 
extended  from  Hounslow  to  Dover  the  basis  of  a friangulation  for  these  surveys. 

It  is  extremely  to  be  regretted  that  a more  enlarged  view  of  the  subject  had  not 
then  been  taken,  and  a proper  geometrical  projection  made  for  the  map  of  the  whole 
kingdom.  As  it  is,  the  south-eastern  counties  were  first  drawn  and  published  in 
reference  to  the  meridian  of  Greenwich,  then  Devonshire  in  reference  to  the  meridian 
of  Butterton  in  that  county,  and  thirdly  the  northern  counties  in  reference  to  the 
meridian  of  Deiamere  in  Clieshire  ; but  there  is  a large  intermediate  space,  the  maps 
of  which  ai’e  made  of  various  sizes  to  accommodate  them  to  the  convergence  of  the 
meridian. 

In  1799  the  Royal  Society  gave  further  proof  of  the  interest  it  took  in  the  pro- 
gress of  the  Survey,  by  lending  to  tl)e  Ordnance  its  great  3-foot  Theodolite,  made  by 
Ramsden,  for  the  purpose  of  expediting  the  work  of  the  Survey;  and  I have  great 
pleasure  in  stating,  that  although  this  instrument  has  been  in  almost  constant  use 
for  the  last  sixty-seven  years,  during  which  time  it  has  been  placed  on  the  highest 

MDCCCLVI.  4 L 


608  ON  The  figure,  dimensions,  and  mean  specific  gravity  of  the  earth. 


chnrcli  towers  and  the  loftiest  mountains  in  the  kingdom,  from  the  Shetlands  to  the 
Scilly  Islands,  it  is  at  this  day  in  perfect  working  order,  and  probably  one  of  the  very 
best  instruments  that  was  ever  made. 

The  great  dVigonometrical  operations  of  the  Survey  have  been  carried  on  under  so 
many  officers,  from  the  time  of  their  commencement  under  General  Roy  down  to  the 
present  time,  that  it  wmuld  be  quite  impossible,  in  this  short  notice,  to  mention  more 
than  tlie  names  of  several  Superintendents  wlio  have  succeeded  General  Roy,  viz. 
Colonel  Williams,  Major-General  Mudge,  Major-General  Colby,  and  Colonel  Hall; 
but  in  justice  to  the  highly  meritorious  body  of  non-commissioned  officers  of  the 
Corps  of  Royal  Sappers  and  Miners,  I should  state,  that  whilst  in  the  early  part  of 
the  Survey  the  most  important  and  delicate  observations  were  entrusted  solely  to  the 
commissioned  officers,  these  duties  have  of  late  years  been  performed  by  the  non- 
commissioned officers  with  the  greatest  skill  and  accuracy. 

In  the  Historical  sketch  of  the  Survey  which  I purpose  publishing  shortly,  I hope 
to  be  able  to  do  justice  to  the  individual  merits  of  all  employed. 

The  computations  connected  with  the  corrections  of  the  observed  angles,  to  make 
the  whole  triangulation  as  nearly  as  possible  perfectly  consistent,  have  been  most 
voluminous,  and  have  been  made  under  the  direction  of  Lieut.-Colonel  Yollano, 
Captain  Cameron,  and  Captain  Alexander  R.  Clarke;  but  I gladly  avail  myself  of 
this  opportunity  to  acknowledge  the  great  and  important  assistance  and  advice  which, 
both  as  regards  the  insti-uments  and  the  calculations,  Mm  have  at  ail  times  received 
from  the  Astronomer  Royal. 

The  triangulation  by  the  methods  which  will  be  explained,  is  now  made  consistent 
in  every  part,  so  that  any  side  of  any  triangle  being  taken  as  a base,  the  same  distance 
will  he  reproduced  when  it  is  computed  through  any  portion  or  the  whole  series  of 
triangles  ; and  when  the  five  measured  bases  on  which  Mm  rely  are  incorporated  in  this 
triangulation,  the  greatest  difference  between  their  measured  and  coinjiuted  lengths  is 
not  as  much  as  3 inches,  and  yet  some  of  the  bases  are  upwards  of  400  miles  apart. 

Several  bases  of  from  five  to  seven  miles  long  have  been  measured,  but  those  upon 
which  the  chief  reliance  has  been  placed  are  the  Lough  Foyle  and  Salisbury  Plain 
bases,  Mdiich  were  measured  with  General  Colby’s  compensation  bars.  The  difference 
between  the  measured  and  computed  length  of  the  one  base  from  the  other  through 
the  triangulation  is  0’4178  ft.,  or  about  5 inches. 

This  difference  has  been  divided  in  proportion  to  the  square  root  of  the  lengths  of 
the  measured  bases,  by  wdiicli  we  have  obtained  the  mean  base  which  has  been  used 
in  the  triangulation;  there  is  therefore  a difference  of  -|-  or  — 0'2  ft.,  or  2^  inches 
between  the  measured  and  computed  length  of  these  bases  from  the  mean  base. 

The  Hounsloiv  Heath  base  was  measured  with  Ramsden’s  100-ft.  steel  chains,  and 
only  differs  0*173  ft.,  or  about  2 inches,  from  its  computed  length  from  the  mean  base. 

d'he  Belhelvie  base  in  Aberdeenshire,  also  measured  with  tiie  steel  chains,  differs 
only  0*24  ft.,  or  less  than  3 inches,  from  the  computed  length. 


FROM  THF  ORDNANCE  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEV. 


609 


The  difference  between  the  measured  and  computed  length  of  the  Misterton  Carr 
base,  near  Doncaster,  also  measured  with  the  steel  chains,  is  only  O' 191  ft,,  or  about 
2 inches;  and  it  will  be  observed  that  the  difference  between  the  computed  and 
measured  lengths  of  these  three  bases  (tneasured  with  chains)  is  not  greater  than  the 
difference  between  the  measured  and  computed  length  of  the  Lough  Foyle  and  Salis- 
bury Plain  bases  (measured  with  the  compensation  bars),  from  which  it  may  be  in- 
ferred that  bases  measured  with  steel  chains  are  deserving  of  the  greatest  confidence; 
and  when  the  great  simplicity,  portability,  and  cheapness  of  the  chains  is  compared 
with  the  complex,  heavy  and  expensive  apparatus  of  the  compensation  bai’S,  I should 
anticipate  that  they  would  be  more  generally  employed  than  they  have  been  of  late 
years,  especially  in  the  colonies,  and  in  countries  where  the  transport  of  heavy  arti- 
cles is  effected  with  difficulty. 

The  length  of  the  base  on  Rhuddlan  Marsh  in  North  Wales,  which  was  measured 
with  steel  chains,  differs  l'596ft.  from  the  computed  length;  but  from  the  circum- 
stance that  the  extremities  of  the  base  are  very  badly  situated  with  reference  to  the 
surrounding  Trigonometrical  stations,  the  angles  being  very  acute,  and  not  well  ob- 
served, we  have  placed  little  confidence  in  the  result  of  the  comparison  of  its  com- 
puted and  measured  length. 

One  of  the  first  practical  results  arising  from  the  completion  of  the  triangulation 
is,  that  we  are  now  able  to  engrave  the  latitude  and  longitude  on  the  marginal  lines 
of  the  old  sheets  of  the  1-inch  map  of  England,  and  this  is  now  being  done. 

The  following  account  of  the  Trigonometrical  operations  and  calculations  has  been 
drawn  up  by  Captain  Alexander  R.  Clarke,  R.E.  : this  account  may  be  considered 
as  an  abridgement  of  that  more  detailed  account  which  is  now  in  the  press,  and  will 
be  shortly  published. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  equatorial  diameter  of  the  earth,  as  derived  from  the 
Ordnance  Survey,  is  7926'610  miles,  or  about  one  mile  greater  than  it  is  given  by  the 
Astronomer  Royal  in  his  ‘ Figure  of  the  Earth,’  and  that  the  ellipticity  is  ^^3,  or  as 
the  Astronomer  Royal  conjectured,  something  “ greater  than  -3^05”  which  he  gives  in 
the  same  paper. 

The  mean  specific  gravity  of  the  earth,  as  derived  from  the  observations  at  Arthur’s 
Seat,  was  stated  in  a former  paper  to  be  5*14  ; the  calculations  have  since  been  revised, 
and  we  now  find  it  to  be  5'316. 

The  mean  specific  gravity  of  the  earth,  as  derived  from  the  only  other  observations 
on  the  attraction  of  mountain  masses  on  which  any  reliance  has  been  placed,  viz.  the 
Schehallien  observations,  give,  as  finally  corrected  by  Hutton,  or  almost  5*0. 

From  the  experiments  with  balls  we  have  the  following  results  : — 

By  Cavendish,  as  corrected  by  Baily  ....  5'448 


By  Baily 5'67 

By  Reich 5'44 


4 L 2 


610  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH, 


From  the  pendulum  experiments  at  a great  depth  and  on  the  surface,  the  Astro- 
nomer Royal  obtained  6‘566. 

I have  recently  received,  through  the  Astronomer  Royal,  two  copies  of  the  new 
National  Standard  Yard  ; it  is  obviously  necessary  that  our  geodetic  measures  should 
be  given  in  reference  to  the  standard  ; but  not  knowing  from  what  scale  the  standard 
has  been  taken,  I am  unable  to  say  at  jjresent  in  what  way  the  reduction  is  to  be 
made;  that  is,  whether  by  reference  to  the  comparison  of  the  old  standards  which 
have  been  ali  eady  made,  or  by  the  mechanical  process  of  a direct  comparison  of  the 
Ordnance  Standard  with  the  new  National  Standard. 

H.  James,  Lieut. -Colonel  R.E. 

Tlie  Principal  'Friangulation  of  the  Oi’dnance  Survey  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 
extending  from  the  Scilly  Isles,  in  latitude  49°  53',  to  the  Shetland  Isles,  in  latitude 
60°  50',  and  embracing  at  its  widest  extent  about  12°  of  longitude,  consists  of  about 
250  stations. 

The  observations  for  the  connexion  of  the  trigonometrical  stations  have  been  made 
with  four  large  theodolites,  two  of  3 feet,  one  of  2 feet,  and  the  other  of  18  inches  in 
diameter.  The  first  two  instruments  (one  of  which  is  the  property  of  the  Royal 
Society),  and  the  18-inch  theodolite,  were  constructed  by  Ramsden  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  trigonometrical  opeiations  in  England  in  1798:  the  2-feet  theo- 
dolite was  constructed  by  Messrs.  Troughton  and  Simms  at  the  commencement  of 
the  Irish  Survey  in  1824. 

The  latitudes  of  thirty-two  of  the  stations  of  the  principal  triangulation  have  been 
determined  by  observations  made  with  Ramsden’s  zenith  sector,  and  since  the 
destruction  of  that  instrunsent  in  the  great  fire  at  the  Tower  of  London,  with  Airy’s 
zenith  sector.  All  the  observations  made  wdth  these  instruments  have  been  published 
in  detail*. 

The  mode  of  observing  with  the  theodolite  may  be  shortly  described  as  follow's: — 
Tlie  instrument  being  first  placed  very  carefully  over  the  precise  centre  of  the  station, 
an  object  having  a fine  vertical  line  of  light,  with  a breadth  of  about  10",  is  set  up  in  a 
convenient  position  wdthin  a mile  or  two  of  the  station  ; this  object,  called  the 
“ referring-object,”  serves  as  a point  of  reference  from  which  all  angles  are  measured. 
The  lower  limb  of  tlie  instrumetU  being  clamped,  the  observer  intersects  the  refer- 
ring object  and  then  each  of  the  pi'incipal  points  in  succession,  concluding  with  a 
second  observation  of  the  I’eferring-object,  which  should  be  identical,  witliin  the 
limits  of  errors  of  observation,  wdth  the  first  reading  of  that  object:  the  instrument 
is  then  unclamped  and  the  bearings  read  again  on  different  parts  of  the  divided 
circle.  'I’he  method  by  which  these  observations  are  reduced  to  the  most  probable 

* ‘Astronomical  Observations  made  with  Ramsden’s  Zenith  Sector,’  1842.  ‘Astronomical  Observations 
made  with  Air.v’s  Zenith  Sector,’  1852. 


FROM  THE  ORDNANCE  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEY. 


611 


results,  is  an  approximate  solution  of  the  equations  resulting  from  the  method  of 
least  squares. 

The  direction  of  the  meridian  has  been  deteriiiined  by  observations  of  tlie  elonga- 
tions of  a,  X Urs.  min.  and  51  Cepljei ; at  six  of  the  stations  at  which  these  observa- 
tions have  been  made,  the  probable  error  of  the  result  is  under  0"'40,  at  twelve  under 
0"'50,  at  thirty-four  under  0"'70,  and  at  fifty-one  under  1"  00. 

Measured  Base  Lines. 

The  account  of  the  measurement  with  Ramsden’s  steel  chain  of  the  base  lines  on 
Hounslow  Heath  in  1791?  Salisbury  Plain  in  1794,  on  Misterton  Carr  in  1801,  and 
on  Rhuddlan  Marsh  in  180G,  will  be  found  in  the  ‘Account  of  the  Trigonometrical 
Survey.’  These  base  lines  are  all  expressed  in  terms  of  Ramsden’s  brass  scale  at  the 
temperature  of  62°  Fahrenheit.  The  chains  were  compared  with  Ramsden’s  pris- 
matic bar  (20  feet  in  length),  which  was  laid  off  from  the  brass  scale  at  the  tempe- 
rature of  54°  Fahrenheit.  By  a series  of  comparisons  of  the  Ordnance  10-foot 
standard  iron  bar  (designated  O,)  with  Ramsden’s  20-foot  standard,  made  at  South- 
ampton, it  was  found  that 

Ramsden’s  bar=20-0007656  feet  of  Oj, 

so  that  any  measurement  expressed  in  terms  of  feet  of  Ramsden’s  bar  at  62°  must  be 
multiplied  by  1*0000383  to  give  feet  of  Oj,  at  the  same  temperature.  Also  to  reduce  a 
measurement  expressed  in  terms  of  Ramsden’s  brass  scale  to  the  same  in  terms  of 
Ramsden’s  bar,  it  must  be  increased  by  a quantity  corresponding  to  the  diflference  of 
the  expansions  of  brass  and  iron  for  8°;  and  taking  these  quantities  as  used  in  the 
reductiun  of  the  bases,  it  will  be  found  that  the  multiplier  is  1*0000328,  and  hence 
to  reduce  the  old  bases  to  feet  of  O,,  they  must  be  multiplied  by  1*0000/11. 

In  1816  a liase  line  of  live  miles  in  length  was  measured  by  Major-General  Colby 
on  Belhelvie  Sands,  Aberdeenshire : the  measurement  was  elfected  with  Ramsden’s 
steel  chains,  and  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  the  previous  bases.  The  chains 
were  compared  with  Ramsden’s  bar  by  Mr.  Berge  both  before  and  after  the  measure- 
ment. 

In  1826-27  the  Lough  Foyle  Base  was  measured  in  the  north  of  Ireland  with  Major- 
General  Colby’s  compensation  bars.  Of  this  measurement  a description  in  detail 
has  been  published*. 

In  1849  the  old  base  line  on  Salisbury  Plain  was  remeasured.  This  measurement 
exceeded  the  old  measure  when  reduced  to  the  same  standard  by  a foot.  The  guns 
marking  the  extremities  of  the  old  line  were  found  imbedded  very  fii’inly  in  the 
earth,  and  in  all  probability  in  exactly  their  original  positions. 

By  a series  of  comparisons  instituted  in  1834'|'  between  the  Royal  Astronomical 

* ‘ Account  of  the  Measurement  of  the  Lough  Foyle  Base,’  by  Captain  Yolland,  R.E.,  1847. 

t The  observations  which  were  made  by  the  late  Lieut.  Murphy,  Royal  Engineers,  are  given  in  the 
‘ Account  of  the  Measurement  of  the  Lough  Foyle  Base.’ 


612  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH, 
Society’s  Scale  and  the  Ordnance  Standard  O2,  it  was  determined  that 

Ord.  Standard  Oj=  1 19  997508  mean  inches  of  the  centre  yard  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society’s  Scale  ; 

also  from  Mr.  Baily’s  comparison  of  this  scale  with  the  standard  metre  he  deter- 
mined* 

Standard  Metre  =39'369678  mean  inches  of  the  centre  yard  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society’s  Scale. 

From  more  recent  observations,  it  appears  that  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society’s 
scale  has  undergone  a permanent  alteration  of  length  ; the  interval  however  between 
the  two  series  of  observations  above  quoted  was  not  sufficiently  long  to  vitiate  the 
connexion  thus  established  between  the  Ordnance  Standard  and  the  metre.  The 
resulting  value  of  the  metre  in  terms  of  O,  is  therefore 

Standard  Metre  =3*2808746  mean  feet  of  O,, 

and  hence  since  the  metre  =443*296  lines  of  the  toise  of  Peru, 

Toise  =6*3945438  mean  feet  of  O,. 

Reduction  of  the  Triangulation. 

If  u represent  the  true  ratio  of  the  distance  between  any  two  points  in  a network 
of  triangulation  to  the  base  line  ; A B C...A'...  the  true  angles,  whose  observed  values 
are  A-j-a,  B-}-j3,  C-l-7.*..A'-j-a'...,  then  if  w,  be  the  calculated  value  of  u obtained  by 
using  the  series  of  observed  angles  ABC...,  the  value  obtained  by  using  the  series 
of  observed  angles  A'B'C' 

u =/(  ABC. ..)=/(A'B'C'. ..)  = .... 
u^=.u-\-a a -\-b^  +cy  +.... 

M j M -|-  a!  a'  -j-  6'/3'  -j-  c'y’  -j- 

and  so  on.  Each  different  calculation  of  u will  therefore  give  a different  value  for 
that  quantity. 

In  the  necessary  existence  of  these  discrepancies  among  the  calculated  values  of 
u,  it  becomes  of  much  importance  to  obtain  the  most  probable  value.  In  ordinary 
calculations  this  has  been  generally  effected  by  assuming  it  to  be  the  mean  of  all  the 

calculated  values  u{ii{u[ This  might  be  improved  upon  by  assigning  to  each  value 

of  u its  proper  weight  by  means  of  the  weights  of  the  observed  angles,  but  the  method 
would  still  be  imperfect  and  discrepancies  would  still  exist  in  other  parts  of  the 
work. 

From  the  above  equations,  though  we  cannot  determine  the  precise  value  of  u,  yet 
we  can  obtain  some  precise  information  respecting  the  errors  of  observation ; for  we 
have  evidently,  since  the  quantities  ahc...a'b'c' ...  are  numerical,  certain  equations  of 
condition  between  the  unknown  errors. 

But  the  number  of  such  equations  of  condition  for  the  whole  figure  being  necessarily 
less  than  the  actual  number  of  errors,  an  indefinite  number  of  systems  of  corrections 

* Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society,  vol.  ix. 


FROM  THE  ORDNANCE  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEY. 


613 


might  be  obtained  that  would  satisfy  all  the  geometrical  relations  of  the  triangula- 
tion. The  question  then  is  to  determine  that  system  which  is  the  most  probable, 
and  the  solution  derived  from  the  theory  of  probabilities  is,  that  the  most  probable 
system  of  corrections  xx' ...  is  that  which  makes  the  function  '1(lvx'^)*  a minimum. 

If  n be  the  number  of  observed  angles  in  a network  of  triangiilation,  m the  number 
of  points,  then  2{m—2)  will  be  the  number  of  angles  absolutely  required  to  fix  all 
the  points,  consequently  the  geometrical  figure  must  supply  n—2m-{-4  equations  of 
condition  amongst  the  true  angles  or  amongst  the  corrections  to  the  observed  angles  : 
we  have  therefore  w— 2-1-4  equations  of  the  form 

0 '^(ii-\-hiX-\- c^x^ ..... 

0 = ^2 + -f-  c^x'  -f-  d^x"  -f- , 

which  are  to  be  determined  so  that  the  quantity 

U = IV  x^  -{-  w’x'^  -T  w"x"‘‘  -f- 

shall  be  a minimum.  Multiplying  the  equations  of  condition  by  unknown  quantities 
X2X3....,  we  obtain  by  the  theory  of  maxima  and  minima  of  functions  of  many 
variables, 

wx  .... 

w'x'  =Ci?li-l-C2X2-l-C3X3-l-.... 

Substituting  the  values  of  xx'...  in  terms  of  XjXa....  as  obtained  from  these  equations, 
in  the  equations  of  condition  we  get  a system  of  equations  from  which  may  be 

determined  ; and  having  obtained  the  numerical  values  of  these  quantities,  the  last 
set  of  equations  will  give  the  numerical  values  of  the  required  corrections  xx' ... 

In  order  that  the  results  of  the  triangulation  as  applied  to  the  determination  of  the 
figure  of  the  earth  might  have  the  greatest  weight  possible,  the  most  probable  system 
of  corrections  has  been  calculated  according  to  Bessel’s  method,  shortly  described 
above.  The  principal  and  only  objection  to  the  application  of  this  method  of  obtain- 
ing the  most  trustworthy  results,  is  the  extremely  voluminous  and  tedious  nature  of 
the  calculations.  The  total  number  of  equations  of  condition  for  the  triangula- 
tion is  920;  if  therefore  the  whole  were  to  be  reduced  in  one  mass,  it  would  involve 
as  a small  part  of  the  work  the  solution  of  an  equation  of  920  unknown  quantities. 
The  following  method  of  approximation  therefore  was  adopted  : the  triangulation 
was  divided  into  twenty-one  parts  or  figures,  each  affording  a not  unmanageable 
number  of  equations  of  condition  ; four  of  these  parts,  not  adjacent,  were  first  adjusted 
by  the  method  just  explained.  The  corrections  determined  in  these  figui'es  were 
substituted,  so  far  as  they  entered,  in  the  equations  of  condition  of  the  adjacent 
figure,  and  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  remaining  corrections  in  that  figure  made 
a minimum.  Thus  each  division  of  the  triangulation,  with  the  exception  of  the  four 
specified  above,  is  dependent  upon  one  or  more  of  the  figures  to  which  it  is  adjacent. 

* Where  w is  the  weight  of  the  observation  corresponding  to  the  error  x. 


014  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH, 


The  average  number  of  equations  in  each  figure  is  about  44  ; the  greatest  number 
of  equations  in  any  one  figure  is  77.  Each  figure  was  worked  by  two  independent 
computers.  This  of  itself  alone  would  have  been  insufficient  to  secure  freedom  from 
error,  but  the  final  working  of  every  possible  triangle,  after  the  corrections  were 
applied  to  the  observed  angles,  secured  perfect  accuracy. 

Corrections  to  all  the  observed  bearings  having  been  obtained  in  the  manner 
explained,  it  is  clear  that  since  all  the  geometrical  relations  of  the  figure  are  satisfied, 
no  discrepancies  can  present  theniselves  between  the  calculated  values  of  the  distance 
between  any  two  points  by  whatever  series  of  angles  it  may.  be  obtained.  The 
triangles  are  calculated  by  Legendre’s  theorem.  This  theorem  may  be  applied  to 
triangles  of  any  magnitude,  up  to  two  or  three  hundred  miles,  without  fear  of  error. 
The  greatest  errors  that  can  result  in  the  values  of  the  sides  a,  6 of  a spheroidal  triangle 
as  calculated  from  the  side  c by  spherical  trigonometry,  using  the  geometric  mean  of 
the  principal  radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  for  the  mean  latitude  of  the  triangle  as 
the  radius  of  the  sphere,  are  (the  position  of  the  triangle  in  being  the  variable 

quantity  with  respect  to  whicli  the  errors  are  the  greatest  possible), 

— -{■  ni^  Arf 

cos^ 

^“12R2 

where  R is  the  radius  of  the  sphere,  e the  eccentricity  of  the  earth’s  surface,  Imn  the 
cosines  of  the  angles  of  the  triangle  opposite  respectively,  and  K its  mean  latitude. 


Comparison  of  Bases. 

The  absolute  length  of  any  side,  or  the  linear  scale  of  the  triangulation,  is  made  to 
depend  on  the  bases  measured  with  the  compensation  bars  at  Lough  Foyle  and  on 
Salisbury  Plain.  The  discrepancy  between  the  measured  and  calculated  length  of 
these  bases  is  about  5 inches ; this  discrepancy  is  divided  so  that  each  of  the  two 
bases  shall  exhibit  an  error  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  its  length  : the  com- 
parison of  all  the  bases  is  then  as  follows; — 


i 

Date. 

Bases. 

Length  in  terms 
of  Ramsden’s 
Scale. 

Length  in  terms 
of  Ordnance 
Standard. 

Length  in 
Triangulation. 

Difference. 

1791. 

1794. 

1801. 

1806. 

1817. 

1827. 

! 1849. 

Hounslow  Heath 

Salisbury  Plain  

Misterton  Carr  

Rhuddlan  Marsh 

Belhelvie 

Lough  Foyle  

Salisbury  Plain  

ft. 

27404-24 

36574-23 

26342-19 

24514-26 

26515-65 

ft. 

27406-190 

36576-830 

26344-060 

24516-000 

26517-530 

41640-887 

36577-858 

ft. 

27406-363 

36577-656 

26343-869 

24517-596 

26517-770 

41641-103 

36577-656 

ft. 

+ 0-173 
+ 0-826 
-0-191 
+ 1-596 

+ 0-240 

+ 0-216 
— 0-202 

FROM  THE  ORDNANCE  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEY. 


615 


Latitudes  and  Longitudes. 

For  short  distances  the  ordinary  formulae  are  sufficient,  but  in  the  case  of  distances 
above  80  or  100  miles  the  following  formulae  are  used,  A being  the  given  point,  and 
B that  whose  latitude  and  longitude  are  required : — 

Let  s = distance  AB  measured  on  the  surface  of  the  earth 
V =normal  to  minor  axis  at  A 

0 =angle  subtended  at  the  foot  of  this  normal  by  the  curve  s 
a =azimuth  of  B at  A 

a'=azimuth  of  A at  B,  both  measured  from  the  north 
K =latitude  of  A ; »=90—X 

X'  = latitude  of  B 
at  =difference  of  longitude 

§ = radius  of  curvature  of  the  meridian  for  the  latitude  i(>».-|-X') 


*■  1 / f I y \ sin  0)  1 

tan  2(a  =sin  i(jc  + fl)  2“ 

tan  2 (a  + ^ + -cosi(ic  + 9)  2^ 

^ sin  !(«'  + ? + V 

s . 


’ V ' 6(1—  e^) 


cos^  \ cos^  a 


6^92 


^ being  a minute  angular  correction  here  expressed,  as  also  0,  in  angular  measure. 

In  the  calculation  of  latitudes  and  longitudes  we  must  suppose  all  the  points  to  be 
projected  on  a regular  spheroidal  surface  (A),  very  nearly  agreeing  with  the  actual 
surface  covered  by  the  triangulation,  then  by  equations  of  condition  between  the 
observed  and  calculated  latitudes,  longitudes  and  azimuths,  small  alterations  to  the 
elements  of  the  assumed  spheroid  and  its  position  must  be  determined : this  new 
spheroid  (B)  will  be  that  most  nearly  representing  the  actual  surface  under  con- 
sideration. 

For  the  first  spheroid,  that  determined  by  the  Astronomer  Royal  as  most  nearly 
representing  the  earth’s  surface  ; namely, 

a= 209237 13  feet 
6=20853810  feet 

was  usejd  as  the  spheroid  of  reference  (A). 

If  we  resolve  the  inclination  of  the  actual  surface  at  any  point  to  that  of  the  sphe- 
roid (B)  at  the  same  point,  or  rather  its  projection,  into  two  inclinations,  one  north  and 
the  other  east,  and  call  these  inclinations  and  these  quantities  being  positive 
when  the  actual  surface,  as  compared  with  that  of  the  regular  surface,  rises  to  the 

MDCCCLVI.  4 M 


616  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH, 

north  and  to  the  east,  and  if  we  put  | and  yj  for  the  same  quantities  at  Greenwich, 
from  which  point  the  calculations  of  latitude  and  longitude  and  azimuths  had  their 
commencement,  then  each  point  at  which  the  latitude  has  been  observed  will  give  an 
equation  of  the  form 

f „ = a + ^1+ c;j + mla  -\-n6e, 

and  each  point  at  which  the  longitude  or  direction  of  the  meridian  has  been  deter- 
mined will  give  an  equation  of  the  form 

=a!  c'ri  -j-  m!^a  -\-n''he, 

in  which  la  and  are  the  increments  to  the  semiaxis  major  and  eccentricity  of  the 
spheroid  (A). 

In  consequence  of  the  smallness  of  the  coefficients  nni  m the  latitude  of  Great 
Britain,  the  quantity  le  would  have  very  little  weight  as  determined  from  these  equa- 
tions. 

Surface  of  Great  Britain. 

The  approximate  results  derived  from  the  above  equations  are,  assuming  ^e=0, 

Sa=2536 

=0 

I = + l"-4, 

so  that  the  semiaxes  of  the  spheroid  most  nearly  representing  the  surface  of  Great 
Britain  are 

a=20926249] 

>feet  of  Ordnance  Standard  O,. 

6=20856337] 

a — b 1 

a “299-33 

Most  probable  Deflections. 

The  last  column  of  the  following  Table  contains  the  most  probable  deflections  at 
the  various  stations  as  resulting  from  a comparison  of  the  actual  observed  latitudes 
with  those  of  spheroid  (B),  or  of  the  apparetit  and  mean  latitudes. 


FROM  THE  ORDNANCE  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEY. 


617 


Stations. 

Latitudes. 

Observed. 

Spheroid 

(A). 

Diff. 

Obs. — Cal. 

Spheroid 

(B). 

DifF. 

Obs.— Cal. 

Saint  Agnes  

49  53  33-94 

30-78 

-3-16 

32-93 

-POl 

Goonhilly  

50  2 50-07 

45-35 

-4-72 

47-42 

-2-65 

Hensbarrow  

50  22  61-84 

58-81 

-3-03 

60-73 

— 1-11 

Port  Valley 

50  35  43-20 

43-17 

-0-03 

44-95 

+ 1-75 

Week  Down  

50  35  51-42 

50-28 

-1-14 

52-06 

+ 0-64 

Boniface  Down  

50  36  10-56 

9-63 

-0-92 

11-41 

+ 0-86 

Dunnose 

50  37  7-13 

3-75 

— 3-40 

5-53 

-1-62 

Black  Down  

50  41  8-89 

10-29 

+ 1-40 

12-04 

+ 3-15 

Southampton  

50  54  46-97 

47-23 

+ 0-26 

48-88 

+ 1-91 

Greenwich  

51  28  38-30 

38-30 

0-00 

39-70 

+ 1-40 

Hungry  Hill  

51  41  10-26 

11-47 

+ 1-21 

12-94 

+ 2-68 

Feaghmaan 

51  55  22-85 

20-30 

-2-55 

21-68 

-1-17 

Precelly  

51  56  45-18 

44-76 

-0-42 

45-99 

+ 0-81 

Arbury  Hill  

52  13  27-01 

27-29 

+ 0-28 

28-36 

+ 1-35 

Forth  Mountain 

52  18  57-91 

56-83 

-1-08 

57-93 

+ 0-02 

Delamere  

53  13  18-56 

17-27 

-1-29 

17-93 

-0-63 

Clifton  Beacon  

53  27  30-27 

27-02 

-3-25 

27-56 

-2-71 

South  Berule 

54  8 56-40 

57-60 

+ 1-20 

57-87 

+ 1-47 

Tawnaghmore  

34  17  41-34 

39-61 

— 1-73 

39-93 

— 1-41 

Burleigh  Moor  

34  34  19-75 

15-74 

— 4-01 

15-80 

-3-95 

S.  end  of  LoughFoyleBase 

55  2 38-74 

33-93 

— 4-81 

33-86 

-4-88 

Ben  Lomond  

56  11  26-27 

25-26 

— 1-01 

24-64 

— 1-63 

Kellie  Law 

56  14  51-43 

53-69 

+ 2-26 

53-02 

+ 1-59 

Ben  Heynish  

56  27  16-88 

19-64 

+ 2-76 

18-95 

+ 2-07 

Great  Stirling 

57  27  49-12 

50-14 

+ 1-02 

48-94 

— 0-18 

Cowhythe  

37  40  68-92 

60-49 

-8-43 

59-20 

-9-72 

Monach  

58  21  20-84 

23-54 

+ 2-70 

22-01 

+ 1-17 

Ben  Hutig 

58  33  6-47 

5-12 

-1-35 

3-47 

-3-00 

North  Rona  

59  7 13-19 

17-67 

+ 2-48 

15-80 

+ 0-61 

Balta  

60  45  1-73 

7-16 

+ 5-41 

4-51 

+ 2-76 

Gerth  of  Scaw  

60  48  56-43 

61-82 

+ 5-39 

59-15 

+ 2-72 

Saxavord  

60  49  38-58 

41-99 

+ 3-41 

39-31 

+ 0-73 

Arcs  of  Meridian. 

The  two  longest  meridional  lines  in  the  triangulation  are  from  Dunnose,  in  the 
Isle  of  Wight,  to  Saxavord  in  the  Shetland  Isles,  and  from  St.  Agnes’  Lighthouse,  in 
the  Scilly  Islands,  to  North  Rona ; the  lengths  and  amplitudes  are  as  follows : — 


Length. 

Astronomical 

amplitude. 

Dunnose  to  Saxavord  

feet 

3729335-8 

3370394-2 

10  12  31-43 
9 13  41-25 

St.  Agnes  to  North  Rona 

Arc  of  Parallel. 

The  volume  of  the  Greenwich  Observations  for  1845  contains  the  account  of  the 
determination  of  the  longitude  of  Feaghmaan,  a station  in  the  Island  of  Valencia  on 
the  west  coast  of  Ireland,  by  the  transmission  of  chronometers. 

The  whole  arc  was  subdivided-  by  two  intermediate  stations,  of  which  one  was  the 

4 M 2 


618  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH, 


Liverpool  Observatory,  the  other  a temporary  observatory  erected  at  Kingstown. 
The  following  Table  contains  the  comparison  of  the  astronomical  and  geodetical 
determinations : — 


Stations. 

Observed 

Geodetic  Longitude. 

Difference. 

Longitude  W. 

Spheroid  (A). 

Spheroid  (B). 

(A). 

(B). 

Liverpool  

m s 

12  0*05 

m s 

12  0-35 

m s 

12  0-26 

-I-0-30 

-I-0-21 

Kingstown  

24  31-20 

24  31-48 

24  31-26 

-hO-28 

-hO-06 

Feaghmaan 

41  23-23 

41  23-02 

41  22-74 

— 0-21 

-0-49 

Observatories. 

The  positions  of  the  principal  observatories,  as  calculated  by  their  connexion  with 
the  Triangulation  of  the  Ordnance  Survey,  are  contained  in  the  following  Table; — 


Names. 

Latitudes 

Longitudes 

On  Spheroid  (B). 

As  observed. 

Diff. 

On  Spheroid  (B). 

As  observed. 

Diff. 

O / // 

O 4 U 

m s 

m s 

s 

Greenwich 

51  28  39-70 

51  28  38-30 

+ i-40 

0 0-00 

0 0-00 

0-00 

Edinburgh  

55  57  17*57 

55  57  23-20 

— 5-63 

12  43-61 

12  43-00 

+ 0-61 

Dublin  

53  23  14-21 

53  23  13-46 

+ 0-75 

25  20-87 

25  22-00 

-1-13 

Cambridge 

52  12  51-90 

52  12  51-63 

+ 0-27 

0 23-26 

0 22-69 

+ 0-57 

Oxford  

51  45  38-56 

51  45  36-00 

+ 2-56 

5 2-91 

5 2-60 

+ 0-31 

Durham  

54  46  5-27 

54  46  6-20 

-0-93 

6 20-25 

6 19*75 

+ 0-50 

Liverpool  

53  24  47-06 

53  24  47-80 

-0-74 

12  0-26 

12  0-05 

+ 0-21 

Makerstown  

55  49  1-83 

55  49  6-00 

—4-17 

19  26-20 

19  28-00 

-1-80 

Armagh  

54  21  10-76 

54  21  12-67 

-1-91 

26  35-52 

26  35-50 

+ 0-02 

Figure  of  the  Earth. 

In  obtaining  the  spheroid  most  nearly  representing  the  measured  arcs  of  meridian, 
we  shall  follow  the  method  given  by  Bessel  in  his  determination  of  the  figure  of  the 
earth  in  Nos.  333  and  438  of  the  ‘ Astronomische  Nachrichten  substituting  for  the 
English  arc  as  used  by  him,  the  data  of  the  present  results,  and  for  the  Indian  arc 
as  used  by  him,  the  data  contained  at  page  427  of  Colonel  Everest’s  ‘Account  of 
the  Measurement  of  Two  Sections  of  the  Meridional  Arc  of  India.’ 

Colonel  Everest’s  measurements  are  expressed  in  terms  of  his  standard  10- foot 
iron  bar  A,  and  the  standard  6-inch  scale  A,  twenty  parts  of  any  linear  result  being 
in  terms  of  feet  of  the  iron  standard  and  one  part  in  terms  of  feet  of  the  6-inch  scale. 
By  means  of  the  comparisons  contained  at  page  436  of  Colonel  Everest’s  work  and 
at  pages  101  and  [40]  of  the  ‘Account  of  the  Measurement  of  the  Lough  Foyle  Base,’ 
it  will  be  found,  that  to  reduce  the  results  contained  in  the  former  work  to  feet  of  Oj, 
they  must  be  multiplied  by  *99999026.  There  is,  however,  some  uncertainty  in  the 
unit  of  measure  of  the  earlier  portion  of  the  second  East  Indian  Arc. 

Peruvian  Arc. — The  data  are  a mean  between  the  reduced  results  obtained  by 
Delambre  and  Zach  (Base  du  Syst.  Metr.  iii.  133,  and  Mon.  Corresp.  xxvi.  52). 


FROM  THE  ORDNANCE  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEY. 


619 


Indian  Arc. — The  data  for  the  first  Indian  Arc  are  given  in  vol.  viii.  of  the  Asiatic 
Researches,  page  137. 

French  Arc. — The  data  for  this  arc  will  be  found  in  the  Base  du  Syst.  Metr.  ii. 
565,  615,  and  iii.  548,  549. 

Hanoverian  Arc. — From  Gauss’  Breitenunterscheid,  &c.,  p.  71. 

Danish  and  Russian  Arcs,  as  used  by  Bessel,  Astronomische  Nachrichten,  No.  333. 
Prussian  Arc. — Gradmessung  in  Ostpreussen  : Bessel,  1838. 

Swedish  Arc. — Exposition  des  Operations  faites  en  Lapponie : Svanberg. 


1.  Peruvian  Arc. 

Latitude. 

Amplitude. 

Distance  between 
the  parallels. 

Tarqui  

-3  i 32-068 

toise. 

Cotchesqui 

+ 0 2 31-387 

3 7 3-455 

176875-5 

2.  First  East  Indian  Arc. 

Trivandeporum 

11  44  52-590 

feet. 

Pandree  

13  19  49-018 

1 34  56-428 

574327-9 

3.  Second  East  Indian  Arc. 

Punnae  

8 9 31-722 

feet. 

Damargida 

18  3 15-292 

9 53  43-570 

3591744-06 

Kalianpur  

24  7 11-262 

15  57  39-540 

5794648-82 

Kaliana  

29  30  48-322 

21  21  16-600 

7755786-84 

4.  French  Arc. 

Formentera  

38  .39  56-11 

toise. 

Mountjouy 

41  21  44-96 

2 41  48-85 

153673-61 

Barcelona  

41  22  47-90 

2 42  61-79 

154616-74 

Carcassonne  

43  12  54-30 

4 32  58-19 

259172-61 

Evaux 

46  10  42-54 

7 30  46-43 

428019-31 

Pantheon  

48  50  49-37 

10  10  53-26 

580312-41 

Dunkirk 

51  2 8-85 

12  22  12-74 

705257-21 

5.  English  Arc. 

Dunnose 

50  37  7-15 

feet. 

Southampton 

50  54  46-97 

0 17  39-82 

107807-19 

Greenwich 

51  28  38-30 

0 51  31-15 

313716-97 

Arbury  Hill  

52  13  27-01 

1 36  19-86 

586356-34 

Clifton  

53  27  30-27 

2 50  23-12 

1036581-55 

Kellie  Law 

56  14  51-43 

5 37  44-28 

2055737-20 

Great  Stirling  

57  27  49-12 

6 50  41-97 

2499839-45 

Saxavord  

60  49  38-58 

10  12  31-43 

3729335-78 

6.  Hanoverian  Arc. 

Gottingen  

51  31  47-85 

toise 

Altona  

53  32  45-27 

2 0 57-42 

115163-725 

620  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH 


7.  Danish  Arc. 

Latitude. 

Amplitude. 

Distance  between 
the  parallels. 

Lauenburg 

Lyssabbel  

53  22  17*046 

54  54  10-352 

1 31  53-306 

toise. 

87436-538 

8.  Prussian  Arc. 

Trunz 

54  13  11-466 

toise. 

28211-629 

86176*975 

Kbnigsberg  

Memel  

54  42  50-500 

55  43  40-446 

0 29  39-034 

1 30  28-980 

9.  Russian  Arc. 

Belin  

52  2 40-864 

54  39  4-519 
56  30  4-562 

56  34  51-550 
58  22  47-280 
60  5 9*771 

2 36  23-655 

4 27  23-698 

4 32  10-686 

6 20  6*416 

8 2 28*907 

toise. 

148811*418 

254543*454 

259110-085 

361824-461 

459363-008 

Neniesch 

Jacobstadt 

Bristen  

Dorpat  

Hochland  

10.  Swedish  Arc. 

Maldrn  

Pahtawara 

65  31  30-265 
67  8 49-830 

1 37  19*565 

toise. 

92777*981 

If  f be  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  meridian  at  a point  whose  latitude  is  X, 

a{\—e^) 

^ (1— e^sin^X)® 

or  if  we  make 

a—b  2 

a + b ^ (1 

«(1  — w)(l  — n^) 

P= 5, 

(1  + 2n  cos  2A  + n^Y 


which  being  expanded  becomes 

gi=a(l  — n)(l  — w®)N{  I — 2o5  cos  2X+2a'  cos  4X— } 

N =1  + (|)V+(||)V+.... 

IVT  ^ I ^ ^ ^ 3 I 

Na  


, 3.52,3.5.73,, 

— o “ho  A «"o^“h 


’2.4"'  ‘ 2.4.6  2 

If  s be  the  meridian  distance  between  the  points  whose  latitudes  are  XjXj 

.5=1  ^.dX; 

and  putting  Xa— A,  = 2X=X,+X2, 

— 2a  sin  <p  cos  2X4-a^  sin  2(p  cos  4X—  — 


FROM  THE  ORDNANCE  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEY. 


621 


where  g is  the  length  of  a mean  degree  of  the  meridian  determined  by  the  relation 

Hence  if  s be  the  meridian  distance  of  two  points  whose  latitudes  are  X,+.ri  and 
^2~1"'^25  we  must  substitute  in  this  equation  ^+‘^2— foi'  neglecting  the  influence 
of  the  small  quantities  x on  the  mean  latitude  of  the  arc ; after  this  substitution  we 
obtain 

(p4*2a  sin  (p  cos  'Jk  — a!  sin  2^5  cos 
|W/=  1 d-2a  cos  p cos  2X. 

Now  let  gi  «!  be  approximate  values  of  g and  a,  so  that 

I 1+*  7 

Then  substituting  in  the  preceding  equation,  we  have  finally 

rseoo.  , „ i„i 

-s — <P  d- Pi — I 

where  x^  x^  and  p are  expressed  in  seconds,  and 

2a,  . ^ 

P,=  ---  ,7,  Sin  p COS  2k 
‘ sin  1''  ^ 

5«2 

P„=-^ — sin  2ffl  COS  4X. 

® sm  1"  ^ 

This  equation  contains  the  relation  between  the  corrections  to  the  terminal  latitudes 
of  a measured  line  s required  to  bring  them  into  accordance  with  the  measured 
distance,  the  elements  of  the  spheroid  of  reference  being  as  expressed  above  ing,  a,  i k. 
An  arc  in  which  there  are  n observed  latitudes  will  therefore  afford  n—  1 equations 
of  the  form 

x^—x^=.ni-Yai-\-hk ; 

the  quantities  ik  must  then  be  determined  so  as  to  make  the  function 

x^^-\-xl-]rxl-Y .... 

a minimum. 

The  final  equations  thus  deduced  are 


0=:M  d-A/+B^ 
0=M'+Bi+B'^ 


622  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH, 

where  r is  the  number  of  observed  latitudes  in  any  arc,  the  symbol  2 signifying 
summation  with  respect  to  the  different  arcs. 

Bessel  adopts  the  approximate  elements  o-i=57008  toises  the  equations 

for  the  different  arcs  are  then  as  follows,  putting  I0000?'=j9  and  \(ih=.q. 

1,  Peruvian  Arc. 

a:W-a;,=  + l'966+l-1225p+5:60.‘j9  9. 

2.  First  East  Indian  Arc. 

4*)— 4-0'937+0“5697  jo+2-5835  q. 

3.  Second  East  Indian  Arc. 

— ^3=+  5-346+3'5628/?+ 15-9269  q. 
a-®— + 4-801  +5-7458  jo+24-0257  q. 
xf~x^=  + 12-440+7-6875  p+29-798]  q. 

4.  French  Arc. 

+3-991 +0-97l3;?+0-8601  q. 
xf-x,—  +0-646+0-9772  jo+0-8642  q. 
xf  - x^-=  +0-026+1-6378 j0+ 1-1889  q. 

5-035+2-7041 J0+ 1-2671  q. 
a;f_X4=  + 1-191  +3-6655  j»+0-8659  q. 
xf—x^=  +5- 1 7 1 +4-4537  p+0-205 1 q. 

5.  English  Arc. 

+» -X,—  + 3-772+0- 1 064;?-  0- 1 038  q. 
xf  —X,  — + 3-735  +0-3095  jo— 0-3 1 76  q. 

+^>—^3=+  4-302  + 0-5784^9  — 0-6308  9. 

^3=+  1-258+1-0224^—1-2226  q. 
xf—x,=  -\-  7-874+2-0272  p — 2-8959  9. 
xf—x,=  -\-  7- 127+2-4649  p- 3-7683^. 
.rf)_^^=4.10-883+3-6763p— 6-6163  q. 

6.  Hanoverian  Arc. 

.r[j'>-X6=  +5-679+0-7263 p— 0-9224  q. 


FROM  thp:  ordnance  trigonometrical  survey. 


623 


7.  Danish  Arc. 

4')  -^7=  — 0-369+0-55 13  /?  — 0-85.3/  q. 


8.  Prussian  Arc. 

4)— ^3=  —0-.368H-0-1 779/?  — 0-2852  q. 
4)— j:-3=  +3-790  + 0-5433  /?— 0-9157  q. 

9.  Russian  Arc. 

4>— .2:9= +0-248  + 0-9384/?— 1-3293  9. 
4>  — ^g=+5-l  10+l-6049/?-2-5184^. 
x^p—x^z=  +5-939+  1 -6337/?— 2-5741  q. 
4>-a^9= +2-909+2-2809/?  — 3-9289^. 
4- +5-276+2-8953 /?  — 5-3824  q. 


10.  Swedish  Arc. 

4— a?,o=— 0-507  + 0-5839/?— 1-9711  q. 

From  which  we  o!)tain  the  following  quantities  for  the  different  arcs:  — 


No.  of 
Arc. 

(m) 

(a) 

(^) 

{am) 

{aa) 

{aU) 

{hm) 

m 

1. 

+ 1-996 

+ 1-1225 

+ 5-6059 

+ 

2-2068 

1-2600 

+ 

6-2926 

+ 

11-0211 

31-4261 

2. 

+ 0-937 

0-5697 

+ 2-5835 

+ 

0-5338 

0-3246 

+ 

I-47I8 

+ 

2-4207 

6-6745 

3. 

+ 22-387 

16-996] 

+ 69-7507 

+ 142-2645 

104-8052 

+ 423-8645 

+ 581-1810 

1718-8272 

4. 

+ 5-990 

14-4096 

+ 5-2513 

+ 

18-3309 

45-1641 

4- 

11-1409 

— 

0-2661 

5-2976 

5. 

+ 38-951 

10-1831 

— 13-5553 

+ 

78-8302 

25-1874 

— 

41-2067 

— 

127-4937 

68-3661 

6. 

+ 3-679 

0-7263 

- 0-9294 

+ 

4-1247 

0-5275 

— 

0-6750 

— 

5-2780 

0-8638 

7. 

- 0-369 

0-5513 

- 0-8537 

— 

0-2034 

0-3039 

— 

0-4706 

+ 

0-3150 

0-7288 

8. 

+ 3-422 

0-7212 

— 1-2009 

+ 

1-9936 

0-3268 

— 

0-5482 

— 

3-3653 

0-9198 

9. 

+ 19-482 

9-3532 

— 15-7331 

+ 

40-0469 

19-7106 

— 

34-0396 

— 

68-3130 

59-1418 

10. 

- 0-307 

+ 0-5839 

- 1-9711 

— 

0-2960 

0-3409 

— 

1-1509 

+ 

0-9994 

3-8852 

No.  of 
Arc. 

M. 

A. 

B. 

M'. 

B'. 

1. 

+ 1-1034 

0-6300 

+ 

3-1463 

+ 

5-3106 

15-7131 

2. 

+ 0-2669 

0-1623 

+ 

0-7359 

+ 

1-2104 

3-3373 

3. 

+ 46-2918 

32-5885 

+ 127-4920 

+ 177-3163 

502-5376 

4. 

+ 6-0003 

15-5021 

+ 

0-3313 

— 

4-7597 

1-3583 

5. 

+ 29-2602 

12-2204 

— 

21-4027 

— 

51-7569 

38-1202 

6. 

+ 2-0624 

0-2638 

— 

0-3375 

— 

2-6390 

0-4319 

7. 

— 0-1017 

0-1519 

0-2333 

+ 

0-1575 

0-3644 

8. 

+ 1-1710 

0-1334 

— 

0-2593 

— 

1-9957 

0-4391 

9. 

+ 9-6768 

5-1302 

— 

9-5138 

— 

17-2270 

17-8868 

10. 

— 0-1480 

0-1705 

— 

0-3755 

+ 

0-4997 

1-9426 

Sums 

+ 95-5831 

66-9731 

+ 

99-3812 

+ 106-3162 

582-1313 

4 N 


MDCCCLVI. 


624  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  THE  EARTH, 


The  final  equations  are  therefore — 

0=+  95-5831 +66*9731;?+  99-3812^ 

0=  + 106-3162+99-3812jt?  + 582-1313^, 

from  which 

;?  = — 1-548450 
^=+0-081718. 

These  quantities,  when  substituted  in  the  equations  of  condition,  give  the  following 
values  of  the  corrections  required  : — 


1.  Peruvian  Arc. 

Ta.rqni 

— 0-360 

Cotchesqui  

+ 0-360 

2.  First  Indian  Arc. 

Trivandeporum  

-0-134 

Pandree  

+ 0-134 

3.  Second  Indian  Arc. 

Punnae 

-0-492 

Damargida  

+ 0-638 

Kalianpur  

—2-625 

Kaliana  

+ 2-479 

4.  French  Arc. 

Forinentera 

+ 2-270 

Mountjouy  

+ 4-828 

Barcelona  

+ 1-474 

Carcassonne  

— 0-142 

Evaux  

-6-848 

Pantheon  

— 2-144 

Dunkirk  

+ 0-562 

5.  English  Arc. 

Dunnose  

— 2-738 

Southampton  

+ 0-860 

Greenwich  

+ 0-491 

Arbury  Hill 

+ 0-616 

Clifton 

-3-164 

Kellie  Law  

+ 1-760 

Great  Stirling  

+ 0-264 

Saxavord  

+ 1-911 

6.  Hanoverian  Arc. 

// 

Gottingen  

-2-239 

Altona 

+ 2-239 

7.  Danish  Arc. 

Lauenburg  

+ 0-646 

Lyssabbel 

—0-646 

8.  Prussian  Arc. 

Trunz  

-0-736 

Konigsberg  

-1-402 

Memel 

+ 2-138 

9.  Russian  Arc. 

BGin  

-0-619 

Nemesch  

-1-932 

Jacobstadt  

+ 1-800 

Bristen 

+ 2-579 

Dorpat 

— 1-563 

Hochland  

-0-260 

10.  Swedish  Arc. 

Maldrn  

+ 0-786 

Pahtawara  

-0-786 

The  values  of  the  axes  are- 


180.9 


FROM  THE  ORDNANCE  TRIGONOMETRICAL  SURVEY. 


625 


which  in  terms  of  p and  q,  are — 


601  ISO^j 

TT 


IOOOOttV^  6V“ 


599  180^, 

TT 


] — 


180^. 

'IOOOOtt 


(^'+V%)+ 


If  we  put  4 for  the  mean  error  of  an  equation. 


Mean  error  of /?+^S'  = 29l^V^  1267‘24-2587>^+ 1 15’3X®. 
Now  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  the  errors,  or  quantities  x,  is  160‘26 ; 

/ 2y^  = + 2-48. 

V 38-12  ~ 

The  values  of  a and  h,  and  their  mean  errors,  are  consequently 

a =20924933  ; mean  error  +800 
6 = 20854731  ; mean  error  +606. 

The  ratio  of  the  axes  is  expressed  by  the  relation 

" • " " 2n~^ 2 ■ 2n  2 

4=300-30?+3?^ 


Consequently  the  compression  is 


a — b 1 

a ~298-07’ 


mean  error  of  denominator  +2'70. 


The  length  of  a degree  of  the  meridian  whose  mean  latitude  is  X,  is  consequently 
= 364596-61  — 1837-79  cos  2X+3-85  cos  4X, 


and  the  length  of  a degree  of  longitude  in  latitude  X 

=365515-56  cos  X— 306-96  cos  3X+0-39  cos  5X. 

Had  the  point  Evaux  in  the  French  Arc,  at  which  there  is  obviously  some  peculiar 
local  disturbance,  been  omitted,  we  should  have  obtained  p=  — 1 -65000,  q=  +-09341 : 
these  values  would  have  increased  the  values  of  the  semiaxes  as  obtained  above  by 
about  200  feet  each,  and  increased  the  compression  to 

a — b 1 

“^“297-72' 

The  corrections  in  the  French  Arc  would  then  stand  thus : — 


Formentera  . 

. . . +1-319 

Mountjouy  . 

. . . +3-788 

Barcelona 

. . . +0-434 

Carcassonne  , 

. . . —1-246 

Pantheon  . . 

. . . —3-457 

Dunkirk  . . 

. . . —0-839 

and  the  correction  for  Evaux  is  increased  to 


8-059. 


The  corrections  for  the  other 


arcs  are  not  materially  altered,  but  are  in  general  diminished;  the  mean  error  of  the 


626  ON  THE  FIGURE,  DIMENSIONS,  AND  MEAN  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY  OF  1 HE  EARTH. 


equations  is  +2-05,  which  would  diminish  the  probable  error  of  the  results  in  the 


proportion  of  5 : 4. 

Summary. 

We  mav  state  the  results  of  this  paper  briefly  as  follows : — 

1st.  The  four  bases  of  verification,  when  their  measured  lengths  are  compared  M'ith 
their  lengths  as  calculated  from  a mean  of  the  Lough  Foyle  and  Salisbury  Plain  bases, 
show  the  following  discrepancies,  expressed  in  feet : 


Hounslow. 

Misterton  Carr. 

Rhuddlan  Marsh. 

+0-173 

— 0-191 

+ 1-596 

Belhelvie. 

+0-240 


compression  =: 


1 


2nd.  The  elements  of  the  spheroid  (B)  most  nearly  representing  the  surface  of 
Great  Britain  are — 

feet  Oj.  miles. 

Equatorial  semidiameter  =20926249  = 3963-305'l 
Polar  semidiameter =20856337  = 3950-064 J 

3rd.  The  elements  of  the  spheroid  (C)  most  nearly  representing  the  whole  of  the 
measured  arcs  considered  in  this  paper  are — 


299-6S 


feet  Oj.  miles. 

Equatorial  semidiameter  =20924933  = 3963-057 
Polar  semidiameter =20854731=3949-760 


j.compression  - 


:98-u7 


4th.  The  lengths  of  the  degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude  in  Great  Britain  are  a 
in  the  following  Table: — 


Mean 

latitude. 

From  Ord.  Survey,  Spheroid  (B). 

From  Spheroid  (C).  j 

Length  in  feet  of 

Length  in  feet  of 

Length  in  feet  of 

i 

Length  in  feet  of  j 

1°  of  latitude. 

1°  of  longitude. 

1°  of  latitude. 

1°  of  longitude.  j 

O 

50 

364936-33 

235227-42 

364912-12 

235214-58  ! 

51 

364999-14 

230312-27 

364975-19 

230299-77  ’ 

52 

365061-50 

225326-39 

365037-81 

225314-19 

53 

365123-34 

220271-15 

365099-92 

220259^23  : 

54 

365184-58 

215148-11 

365161-41 

215136-58 

55 

365245-15 

209958-83 

365222-23 

209947-61 

56 

365304-96 

204704-93 

365282-29 

204694-04 

57 

36.5363-96 

199387-90 

365341-53 

199377-33  ! 

58 

365422-06 

194009-37 

365.399-88 

193999-13 

59 

365479-20 

188571-00 

365457-26 

188561-08 

60 

365535-30 

183074-50 

365513-59 

183064-93 

Explanation  of  the  Plate. 

PLATE  XXXIV. 

Is  a diagram  of  the  triangulation  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  is  one  of  the  plates 
which  has  been  engraved  at  the  Ordnance  Survey  Office  to  illustrate  the 
Account  of  the  Trigonometrical  Survey  of  the  United  Kingdom  which  is 
now  in  the  press. 


[ 627  ] 


XXX.  A Third  Memoir  upon  Quantics.  By  Arthur  Cayley,  Esq. 


Received  March  13, — Read  April  10,  1856. 


My  object  in  the  present  memoir  is  chiefly  to  collect  together  and  put  upon  record 
various  results  useful  in  the  theories  of  the  particular  quantics  to  which  they  relate. 
The  tables  at  the  commencement  relate  to  binary  quantics,  and  are  a direct  sequel 
to  the  tables  in  my  Second  Memoir  upon  Quantics,  vol.  cxlvi.  (1856)  p.  101.  The 
definitions  and  explanations  in  the  next  part  of  the  present  memoir  are  given  here 
for  the  sake  of  convenience,  the  further  development  of  the  subjects  to  which  they 
relate  being  reserved  for  another  occasion.  The  remainder  of  the  memoir  consists  of 
tables  and  explanations  relating  to  ternary  quadrics  and  cubics. 

Covariant  and  other  Tables,  Nos.  27  to  50  (Nos.  1 to  50  binary  quantics)*. 

Nos.  27  to  29  are  a continuation  of  the  tables  relating  to  the  quintic 

{a,  b,  c,  d,  e,f\x,  yf. 

No.  27  gives  the  values  of  the  different  determinants  of  the  matrix 


a, 

^b. 

6c, 

4d,  e ) 

4b, 

6c, 

4d, 

e 

b. 

4c, 

Q)d, 

4e,  / 

4c, 

Qd, 

4e, 

/ 

determinants  which  are  represented  by  1234,  1235,  &c.,  where  the  numbers  refer  to 
the  different  columns  of  the  matrix.  No.  28  gives  the  values  of  certain  linear 
functions  of  these  determinants,  viz. 

L = 1256+  2345-2.1346 

L' =3.1256—  1346 

8M  =—1345  + 2.1246 
8M'  = — 2346+2.1356 

8N  = — 1245  + 3.1236 
8N'  = — 2356+3.1456 

80P  = L'  — 3L=  5.1346  — 3.2345 

]6P'=  — 5L'—  L=  - 16.1256  — 3.1346  — 2356. 

At  the  end  of  the  two  tables  there  are  given  certain  relations  which  exist  between 
the  terms  of  Tables  14,  16,  25,  26,  27  and  28. 

* The  Tables  49  and  50  were  inserted  October  6,  1856. — A.  C. 

4 o 


MDCCCLVI. 


No. 


628 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


»o 

CO 

o ^ o 

^ CC  lO  00  C^fiO 

^ 1 + -1-7  ++  1 

2456. 

*5^  C4^  ^ ^ 

00  ^ ^ 

1 ++ 1 + 1 + 1 ^ 

1456. 

CT)  G^  CTJ  CD  ^ O 

-flH-^  l-l-l 

2356. 

CS  ^ Ci  o 

CDCD  COCDCDOCOO 

^.--(0^0000^00  X ^ 

1 + ^ + 1 1 ++  1 ^ ^ 

1356. 

C5  ^ ^ ^ CJ 

tJh  Tf  Tf  Tfi  Tfi  O 

(NGt  ©<©<&&&& 

-1-  1 1 + 1 -P  M ^ ^ ^ 

2346. 

►o-  S Hi  Hi 

Tfi-^  Tt^oooo^o 

.0)0^  .CDOt^CD^^  j. 

1346. 

^ ^ ^ CS  Cj  O 

CD  CD  CD  CD  CD  CD  O 

.^co-co.-.  J4M<3;»  § & & 

2345. 

% c-^  ^ 

^ C:  ^ ^ ^ cj 

oooooooooo 
^ .(Nao«5oo’^'iO'X)cr>«£’G< 

& § Oi  00  Oi  03  M 

-f  1 + 1 -P-P  1 ++  1 

1256. 

K^'’S  'S  Hi  v^  Hi 

^ CS  O Cj 

•— 1 ©^  CD  CD  CD  ‘C 

+i7--755§§§5 

1345. 

"e  « 1 ^ 3=  ^ ^ ^ 

T}<'^^C0'«'  ooo 

,0<IX)0<0-^  . 

& ©1  s § 

^ 1 ++  1 + 1 -1- 1 

1246. 

;>l'St-'i  %>:?-:  "2? 

!Sq  5i  <3 

Tf  't'  "f  O 

^1  1 7~  5!^7  § § § 

1245. 

^’1  'U  ^ 'U  , 

« « 53  e e s <3  ^.^  <3  O 

CnCO'OtD'-D'^  OO 

,_  ©lOiOJ^CiOOXS 

1 -f-4-  1 1 -t-  ^ -t-  1 ^ 

1236.  I 

Hi  Hs 

r?  Cl  C:>  CJ  cO^fN  Cl  O ^ 

^ CS  ^ C5<5'<2''^'*0  O 

CD  ©^  CD  CD  CD  o 

+ 5mT5+T555 

1235. 

Cl*  C,*  C.1  qj  ^ PC 

r,  <•!  <5  nC)  O n d O 

'cs'cs  <2  cs  cs 

©i  CO  ©^  CD  CD 

1 +-f  1 1 +-f  1 ^ 

1234. 

^ cr  '^CJ 

Cl  Cl  Cl^  >"0  O M Cl 

CD  CD  CD  ©^  CD  O O 
f-i  C©  I— ( ^o  CO  00  CD 

§ 1 + + 1 + + 1 

C3  CS 

CO  O^CD  ©^  .-1  GO  lO  ©^  O 

-f  1 + 1 ++7  7 + ^ ^ 

g 

>v.f  Hi 

^ ^ ^ ^N2,hC>'<5<5  'O 

p-H©^C0CDC:>©i  lOXO 

+ +1  + 1+^777-^ 

& 

^ Hi  Hs 

^ C2  ^ CS 

^D5^00©)Q0  ©^i©000 

r— 1»— 1|— 1 ^1— tTfCOCO©^ 

l-fl  l-fM++l  1 + 

CM 

^ Hi  Hi  2s 

33C33J353tO'<5^C>~ai~oo«j 

i-ifool  aioi  i-iaoooei 

& & ^ CO  ^ -1  ^ 

V, 

d ^^ci  ^ Cl.  ^ d 

©^ 

CO©^©^'^CD’^^CDO 

r-iCDCOCDTfCO©)  <C  ^ ^ 

+ 1 l-fl  + l 1+^^^ 

ij 

'bl  Hi  ^ 

^ CS  CS  cs  CJ 

t-i^CD©)©l©^LO©iOOOO 
COl>*COr-HCO©^f-H©^00  00©) 

©^  X CO 

-t-l  + l 1 l + l l-p+l 

g 

CS  ^ CS  cs  CSNCiNCi^OKi  tCj 

p-iO^O^OOO^GOCD  »DO 

+ + 1 1 + 1 + ^ 1 + ^ 

Hi . ^ Hi  ^ 

d Cl  '<5  <5  CJ  O d O - 

COG^COi-iQOO^CDiiOO 

+ 1 1+^1+77:55 

MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


629 


If  the  coefficients  of  the  table  14  are  represented  by  ^A,  B,  \C,  viz. 

A = 2(ae — 46c?+3c^) 

B=  af—dbe-\-2cd 
C =2(4^“4ce 

then  we  have  the  following-  relations  between  1234,  &c.  and  A,  B,  C,  viz. 


Cx 

+ BX 

+Ax 

1234  = 

+ 6 

— 12  ab 

+ l6  ac  —10  6® 

1235  = 

+ 6 

O 

7 

1 

+ 6 ac? 

1236  = 

— 2 «c+  8 

+ 6 ac?  — 18  be 

- 2 df  -V  8 e® 

1245  = 

+ 18  ac 

— 6 ac?  — 30  be 

+ 8 ae  +10  6c? 

1246  = 

+ 12  be 

+ 4 ae  — 4 bd—24  c® 

+ 4 6e  + 8 cc? 

1345  = 

+ 24  ad 

— 8 ae  —40  6c? 

+ 4 a/  +20  6e 

1256  = 

— 1 ae  + 4 bd-\-  3 

+ 1 of  + 5 6e  — 18  c<? 

— ] 6y  + 4 ce  + 3 c?® 

2345  = 

+ 20  «e+40  bd — 30  c" 

— 80  be  +20  cd 

+ 20  bf  +40  ce-30  c?® 

1346  = 

+ 4 ae  + 8 bd+  6 c" 

— 36  cd 

+ 4 6y  + 8 ce+  6 c?® 

2346  = 

+ 4 q/-  +20  be 

— 8 bf  — 4 ce 

+ 24  cf 

1356  = 

+ 4 be  -j-  8 cd 

+ 4 bf  — 4 ce  — 24  c?® 

+ 12  e?e 

2356  = 

+ 8 + 10  ce 

— 6 c/  — 30  c?e 

+ 18  df 

1456  = 

+ 6 ce 

+ 6 cf  — 18  de 

— 2 df  -{■  8 e® 

2456  = 

+ 6 c/ 

- 2 c?/  -10  e® 

+ 6 e/ 

3456  = 

o 

1 

+ 

-12  ef 

+ 6/® 

the  following 

relations  between  L, 

L',  &c.  and  A,  B,  C, 

viz. 

Cx 

+ BX 

+Ax 

N = 

— Z ac+  ^ b‘ 

+ 3 ad — 3 be 

— 1 ae  + 1 6<? 

M = 

— 3 ad+  Zbc 

+ 3 ae — 3 c® 

— 1 af+  1 cc? 

L = 

+ 11  ae+28  bd — 39  c“ 

+ 1 af  — T5  6e+74  cd 

+ 11  6/ + 28  ce— 39  d~ 

L'  = 

— 7 + 4 bd4r  3 c® 

+ 3 <y+15  be — 18  cd 

- 7 6/+  4 ce+  3 <?® 

2P  = 

— 1 ae — 2 bd-\-  3 c® 

+ 3 6e  — Z cd 

+ 1 6/+  2 ce—  3 e?® 

P'  = 

+ 3 ae—  6 bd+  3 c® 

— 1 af  \ cd 

+ 3 6/  — 6 ce  + 3 c?® 

M'  = 

— \ of  \ cd 

+ 3 bf  - 3 d~ 

— Z cf  -{■  Z de 

N'  = 

— \ bf  + 1 ce 

+ Z cf — Z de 

- 3 df+  3 e® 

We  have  also  the  following  relations  between  L,  L',  &c.  and  a,  h,  c,  d.  e,f,  viz. 

tfP  — 6M  + cN  =0 

aM'+feP'  — 2cM+3c?N  =0 

«N'“}-26M'—  cL'  . +3eN  =0 
H-36N'  . - ^/L'+2eM4-/N=0 

+3cN'-2<;M'+  eF  +/M  = 0 

+ d^'-  eM'+/P  =0. 

The  quartinvariant  No.  19  is  equal  to 

-AC^-B^ 

i.  e.  it  is  in  fact  equal  to  —4  into  the  discriminant  of  the  quintic  No.  14. 

The  octinvariant  No.  25  is  expressible  in  terms  of  the  coefficients  of  Nos.  14  and 

4 o 2 


630 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


16,  viz.  A,  B,  C,  as  before,  and  ^a,  j3,  7,  the  coefficients  of  No.  16,  i.  e. 

a,  = ^{ace—ad^—  h^e -{-21)601— d) 

(3=  acf — ade — hd^ -\-bce — cV 

7=  adf — ae^ — bcf-{-  bde-{-de — cd‘^ 
h = 3(bdf—be^  -{-2cde—  &f  —cP), 

then  No.  25  is  equal  to 

A,  B,  C 
a,  [3,  7 

(3,  7,  ^ 

The  value  of  the  discriminant  No.  26  is 

(No.  19)^—128  No.  25. 

We  have  also  an  expression  for  the  discriminant  in  terms  of  L,  L',  &c.,  viz.  three  times 
the  discriminant  No.  26  is  equal  to 

LL'+64MM'-64NN', 


a remarkable  formula,  the  discovery  of  which  is  due  to  Mr.  Salmon. 

It  may  be  noticed,  that  in  the  particular  case  in  which  the  quintic  has  two  square 
factors,  if  we  write 


then 


(a,  b,  c,  d,  e,f\x,yy=b{{p,  q,  r\x,yyY{\,  (dyix,y), 

a=5'Kp^,  b=4pqX-{-p^()j,  c={2q^-\-pr)X-{-2pq(jtj, 

e—r^\-\-4qr^,  d=2qr'k-\-{2q‘^-{-pr)iJj  •, 


and  these  values  give 


P=K(6^^— jor)  P'=K(  lOy^— 15jor) 

M = K.10/?^  M'=K.10^/’ 

N = K . bp^  N' = K . br^, 

where  the  value  of  K is 

— 2qiJj7-^r'K^y{pr — q^y . 

The  table  No.  29  is  the  invariant  of  the  twelfth  degree  of  the  quintic,  given  in  its 
simplest  form,  i.e.  in  a form  not  containing  any  power  higher  than  the  fourth  of  the 
leading  coefficient  a ; this  invariant  was  first  calculated  by  M.  Faa  de  Bruno. 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


631 


No.  29. 


- 1 

a^<rd~f^ 

+ 

2 

''dddeY 

324  d^dd^ef 

+ 

18  ab&Y 

+ 

194  kddy- 

-1-  2 

a^(?de-f^ 

— 

1 

d-ddf 

— 

440  a?dd^d‘ 

+ 

242  abddeY 

— 

652  ddidey 

— 1 

a^ccP'ef^ 

— 

16 

db^ddf* 

+ 

78  d^dddf 

— 

128  abddy 

+ 

71.3  iddd"d 

+ 6 

+ 

16 

dWdeY 

+ 

428  a^^d^'d 

— 

324  abdd\f 

-j- 

1 36  dcd^’e/ 

-16 

a^cd'e^f" 

+ 

82 

(tb^cd‘eY 

a~b^cdeY 

— 

180  arcdPe 

— 

498  abdd-ey 

— 

246  b^cd^e^ 

+ 14 

a^cdd'f 

— 

132 

+ 

27  d^d}'^ 

+ 

136  abddd' 

+ 

16  b^dy 

— 4 

d^ce' 

+ 

50 

dWcdf 

+ 

14  ab^cdY 

14  ab^cdY 

+ 1078  abdd*ef 

+ 

4 bH^d 

— 4 

ddY 

— 

16 

a-PdY 

a-b^d^eY 

— 

+ 

206  abdd'^d 

— 

14  b^dY 

+ 11 

— 

14 

— 

32  ab^d~eY 

— 

342  abd'dy 

— 

294  b^ddef  - 

-10 

dd?e^f 

+ 

60 

dWdPe^f 

+ 

50  ab^ddY 

— 

804  ahddJ'd 

+ 

138  b^dey 

+ 3 

dd-d 

— 

30 

db^dd 

— 

18  ab^df 

+ 

506  abdd'e 

— 

440  dd(iy^ 

+ 2 

aWcff-f* 

+ 

11 

dd-cY 

— 

10  ab^dY 

— 

90  abcd^ 

-1-1246  h^ddrdy 

— 4 

db^cde‘f^ 

— 

30 

aWc^deY 

— 

30  adddeY 

— 

72  adeY 

— 

246  b^dde* 

+ 2 

dVce\f 

— 

14 

a-JdddY 

+ 

60  ab^ddf- 

+ 

78  adky^ 

+ 

206  ddd'ef 

- 6 

cdlrd^ef^ 

— 

50 

a'b^ddy^ 

— 

48  ab*cd^eY 

+ 

224  adddf 

_ 

866  b^dd?d 

+ 16 

o?hHhY“ 

+ 168 

db^ddrdY 

+ 

16  ab^cdY 

+ 

1 6 add 

— 

220  dddy 

-14 

dh^de'f 

— 

48 

d^Wddey 

+ 

38  ab^cde*/ 

— 

342  add^ef 

+ 

550  IdddJ'd 

+ 4 

dlre‘ 

— 

4 

db'^dd’ 

— 

36  adcd" 

_ 

220  add“d 

_ 

56  b^^cd'e 

+ 6 

o?hddf^ 

— 

48 

(db'^cd^eY 

+ 

112  ab^d^eY 

+ 

106  addy 

— 

4 Vd 

- 6 

dbdeY 

— 

2 

(rWcd/ey 

— 

204  ab‘^d^e^f 

+ 

392  add^d 

+ 

78  b-def- 

-50 

c?b(?<tef^ 

+ 

6 

aVdcdre^ 

+ 

102  ab^drdf 

— 

222  add^e 

+ 

428  Wdd?y" 

+ 82 

dhdddf 

+ 

62 

d-bHY 

+ 

50  ab^deY 

+ 

40  ad(P 

— 

516  b‘ddey 

— 32 

dbde’f 

— 

90 

d^Wd^df 

+ 

46  odc^dY 

— 

4 ddY 

+ 

4 b~de* 

+ 36 

dbcdY 

+ 

39 

arh^d^e* 

— 

2 addddY 

+ 

4 b'ey^ 

— 

804  b-dd^ef 

— 30 

dbcd^eY 

— 

28 

d~bdeY 

— 

204  a¥ddf 

+ 

3 b^dY 

+ 

550  Iddd/d' 

-30 

dbcd?ey 

+ 

54 

dbdd?f 

— 

170  addd^eY 

+ 

24  dcdeY 

+ 

392  dddy 

+ 24 

dhcdd' 

— 

48 

dbddeY 

+ 

308  ab^ddd" 

— 

30  dceY 

+ 

139  b^dd^d 

— 28 

dbd’ef" 

-1- 

112 

dbddf 

+ 

42  ab^dd'^ey 

+ 

16  ddY 

— 

354  Vdd^'e 

+ 50 

dbd^df 

+ 

82 

(rbdd?eY 

— 

164  aWcd^Y 

— 

4 dd'df  - 

+ 

83  b^dd^ 

-22 

dbd?d 

— 

170 

dbc"(Pey 

dbddd 

+ 

674  ab\d^df 

— 

36  b^dey 

— 

180  bddY 

48  bdey 

— 4 

dcY 

— 

104 

— 

590  ab^cd^e^ 

+ 

27  b^d 

+ 

+ 36 

dddeY 

dd/p 

— 

108 

dbdd?f 

— 

128  aWd^ef 

— 

104  b^ccPef- 

+ 

506  bdd~ef 

-16 

— 

42 

dbdd^df 

+ 

138  add^d' 

— 

22  b^deY 

— 

56  bddd 

— 22 

aWY 

+ 298 

(tbddPe^ 

— 

70  ab^ddY 

— 

60  dddrf^ 

— 

222  bddy 

-50 

ddd‘eY 

+ 242 

crbcd^ef 

— 

90  ab~ddf" 

+ 

6 dc^dey^ 

— 

354  bdd^d 

+ 16 

ddde'^f 

— 

294 

cdbcd^d 

— 

42  alddddeY 

+ 

102'  b^de^f 

+ 

330  bddj'e 

+ 16 

— 

72 

d-bdy 

+ 

674  aJddddf 

+ 

CO 

0 

CO 

— 

72  hdd? 

+ 54 

ddd*eY 

+ 

78 

(rbd^d 

— 

4 ad^dd' 

— 

234  dcdd' 

+ 

27  dy- 

+ 46 

o?dd}e^f 

— 

6 

dddY 

+ 

394  ab^ddy^ 

— 

24  WdPp 

— 

90  ddef  ' 

-60 

d'dd?d‘ 

+ 

62 

ddeY 

— 

652  ad^ddP'd' 

— 

4 dd^df 

— 

4 dd  ! 

- 6 

dcdY 

— 

108 

(ddd^eY 

— 

714  alrdd^e-f 

+ 

32  dd?d 

+ 

40  ddy 

-70 

dcdPe^f 

— 

164 

ddddf 

— 

498  iddddJ'ef 

+ 

56  b^ddf 

+ 

83  dd-d 

+ 56 

dcd*e^ 

— 

24 

dde’ 

+ 1246  ah^dd^d 

+ 

39  Idddf^^ 

— 

72  dd!^e 

+ 18 

dddef 

+ 

63 

a‘ddY 

+ 

224  adcdJf 

+ 

298  bVd-ef 

+ 

16  dd^ 

-14 

aW 

+ 394 

cddd^df 

— 

516  ab“cd^d 

— 

590  ddddf 

— 1 

awr 

l 

+ 194 

ddd^e' 

+ 

48  ub"d^e 

+ 

32  ddd 

1 

The  tables  Nos.  30  to  35  relate  to  a sextic.  No.  30  is  the  sextic  itself;  No.  31  the 
qaadrinvariant;  Nos.  32  and  33  the  quadricovariants  (the  latter  of  them  the  Hessian); 
No.  34  is  the  quartinvariant  or  catalecticant ; and  No.  35  is  the  sextinvariant  in  its 
best  form,  i.  e.  a form  not  containing  any  power  higher  than  the  second  of  the  lead- 
ing coefficient  a. 


g Rt,?/)® 


No.  30. 


a 

6 b 

15  c 

20  d 

15  e 

6/ 

632 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


No.  31. 


+ 1 ag 
-6  6/ 
+ 15  ce 
-10 


No.  32. 


+ 1 «e 

+ 2 af 

+ 1 ag 

+ 2 bg 

+ 1 eg 

-4  M 

— 6 be 

—9  ce 

—6  cf 

-4  df 

+ 3 

+ 4 

+ 8 

+ 4 rfe 

+ 3 ^ 

No.  33. 


+ \ ac 

+ 4 

+ 6 ae 

+ 4 (?/ 

+ 1 ag 

+ 4 6^ 

+ 6 c^ 

+ 4 c?^ 

+ 1 eg 

-1  6= 

— 4 be 

+ 4 6c? 
— 10  c® 

+ l6  be 
— 20  cd 

+ 14  6/ 
+ 5 ce 
-20  d^ 

+ 16  cf 
— 20  de 

+ 4 df 
-10  e^ 

-4  ef 

No.  34.  No.  35. 


+ 1 edd’^g’^ 

— 42  acd^f 

+ 60  bc^df^ 

— 6 eddefg 

+ 12  ace^ 

-30  6cV/ 

+ 4 a^df 

—20  ad^g 

+ 24  bed^g 

+ 4 a“e^g 

+ 24  ad^ef 

— 84  bed^ef 

- 3 a^ey^ 

— 8 ad~e^ 

+ 66  6cc?e® 

— 6 abedg"^ 

+ 4 b^dg^ 

+ 24  6c?y 

+ 18  abcefg 

— 12  b^efg 

— 24  6c?V 

— 12  abef^ 

+ 8 bY 

- 3 6"cy 

+ 12  c'^eg 

+ 12  abdfg 

-27  cy^ 

— 18  abde^g 

+ 30  b’^c^g 

— 8 c^d'^g 

+ 6 ab^f 

— 24  b-cef“ 

+ 66  (?def 

+ 4 ac^g“ 

— 12  b'^d'^eg 

— 8 c®e® 

— 24  a(?^g 

-24  b'^df^ 

-24  c^df 

— 18  ac“dfg 

+ 60  6W/ 

-39  e"c?V 

+ 30  acP'ef’^ 

-27  6V 

+ 36  cd'^e 

+ 54  acd^eg 
— 12  aedf" 

+ 6 befg 
— 42  bc^deg 

- 8 

+ 1 

aceg 

— 1 

acf 

— 1 

ad^g 

-j-  2 

adef 

— 1 

ae^ 

— 1 

b‘eg 

+ 1 

hT 

+ 2 

bedg 

-2 

beef 

-2 

bdf 

+ 2 

bde^ 

— 1 

&g 

+ 2 

c^df 

+ 1 

c^e^ 

-3 

cdPe 

+ 1 

d^ 

The  sextinvariant  may  be  thus  represented  by  means  of  a determinant  of  the  sixth 
order  and  of  the  quadrinvariant  and  quartinvariant. 


5xNo.  35  = 

a, 

2b, 

3c, 

4d, 

e 

b, 

2c, 

3d, 

4e, 

f 

c, 

2d, 

3e, 

4/, 

g 

a, 

4b, 

3c, 

2d, 

e 

b, 

4c, 

3d, 

2e, 

f 

c, 

4d, 

3c, 

2/, 

g 

I5ce- 

-lOd^) 

a, 

b, 

c, 

d 

b, 

c, 

d. 

e 

c, 

d, 

e. 

f 

d, 

e, 

1 

g 

MK.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


633 


The  tables  Nos.  36  and  37  relate  to  a septic.  No.  36  is  the  septic  itself ; No.  37 
the  quartinvariant. 

No.  36. 


1 a 

7 b 

21  c 

35  d 

35  e 

21  / 

7 9 

h 

J^x,  y) 


7 


No.  37. 


— 1 a~h^ 

+ 14  altffh 

— 18  acfk 

— 24  acg- 
+ 10  adeh 
+ 60  adfg 

— 40  ae-g 

— 24  bjh 

— 25  by 
+ 234  bcfg 
+ 60  bceh 


— 40  bdrh 

— 50  bdeg 
-360  bdf- 
+ 240  bey 

— 360  c'gff 

— 81  cy- 
+ 240  cd"g 
+ 990  cdef 

— 600  ce^ 

-600  dy 
+ 375  dre^ 


The  tables  Nos.  38  to  45  relate  to  the  octavic.  No.  38  is  the  octavic  itself; 
No.  39  the  quadrinvariant ; Nos.  40,  41  and  42  are  the  quadricovariants,  the  last  of 
them  being  the  Hessian  ; No.  43  is  the  cnbinvariant ; No.  44  the  quartinvariant,  and 
No.  45  the  quintinvariant,  which  is  also  the  catalecticant. 


No.  38. 


a 

8 b 

00 

56  d 

70  e 

56/ 

00 

8 h 

i 

yf 


No.  39. 


+ 1 

ai 

- 8 

bh 

+ 28 

C9 

— 06 

if 

+ 35 

No.  40. 


+ 1 ag 

+ 2 ah 

+ 1 ai 

+ 2 bi 

+ 1 ci 

- 6 by 

-10  bg 

— 2 bh 

— 10  eh 

- & dh 

+ 15  ce 

+ 18  e/ 

— % eg 

dg 

+ 15  eg 

-10  d^ 

— 10  de 

+ 34  dy 
— 25 

-10  ey 

-loy 

No.  41. 


+ 1 ae 

+ 4 «/ 

4-  & ag 

-}-  4 (xJi 

+ 1 ai 

+ 4 bi 

+ 6 ci 

+ 4 di 

+ 1 ei 

-4  bd 

— 12  be 

— 8 bf 

+ ^ bg 

+ 12  bh 

+ 8 eh 

— S dh 

-12  eh 

— 4 yh 

+ 3 c" 

“1“  8 cd 

— 22  ce 
+ 24  <72 

— 48  e/ 
+ 36  de 

— 22  eg 
-36  dy 
+ 45  e^ 

-48  dg 
+ 36  ey 

+ 1 

+ 8/y 

4-^  g‘ 



634 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 

No.  42. 


+ 1 

+ 6 ad 

+ 15  ae 

+ 20  qf 

+ 15  ag 

+ 6 ah 

+ 1 ai 

+ 6 bi 

+ 1 5 c* 

+ 20  di 

+ 15  ei 

+ 6/2 

+ 1 yi 

-1  b- 

—6  be 

+ 6 bd 

+ 50  be 

+ 90  bf 

+ 78  bg 

+ 34  bh 

+ 78  ch 

+ 90  dh 

+ 50  eh 

+ Q fh 

-&gh 

-1  h^ 

— 21  e‘ 

-70  cd 

-105  d'^ 

+ 126  cf 
-210  de 

+ 154  eg 
- lidf 
-175  e- 

+ 126  dg 
— 210  ef 

-105  f 

-21/ 

No.  43. 


+ 1 

aei 

— 4 

afh 

+ 3 

ag- 

— 4 

bdi 

+ 12 

beh 

- 8 

kfy 

+ 3 

cH 

- 8 

cdh 

-22 

ceg 

+ 24 

<^f 

+ 24 

d-g 

-36 

def 

+ 15 

e^ 

No.  44. 


— 

1 

aegi  r 

+ 

1 

acJd- 

+ 

3 

adfi 

— 

3 

adgh 

— 

2 

aeH 

+ 

1 

aefh 

3 

aeg- 

— 

2 

afy 

+ 

1 

b‘^gi 

1 

b%^ 

— 

3 

befi 

+ 3 /jcffk 
+ 1 ddei 
-10  dc///i 

+ 9 

+ 1 1 de"k 

— 23  hefg 
+ 12  hf 
+ 3 c"e^ 
4-  9 c“fli 

— 12  (?g'“ 


- 2 

cdH 

— 23 

edeh 

+ 27 

cdfg 

+ 19 

ce^g 

-21 

cef^ 

+ 12 

d'^h 

-21 

d^-eg 

-13 

d'T 

— 32 

de^f 

— 10 

e^ 

No.  45. 


+ 1 acegi 

-H  ar 

— 4 bdeg~ 

+ 1 edy 

— 1 aceJd 

— 1 b“egi 

+ 2 bdf-g 

— 2 edefg 

— 1 acfH 

+ 1 b”eh^ 

— 2 be^h 

— 2 cdy 

+ 2 aefgh 
— 1 

-2  b^gh 

+ 4 beyg 

— 3 ce^g 

+ 1 bji^ 

— 2 bef^ 

+ 4 ce-dh 

— 1 ad‘gi 

+ 1 by 

— 1 c^gi 

+ 3 cep 

+ 1 ad“h^ 

+ 2 bedgi 

+ 1 c^h^ 

+ 1 dH 

+ 2 adefi 

— 2 bcdh‘ 

+ 2 c^dfi 

— 2 d^eh 

— 2 adegh 

— 2 bcefi 

— 2 c^dgh 

— 2 d'^fg 

— 2 adf~h 

+ 2 bcegh 

+ 1 eVi 

+ 3 cTe^^ 

+ 2 adfg- 

+ 2 befh 

-4  cyji 

+ 3 d‘ef 
— 4 de^f 

— 1 aeH 

-2  befg- 

+ 2 e“eg- 

+ 2 ae^fh 
+ 1 ae-g- 
-3  aef-g 

— 2 hd‘fi 
+ 2 bd'^gh 
+ 2 bdeH 

+ 1 eyy 

— 3 cd“ei 
+ 2 cd^fh 

1 V 

+ 1 e' 

It  we  write 

No.  39=1 
No.  43=J 
No.  44  = K 
No.  45  = L, 


then  tlie  determinant  called  the  lambdaic,  viz. 

a , h , c , d , e— I2a 

b , c , d , e-l-3?v,  y 
c , d , e—2X,  f , g 
d , e+3X,  / , g , h 

e—l2X,  f , g , h , i 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


f)35 


is  equal  to 

L+2XK+3X"J+18>."I  — 2592?v^ 

Nos.  46  to  48  relate  to  the  nonic.  No.  46  is  the  nonic  itself ; Nos.  47  and  48  are  the 
two  quart! n variants,  each  of  them  in  its  best  form,  viz.  No.  48  does  not  contain  r/, 
and  No.  47  does  not  contain  aci^,  the  leading’  term  of  No.  48.  The  nonic  is  the 
lowest  quantic  with  two  quartinvariants. 

No.  46. 


+ 1 a\  +9  b +36  c 


+ 84  d 


+ 126  e +126  / +84  g +36  h 


+ 9 


+ 1 j 


yf 


No.  47. 


No.  48. 


— 

1 

+ 

18 

abij 

acr 

— 

72 

achj 

+ 

168 

adgj 

adlii 

— 

108 

aefj 

— 

576 

aegi 

+ 

432 

aeh? 

+ 

540 

afi 

— 

720 

afgh 

+ 

320 

af 

¥hj 

— 

81 

bcgj 

+ 

648 

bchi 

— 

576 

bdfj 

+ 

792 

hdgi 

— 

1728 

bdld 

+ 2160 

begh 

+ 

540 

bdj 

— 

972 

befi 

0^ 

bfk 

— 

720 

bff 

+ 

432 

d\f.i 

— 

1728 

dgi 

— 

720 

cdej 

+ 

2160 

cdfi 

+ 

4608 

cdgh 

ceH 

— 

2592 

cefh 

— 

5760 

ceg^ 

+ 

4320 

afa 

+ 

320 

d-y 

— 

720 

d“ei 

— 

5760 

djh 

— 

1536 

d'Y 

+ 

14688 

dafg 

+ 

4320 

de~h 

8640 

dp 

— 

8640 

e^g 

+ 

5184 

ep 

af 

abij 

+ 

2 

acP 

— 

2 

achj 

+ 

7 

adgj 

— 

7 

adhi 

— 

5 

aefj 

— 

22 

aegi 

+ 

27 

aeh^ 

+ 

25 

afi 

— 

45 

afgh 

+ 

20 

af 

+ 

2 

b%j 

— 

2 

b^i? 

— 

7 

bcgj 

+ 

7 

bchi 

— 

22 

bdfj 

+ 

74 

bdgi 

— 

52 

bdJd 

+ 

23 

begh 

+ 

25 

bdj 

— 

73 

befi 

+ 

70 

bf-h 

— 

45 

bff 

+ 

27 

dfj 

— 

52 

crgi 

+ 

25 

— 

45 

cdej 

+ 

23 

cdfi 

+ 

22 

cdgh 

+ 

70 

ceH 

127 

cefh 

+ 

32 

cef 

+ 

25 

afa 

+ 

20 

dj 

— 

45 

d^ei 

+ 

32 

d-fh 

— 

47 

drf 

+ 

85 

defg 

+ 

25 

de^h 

— 

50 

df 

— 

50 

e^g 

+ 

30 

ef 

Nos.  49  and  50  relate  to  the  dodecadic.  No.  49  is  the  dodecadic  itself;  No.  50  is 


the  cubinvariant. 


No.  49. 


a 

12  b 

66  c 

220  d 

495  e 

792/ 

924  g 

792  h 

495 

220  j 

66  k 

12  1 

m 

lix,y) 


12 


No.  50. 


+ 3 agm 

— 12  ahl 
+ 30  aik 

— 20  af 

— 24  hfm 
+ 90  bgl 

— 108  hhk 
+ 60  bij 
+ 60  cem 


— 2l6  cfl 

+ 72  cgk 

+ 300  chj 

— 270  ci^ 

— 40  d'm 

+ 120  del 
+ 600  dfk 

— 1290  dgj 


+ 540  dhi 

— 540  e^k 
+ 1080  efj 
+ 1485  egi 

— 1080  eh^ 
-2160  f 'H 
+ 2160  fgh 

— 840  / 


4 P 


MDCCCLVI. 


636 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


Resuming'  now  the  geneial  subject,^ 

54.  The  simplest  covariant  of  a system  of  quantics  of  the  form 

{*Xx,y,  ..y 

(where  the  number  of  quantics  is  equal  to  the  number  of  the  facients  of  each  quantic) 
is  the  functional  determinant  or  Jacobian,  viz.  the  determinant  formed  with  the 
differential  coefficients  or  derived  functions  of  the  quantics  with  respect  to  the  several 
facients. 

55.  In  the  particular  case  in  which  the  quantics  are  the  differential  coefficients  or 
derived  functions  of  a single  quantic,  we  have  a corresponding  covariant  of  the  single 
quantic,  which  covariant  is  termed  the  Hessian  ; in  other  words,  the  Hessian  is  the 
determinant  formed  with  the  second  differential  coefficients  or  derived  functions  of 
the  quantic  with  respect  to  the  several  facients. 

56.  The  expression,  an  adjoint  linear  form,  is  used  to  denote  a linear  function 
\x-\-7iy-\--;  oi‘  in  the  notation  of  quantics  (|,  ri...'fx,y, ..),  having  the  same  facients  as 
the  quantic  or  quantics  to  which  it  belongs,  and  with  indeterminate  coefficients 
(I,  ;j..).  The  invariants  of  a quantic  or  quantics,  and  of  an  adjoint  linear  form,  may 
be  considered  as  quantics  having  (|,  ??...)  for  facients,  and  of  which  the  coefficients  are 
of  course  functions  of  the  coefficients  of  the  given  quantic  or  quantics.  An  inva- 
riant of  the  class  in  question  is  termed  a contravariant  of  the  quantic  or  quantics. 
The  idea  of  a contravariant  is  due  to  Mr.  Sylvester. 

In  the  theory  of  binary  quantics,  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  consider  the  contrava- 
riants  ; for  any  contravariant  is  at  once  turned  into  an  invariant  by  writing  {y,  —x) 
for  (I,  v)- 

57.  If  we  imagine,  as  before,  a system  of  quantics  of  the  form 

i*Xx,y, ..)“, 

where  the  number  of  quantics  is  equal  to  the  number  of  the  facients  in  each  quantic, 
the  function  of  tlie  coefficients,  which,  equalled  to  zero,  expresses  the  result  of  the 
elimination  of  the  facients  from  the  equations  obtained  by  putting  each  of  the  quantics 
equal  to  zero,  is  said  to  be  the  Resultant  of  the  system  of  quantics.  The  resultant  is 
an  invariant  of  the  system  of  quantics. 

And  in  the  particular  case  in  which  the  quantics  are  the  differential  coefficients,  or 
derived  functions  of  a single  quantic  with  respect  to  the  several  facients,  the  resultant 
in  question  is  termed  the  Discriminant  of  the  single  quantic ; the  discriminant  is  of 
course  an  invariant  of  the  single  quantic. 

58.  Imagine  two  quantics,  and  form  the  equations  which  express  that  the  differen- 
tial coefficients,  or  derived  functions  of  the  one  quantic  witli  respect  to  the  several 
facients,  are  proportional  to  those  of  the  other  quantic.  Join  to  these  the  equations 
obtained  by  equating  each  of  the  quantics  to  zero;  we  have  a system  of  equations, 
one  of  which  is  contained  in  the  others,  and  from  which  therefore  the  facients  may 
be  eliminated.  The  function  which,  equated  to  zero,  expresses  the  result  of  the 
elimination  is  an  invariant  which  (from  its  geometrical  signification)  might  be 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


637 


termed  the  Tactmvariant  of  the  two  quantics,  but  I do  not  at  present  propose  to 
consider  this  invariant  except  in  the  particular  case  where  the  system  consists  of  a 
given  quantic  and  of  an  adjoint  linear  form.  In  this  case  the  tactinvariant  is  a 
contravariant  of  the  given  quantic,  viz.  the  contravariant  termed  the  Reciprocant. 

59.  Consider  now  a quantic 

(*Xx,p, 

and  let  the  facients  x,p,  ..  be  replaced  by  Xa^+iO-X,  ..  the  resulting  function 

may,  it  is  clear,  be  considered  as  a quantic  with  the  facients  {X,  (jij)  and  of  the  form 

(X,  Y,...) 

(A, 


MX,  Y,..) 

L 


The  coefficients  of  this  quantic  are  termed  Emananis,  viz.  excluding  the  first  coeffi- 
cient, which  is  the  quantic  itself  (but  which  might  be  termed  the  0-th  emanant) ; the 
other  coefficients  are  the  first,  second,  and  last  or  ultimate  emanants.  The  ultimate 
emanant  is,  it  is  clear,  nothing  else  than  the  quantic  itself,  with  (X,  Y, ..)  instead  of 
{x,  y, ...)  for  facients  : the  penultimate  emanant  is,  in  like  manner,  obtained  from  the 
first  emanant  by  interchanging  {x,y,..)  with  (X,  Y, ...),  and  similarly  for  the  other 
emanants.  The  facients  (X,  Y, ..)  may  be  termed  the  facients  of  emanation,  or  simply 
the  new  facients.  The  theory  of  emanation  might  be  presented  in  a more  general 
form  by  employing  two  or  more  sets  of  emanating  facients ; we  might,  for  example, 
write  i^X-f-i'X',  Xy-^-fY-^vY', ...  for  x,y, ...,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  dwell  upon 
this  at  present. 

The  invariants,  in  respect  to  the  new  facients  of  any  emanant  or  emanants  of  a 
quantic  {i.  e.  the  invariants  of  the  emanant  or  emanants,  considered  as  a function  or 
functions  of  the  new  facients),  are,  it  is  easy  to  see,  covariants  of  the  original  quantic, 
and  it  is  in  many  cases  convenient  to  define  a covariant  in  this  manner ; thus  the 
Hessian  is  the  discriminant  of  the  second  or  quadric  emanant  of  the  quantic. 

60.  If  we  consider  a quantic 


{a,  h,  ..Xx,y,  ..y, 

and  an  adjoint  linear  form,  the  operative  quantic 

(which  is,  so  to  speak,  a contravariant  operator)  is  termed  the  Evector.  The  proper- 
ties of  the  evector  have  been  considered  in  the  introductory  memoir,  and  it  has  been 
in  effect  shown  that  the  evector  operating  upon  an  invariant,  or  more  generally  upon 
a contravariant,  gives  rise  to  a contravariant.  Any  such  contravariant,  or  rather 
such  contravariant  considered  as  so  generated,  is  termed  an  Evectant.  In  the  case  of 
a binary  quantic, 

{a,  b,  ..X-r,  yf, 

4 P 2 


638 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


the  covariant  operator 

may,  if  not  with  perfect  accuracy,  yet  without  risk  of  ambiguity,  be  termed  the  ^cec^or, 
and  a covariant  obtained  by  operating  with  it  upon  an  invariant  oi-  covariant,  or 
rather  such  covariant  considered  as  so  generated,  may  in  like  manner  be  termed  an 
Eivectant. 

61.  Imagine  two  or  more  quantics  of  the  same  order, 

(fl,  h,  ..fe?/)’" 

(a,  VT 


we  may  have  covariants  such  that  for  the  coefficients  of  each  pair  of  quantics  the 
covariant  is  reduced  to  zero  by  the  operators 

Such  covariants  are  called  Comhinants,  and  they  possess  the  property  of  being  inva- 
riantive,  quoad  the  system,  i.  e.  the  covariant  remains  unaltered  to  a factor  pr^s, 
when  each  quantic  is  replaced  by  a linear  function  of  all  the  quantics.  This  extremely 
important  theory  is  due  to  Mr.  Sylvester. 

Proceeding  now  to  the  theory  of  ternary  quadrics  and  cubics, — 

First  for  a ternary  quadric,  we  have  the  following  tables : — 


Covariant  and  other  Tables,  Nos.  51  to  56  (a  ternary  quadric). 

No.  5 1 . 

The  quadric  is  represented  by 

{a,  b,  c,f,g,  h\x,y,  zf, 

whi(di  means — 

cz‘^ + + '2gzx  -{-2hxy. 


No.  52. 

The  first  derived  functions  (omitting  the  factor  2)  are — 


(a,  h,  gXx,  y,  z) 

{h,  h,  /Xj7,  y,  z) 

ig,  f>  cXx,  y,  z). 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS.  639 


No.  53. 


The  operators  which  reduce  a covariant  to 

zero 

are — 

( K 

b, 

2/IB„ 

B.)— ^B^ 

(%. 

/, 

Ba, 

B^)— ^B^ 

( a, 

2h, 

^ I 

Sa, 

B/)-3/B, 

( g^ 

2/, 

C I 

Ba, 

B/)-^B, 

( a, 

A, 

2^  I 

B/, 

Be)  — ^B, 

(2h, 

b, 

Ba, 

BJ-^B^. 

No.  54. 

The  evector  is 

n,  l)\ 

No.  55. 

The  discriminant  is 

a,  h,  g 

h,  h,  f 

g,  L c 

which  is  equal  to 

ahc—af'^ — hg^—ch^-\-^fgh. 


No.  56. 


The  reciprocant  is 


I,  n,  ^ 

I,  h,  g 

>1,  h,  h,  f 


g, 

whieh  is  equal  to 

{bc—f\  ca-g\  ah  — h\  gh—af,  hf-hg,  fg-ch\l,  ri, 

The  discriminant  is,  it  will  be  noticed,  the  same  function  as  the  Hessian.  The  reci- 
procant is  the  evectant  of  the  discriminant.  The  covariants  are  the  quadric  itself 
and  the  discriminant ; the  reciprocant  is  the  only  contravariant. 

Next,  for  a ternary  cubic,  we  have  the  following  Tables  : — 


Covariant  and  other  Tables,  Nos.  57  to  70  (a  ternary  cubic). 


The  cubic  is  U= 
which  means — 


No.  57. 

(a,  b,  c,  f,  g,  h,  i,  j,  k,  IJ^x,  y,  zf, 


ax^  -b  by^  -f  -j-  ^fy'^z  -f-  3g  z^x  -\-^hx^y  iyz"^ + 2>jzx^  -f-  3 kxy'^  6 Lxyz. 


640 


MR.  A,  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


No.  58. 

The  first  derived  functions  (omitting  the  factor  3)  are — 

(a,  Jc,  g,  /,  j,  hXx,  y,  zf 

(h,  b,  i,  /,  I,  hXx,  y,  zf 

U,  / c,  i,  g,  I Xx,  y,  zf. 

The  second  derived  functions  (omitting  the  factor  6)  are — 


(a, 

h, 

ih 

b, 

/I 

h 

cjx, 

y^ 

2) 

a 

/ 

iXoo, 

y^ 

Z) 

1, 

y^ 

{h, 

IJx, 

y^ 

No.  59. 

The  operators  which  reduce  a covariant  to  zero  are — 


( 3^ 

3/, 

C, 

2i, 

g’ 

2/IB„ 

B/, 

B^, 

Ba)- 

■yB^ 

( 

k, 

3^, 

21, 

2i, 

hX'^j, 

Be, 

B., 

B„ 

B.)- 

■zd^ 

(3A, 

b, 

h 

/ 

21, 

2k  X^ a, 

B., 

B,, 

Ba)- 

-x'd^j 

( b, 

b, 

3i, 

2/ 

21, 

kx^j, 

Be, 

B„ 

B„ 

B.)- 

-z^. 

f. 

c, 

i, 

2^, 

21X'^., 

B„ 

B., 

B,, 

Ba)- 

-x'b. 

( a, 

3k, 

g^ 

21, 

2hXA, 

B„ 

B„ 

B„ 

Ba)- 

-i/B.. 

No,  60. 

The  evector  i 

is 

b, 

!> 

Bft, 

B/’II,  Jj, 

No.  61. 

The  Hessian  is  HU= 


(a, 

h, 

y^ 

z), 

{h, 

k, 

iXx, 

y^ 

0'^ 

/, 

3/, 

(h. 

k, 

IX^, 

3/, 

z), 

(k, 

b, 

y^ 

2), 

(/, 

/ 

iXx, 

y. 

1, 

gl^, 

y^ 

z), 

{1, 

/, 

iXx, 

y^ 

(^r, 

y^ 

MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


G41 


wliich  is  equal  to — 


— 1 ayk 

— 1 bhi 

— 1 cij 

— 1 bch 

-1  acf 

— 1 abg 

— 1 bcj 

— i ach 

— 1 abi 

— 1 abc 

4*  1 fif/" 

+ 1 hV- 

4“  1 cl" 

+ 2 bgl 

+ 1 ai^ 

+ 2 afl 

+ 1 6/ 

-1  afg 

+ 1 af 

+ 1 afi 

+ 1 gK- 

+ 1/=^ 

— 1 bij 

4~  2 chi 

— 1 aik 

— 1 cfh 

4“  ^ (lil 

— 1 bgfi 

+ 1 % 

— 2 Jijl 

-2  fkl 

—2  fkl 

+ 1 cB 

— 1 cjk 

+ 1 bf 

+ 2 ckl 

+ 1 ch? 

+ 2 bjl 

+ 1 chk 

+ 1 j-k 

+ 1 ik" 

+ 1 

+ 1 fj 

+ !/<?/ 

+ ^fv 

+^ff 

-3fgk 

i 

A 

+ 1 g'^k 

+ 1 glik 

— 2 gik 

+ 1 yjk 

+ lg/P 

4“  1 fhi 

— 2 ghi 

+ 1 hH 

+ 1 hP 

— 2 hij 

+ 1 hki 

+ 2 gkl 

+\fp 

-1  gP 

-1  hP 

- 1 iP 

-IjP 

-1  kP 

4“  ^ hil 

— 3 ijk 

-2  P 

The  quartinvai'iant  is  S = 


No.  62. 


— 1 

abcl 

+ !>/ 

+ 1 

abgi 

+ 3 fghl 

+ 1 

acfk 

-1 

— 1 
+ 1 

ofy 

afil 

— 1 fhij 
-^fjP 

— 1 

aPk 

+ 1 g"k~ 

+ 1 
— 1 

bchj 

bg-h 

— 1 ghki 
-2  gkP 

+ 1 

+ 1 

— 1 

bif 

— 2 hiP 

— 1 

cf-h 

+ 3 ijkl 

+ 1 

chkl 

+ 1 P 

— 1 

cjlc 

No.  63. 

The  sextin variant  is  T= 


+ 1 cPb’^c" 

—24  acf'-'hl 

-12  bcfhf 

< 

— 12  cfhH 

— 12  fgjkP 

— 6 d^bcfi 

— 12  acf-jk 

— 24  bcglPl 

+ 12  cfhPP 

-\2fhYi 

+ 4 (pbp 

-12  acfglP 

+ 18  bcghjk 

— 60  cfhjkl 

-12  fhijp 

+ 4 flV' 

+ 18  acf  hki 

— 12  bcJPij 

+ 24  effk^ 

+ 36  fifkl 

— 3 df  '^P 

+ 36  acfkP 

+ 36  bchjP 

+ 12  cghIPl 

+ 24  fjP 

— 6 ab'cgj 

— 24  acilPl 

— 24  be  fkl 

— 1 2 cgjJP 

+ 8 fP 

+ 4 ab‘‘f 

-12  afgj 

+ 6 bfgY 

+ 12  cKHkl 

— 12  g~hJci 

— 6 abdhk 

+ 24  af  'Yk 

+ 12  bfgfl 

+ 6 chijIP 

-24  gVPP 

+ 6 abcfgh 

+ 6 afghi 

-12  bfif 

-12  chkP 

-12  gIPkP 

+ 12  abcfjl 

+ 12  afgP 

— 12  bfhk 

+ 12  cj/PP 

— 12  ghkiP 

+ 12  abcgkl 

+ 12  afHjl 

+ 24  bg-JPi 

+ 8/!f 

+ 36  gijJPl 

+ 12  abchil 

— 60  afgkil 

+ 12  bg^hP 

-27  fYh^ 

+ 24  gkP 

+ t)  abcijk 

+ 12  afhPl 

+ 12  bg^jkl 

-\2fgfk 

+ 8 

— 20  abcP 

+ 6 afrjk 

— 60  bghijl 

+ 36  fghjl 

-24  KH-P 

+ 18  abfgij 

-12  afiP 

+ 6 bgifk 

-\2fhif 

+ 24  hip 

-24  ahfgH 

+ 24  agJPP 

-12  bgjP 

-24  ffP 

+ 36  higkl 

— 12  abg~ki 

— 12  ahPk 

+ 24  bhPf 

+ 36  ffhkl 

—27  Pflc 

— 12  abghp 

+ 12  aPkP 

+ 12  bifP 

-\2fgiJP 

-36  ijkP 

+ 36  abgiP 

+ 4 b'^cf 

— 3 c~h~]r 

+ 36  fghHl 

— % P 

— 24  abpjl 

- 3 bYf 

+ 24  cYlPj 

— 6 fghijk 

+ 4 ac-k"^ 

K 

+ 4 bd^JP 

+ 6 cfgIPk 

— 36  fghP 

The  discovery  of  the  invariants  S and  T is  due  to  Aronhold,  the  developed  ex 
pressions  were  first  obtained  by  Mr.  Salmon. 


642 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


No.  64. 

There  is  an  octicovariant  for  which  we  may  take 


©u= 

S.HU, 

S,HU, 

B.HU, 

u. 

U, 

S HU, 

m u 

or  else 


©,u= 

iB.  u, 

R U, 

A u. 

HU, 

BRHU, 

HU, 

b.b^hu. 

B.B.HU, 

B^HU, 

or  else,  what  I believe  is  more  simple,  a function  0;;U,  which  is  a linear  function  of 
the  last-mentioned  two  functions. 

The  relations  between  ©U,  ©,U,  ©^^U  are — 

-©,U-|-4©U=T.U^-24S.U.HU 

©,,U-1-2©U=T.U^-10S.U.HU. 

I have  not  worked  out  the  developed  expressions. 


No.  65. 

The  cubicontra variant  is  PU= 


r 

-1  bcl 

— 1 acl 

— 1 abl 

+ 1 ack 

+ 1 abi 

+ 1 bcj 

+ 1 abg 

+ 1 bch 

+ 1 acf 

— 1 abe 

r\ 

+ 1 bffi 

+ 1 agi 

+ 1 afk 

-2  afg 

-1  af 

-1  6/ 

+ 1 afl 

+ 1 bgl 

— 1 aP 

+ 1 afi 

+ 1 cf/e 

+ 1 chj 

+ 1 bhj 

+ 1 ail 

— 2 bgh 

-2  cfh 

— 2 aik 

— 2 bij 

"h  1 chi 

-t-1  % 

—1  fy 

— 1 g-h 

— 1 fK- 

-1  ch^ 

+ 1 bjl 

+ 1 ckl 

-1  6/ 

-1  c/r 

— 2 cjk 

+ 1 chk 

+ I fii 

+ 1 gji 

1 ckL 

+ 2^-^ 

+ 3 fhl 

+ 3 fgl 

-1 

+2/!/- 

-1  M 

+ 3 fgk 

*N 

— 1 ?:Vi: 

— 1 if 

-1  jk~ 

+ 3 fhl 

-1  fv 

— 1 ghk 

-1 

-1-2  g^^k 

i 

-1  gjk 

+ 2 gk- 

— 1 gki 

+ 2 kH 

— 1 //^^• 

— 1 ghi 

— 4 gkl 

— 1 hij 

— 1 hki 

+ 2 hi^ 

-2  hP 

-2fP 

-2  gP 

— 4 Ml 

-2  jP 

-2  kl^ 

-2  il“ 

+ 3 

-|-  3 ikl 

3 ijl 

+ 3 ijk 

+ 4 P 

J 

The  quintic  contravariant  is  QIJ 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


643 


s? 


’'S  "S  ?? 


*Ci  kC>*I*CS  iOn  "O^  »• 


y5C£>t£)O0^Cr>G<0l^0e<G<«5O^000®^a»C0<N(r>0<^OQ0©<e<OC0lXi00©^CD'^00Q0Tt<0<(NCC00-^<N00Q0'^CCCD-^Tti 
M^M'-li-iC'Srtr-l  CO  p-Hrli-HCOi-i  r-l  COi-l^i-lCO  r-li-lr-lOlr-l.-iU0rti-li-l->C'©<f-li-t-^©^'<tl.->lOlO< 

+ + +1  l + l I + I++I  + I + I4-I+  + +I  I++I++1++I++I  I I++I  I++I++I  I 


§'%'5;'Ss‘ss  •'S 

-O  1*0  O*  ^ Cj  ^ ^ 


' 


*5  «^'«>s  C3l  «5s  Ss,  OSli-Si 


cocoeoco'.oco(Naiao-^©^oco'^tjD<x>CTse)coc£>cococoo'^©<c!OcocDCDOicc’oo©^cocoooo<eiTtHcococr>©<cioi>.cD 

.-I  rto^rtco  ©I  ^i-H  rtrtrMG^  cortrtoirt 


+ + I + 


©i  .-H  CO  ©I 

+ + I + I + + 


+ + 


+ + 


CO  ©( 

+ I + + 


+ + I + I + 


+ + 


+ + + 


'=5^! 

It!  ^ .'^ 

ISO  r<2  ixQ  xOisOisO'sCS'sO  ^ ^<x»  ^ 

cciCDCOC^©^<;DC£>cococ^coo^o^iC£)oo'^c<oo^oo«.DotDcr>^©^0)0'^cr>coc^(^o)GO©^'^'X>coc^^c£>cr>©^ooooi>.ao 

F— ( r— I ^ ^ ^ CO  1^  CO  ^ ^ ^ 1^  G^  CO  1^  ^ r^  Gi  ^ 

I+  + +I  I I+  + +I  l + l + l+  +l  + l + l‘H-  + +l  + l+  + 4-l  + l I I I I I I+  + + +I  I 


'y  <y  ^ ^ ^ 

'IS©  IS©  F©  IS©  N©  P*0  P»0  ^©’'K©*^©»K©  IX©  h©  IX©  IX©  F©  ^ 


+ I + I+  +I  + I + I-+  + +I  + I+  + 


•«  S ^ Sic. S 

.O  .O  £4^  ^ ^ ^ — . . i-  c'.cst.^  c e,  .c  iCi  ~ -c^  .■'* 

W "sO  's©^^0  NO  fs©  ^©  ^ ^ ^ ‘rx.  '^X.  F© 

N©  IX©  F©  ixs^  o ^ © 


^ ^ ^’ox^  •<>.’^^ 
s<  ^ IX^C^  ‘c 


. ^ 12  ci  ^ 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ’^r- 

55i  ^S^  -5 


CO<OCO<X'COO’5?^G^GO-!fC’>G^COCOOG^C£>cr>'^GOG^Cr»C^G^OCO’*f'X>C^'X>COtC>OOCOG^CDOO<£>GiCOCOG^'^G^C01>*aO 
^,-l(^  ^ CO*-H  G^I— ll-H  I— iCO  Gt  ^ *— t •— ' rH^O^^COGil-l 


+ i + + + 


+I+I++I++I+I+ 


+ I ++4 I ++ I + 


+ + I + + 


o o vSs'X.'K?'  i'"  'Cj  JCs  55c  ^.!Ss” 

f©  N©  -X©  K©  ^ ^ i:j^ 

^ e ^ ^ ©^©^5S'<''<5'S©I©I©'X©  ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ -S  -J  ^ 

COCOCOC^G^O^CO^<^COC^'^O^G^OOCO^'^^OG^CO-^COQOGiOC.CG^COCr)i>*OOOQOCOCOCOG^':^C^G^cr>G^ 
^ (^^,_  (^COi— 'G^i-'i-tCOi--'  (^r-i-tCO^^ 

+ +I  + I+  +I+I+  + +I  I + 1-1 — hi  I I I I I I + 


ca^'sii  ix<  kI 


- . ' '.'I  ^ ‘^S.  ^^«X>  Ol 

^’x.w  iJS  •<xv«  C4  *'X<J  c<,  ^ ^ 

??  5?  C 


+ + I I + + + I + 


+ I + + 


^ 00  G^ 
G^  — • ^ 

I + + 


. ^ „ |xQ»  -xxi  . «xo  ~ « 


^ ©•  © IS©  K©  s©  ©^©'©  © K©  N©  © N©  i;^  y y^'Vx  Sxo  Sxxj^SxjSxx^'^S^  ©i  ^ ©: 


COCOCOC.OC^'^G^OOO<:j^CO'^COC^OG)COG)0^^0^00*rHG^G^OCO<xDCOC^<r>J>-<X'CO'X'G)OOCOOOCr)G^G)Ttic^«X)aO 
O^I-HI-I  co^p^  P-iO)rHf-iCO  0),-,C0^i-H*-'— i^Gi  ^ 


+ + + + 


+ 


COi— 1 I—  .-l4J<r-(.-lC0  .— <CTJ^|— ( I— I 

+ +I  + I I+  + +I+  + +I  + I+  +I  I I++I  + I I l+l  I I 


CO  OO  0< 

"I — h 


isP  c CC 

"CS  « « 53  CS  e 5S 


- ..  r^  ^ 

5^  ' 

© X©  y * o y y 

© © © © 


: 


<£*0?*  *J:vr9  ^ss  tx©  ;r^  ^ ^ ^ cr  -^is^  ^ e»-^ 

•©i‘©»s©N©  ^^yyy  ^ ©i  ©i  ©i  ©i 

OOTf<c^O>(^0;DCOC^^DCOCr>cr)TttCO<.OCQOG^Gii>*G^COG^’^OOC£)aOCOOOCr'CC> 
^ 0^  ^ ^ CO  G^  CO  ^ ^ G^  CO  ^ G^  ^ 1^  i—H 


. <«£ 


cocococo^o^G^^G^cr»c:)i 

^ ^ 

I + i + + + I I I I +■ 


^ G^  ^ I— ( CO 

■ I + + + + I + + 


•«*.•'•  ?X», 

CD  X G^ 


H — h I H — h I + 1 H — H 


+ 


+ I + 


+ 


c c 


C\  w cT^N©  P©  Is©*IxC^I©  X©  S©  IX© 

«535i535S5i  53  5S«5353 
’-IC001C050C0CD5050C0O 


+ I + 


+ + + + + 


:£^c  XI  «4^  O 531  -C  C 


p C ’.^C  ^ 

,n  o xi  &s  asC  '«r-k,c 

K©  N©  N©^X©  F©  s©  p©  !»©■'  y 

G^^CDG^CiCDGCG^COGlCOCDCDOG^CDCDCDCOCDCD 
^ f-H  ^ ^ CO  • 


+ + 


+ I + 


+ + I + I ++  I ++  I + 


*<?* 

X Xo  ^ 

•s©  y^’51 


© p©  y y*  y y y 


is 

'S^'S^'as'ai 
5“  5^  a a 


aaaaa5saaaaaa 

rtCOStCO-^COCOCOCOCDCOOClG^COCO 

+ I + I + I+  + + + + T + 7 I I 


Sii.  Px.i 

■'>»  ir^ 

©i^oi 
© © 

X G^ 

+ 7 


5>  05i«  Xo  as  asC  c^fX 
c c a 5j^  a a a a a' 

'^C0G<«O®tO55OQ0(M 


n!  ^ ^ . 

:?=  C^c  '-r 


+ I + 


4-  I + I + + 


'^■'S5Cj°as'as''as'as  as  5s"^c 

COCOCOCOCMCOCOOeOCOO^CO 

+ + + I + I + + 


ixhCD'^*'©'C0C0G)C0C0CDCDCD 

+ I ++  I l + l + + + + 


■■53^  is -S  Ko  ~ 

'S^'^'as^'SsC'.l^ 

Nrs”Nrs*ixr\  xTx  kts  ktx  ti  c.-^  t-i*  ci*  c.^  y*  y 


LS  « :< 

IX©  IX©  ^©•^©^IX©■'^^“^©"^©  y y'^  y'i  y' 

COOCTjG^CDCDXG^G^G^CDCDOiOOG^ 


+ I + 


+ I + 


+ + 


a a 52^o!g  n- 
50etC0  50  50  O50C0C0®5C0CO 

IH — I — I — hl4 — hl  + l + 


4 Q 


MDCCCLVI 


The  rcci procant  is  FU 


to 

d 

7^ 


. r-i 


sO  fsCr’^^KS  r«Ci  '<2' 

C^CiOO^CT'OOOOO^OOOiO^CDOG^rffCO 
•— ICO^I— Ir-tTf-— I.-HCO 

+ + I I I 1 I + + + ++  I I I I 


* ««*  C4  *»0  I«i^  f«4i  M CA  kS^ 

^ ?s  ?2!  ?S 


« <5 


cocr)t£>e?cr>ooGiooooG^t£'to!NG<'^co 

^eOf— cOt-Hr— lr^> 


+ + 


+ I ++  I ++ I I I 


^ ^ o 

f'O  N©  *«0 

o©^cr)(^a:iO)QOQOoocr»fO'*tcr»':iDO^©^ 

,-H  ^ CO  - 


' 'N'S'N  '=>'^ 


+ 


+ + + 1 I + 


+ + I 


■Js  „ •«  2 <f>  "S  «<  n 

Ss  "Si  -iS^Se  ^ 5^ 

53  « 5S  5r~a  "sr-o  iO  "O  5i"ss  "U 

iO<5^iOG(dQ0C0Gl005Of0'*'5OGti5DG» 

r-l  i-H  ^rtr-1"}<SO  GiCOr-l  i-l 


+ I I + + 


+ 


+ + 


cr"  sj  sX:  *5  5^  5?5-;^  - ■ 
e 5S  53  5S  53^  53  5S  « e 


^ f. 


"Si  -.."vi 


5Oa3G55£)O0GtCO005DG(G(:O'^5D5De< 
,-1  rHr-l"-ir*<C3"-lr-l  GS  Mr"! 

+ +I  1 I+I+I++I  I l+i 


cf"  "5^""^  rC!> 

5S  ?£  5S  ^ 

p— t r-H  »— l ^ (-H 

I + + I + I I + + 


Si?;  ^ "i;  ^ ■"<.  -i; 

^ ^C>  ^0  ^ 

— — ^ — 


+ + + 


M o)  cj:) 

1 + + 


to  ^ ^ ^ 

^ 25  5S  O 

^ rH  ^ r-H 

I + + + I I I + + 


-id  *^--o  c-J  --o  ’"^  •<>*  n^- 
ci  * '^  Gi  -id  ?->«  ^^2“  . 

5J  O SJ  53iS. 

-O  O O *0 

^ r-.  r-.  ^ ,-H 

1 + + I I + + + I 


' ^ lU 

CA  <■>»».'--*  <d  IJI  Cl  ^ 

O <r<5  >V <S  -<  tl. 

?S  ?S  ^5^0  o S^<5: 

(X>  O -t^  CO 

r^  ^ OX  ^ ^ 


+ + 


+ + + 


'Si  S?-^ 

50  5£>  G»  00  Gt  5D  Gl  G» 
01  — — — 


-:i  Sj  5>  Sv 

sees 


+ + + 


+ + 


Cl  tO  <d  >0 

?:  ?s  ^ 


fip 


CO  ^ ?? 


+ I + + 


’t.  5?"  i> 

c.^  5.-  5313’,,"^ 
S S S S>  53i 

i-i  50  -r  "f  CO 

+ I ++  I 


-O  ttC  "-S 

— t CO  -r  -r  c^ 

+ I ++  I 


Si.. 


ar 


^"-P 

5? 


MJ> 

-W- 


-Si  "5?  ■Ov"Si  "S.  CT  '"i 

?S  !S  53  5^  53  -<> 

•^fCOCOOQOOCOOXOOQO 
©)  CO^C^  CC)rtiCOCOTf 


I *-5^  • ?V 

■ssLS^si. 


. N M 


r^  ri^  ^ ^ -i?  ►tft  Ni?»  ’ ^ ?***  ^ 

53its; 

OrilQOTf!-<l!"i!"tl"i!TjlTi!TflOXI 
COGlOrtr^OIOIr-lOIOlOlcJl 

I+  + +I+++I++I+  + +I  l++l+  + + -t  I • 


i<5  i<3  ><2  >- 

JS;*  J-s* 


. 


S S S 5 5?  5?  5^  S "§^’"0^-0 


C05D-'i!G(50G5'^"*<000«5D 

C0Glf-iC0r-cl0lGt5OC0r-l 


+ + 


+ + + 


Ki  "is  Sr  ~ « 

Si  ^"53  "<3  "S3 

5DGtOG('!t!Q0Q00050 
50r-i50t""Gt"3't".'st'03 

+ + I I + + 1 I + + 1 


•-0  1-^  I 


53  53  ?S  53  -<2  NO 


Nid 

oZsf 


?«*v  .SOS  .SOS  'GC"-** 

Si  Si  Si  Si"!i 


5r>50'3'00(Gl5riG(':ti50-'*!Oi30G("5fCO©»Q000050 

COG^CCi— ‘I— t -^^C0G^COCDtN.*0^’^r-i  CD  02 


+ + 


+ I + + + 1 + 


+ 


+ + 


S"  .-?i 


NO  NO  ^ ^ Ow  55i  5?5  ^-^^-5-  ci^gT^  5>,'<53  -^N 
53  53  5r'<^  NO  njS^nO  NO  NO  NO  '•  ^ 

CDO^COCDT^’^CDO^'^OOO^CDOOO^G^GOOOOTtiCD 
1—1  CO(^»DCOr-tO^CDCO»— iCD'^^l>NtN*'^CDG^02 


++ I + I ++ 


+ + + + 


-o  5£j?s  ^ 5:  ■"< 

"S  "S  "S  sj  s^i  '^i'-"^ 

53  S S 53*  SS^sS  "S'*<o"^C)  "O  "S^ 


"ss  •<s)  r"s  ""i. 
5:i"!i 


tOr*iODG(OGl5£)OT)iO(T}i500CO-!ti5DOtOOGI5D(» 
GICOc— iCOi— iCOCOiOr-iOt  5DI>.0<a3i— 


+ I + + 


++++++ 


+ I + 


’ ’^'^L  N^  'N^  • CA 

53  53  ^ 53  ??  53*  53 


5i‘ 


N^  nJjJ 

- * '>i'^  IN 
^N?*  N^ 
rO\  G i c i ^ •'  ^ ^ 


2^""i  51 


'S 


s'  S "S''s  "s  'S^'C^'Si'^  53i  s5" 

5JOG("l!5riO"3!5r>Gl'^'X>GtOQOQO-st<05r>GIO»5000 
rHGtMCOMCOrHOI  i-(COt'"-'J'G(5JOC3t""i— i5C-sf 


+ 


rH  Gt  M 50  >0  CO 

+ I + I + + + + I + 


+ I + 


+ 


’ ^ 5^  "N^  N*^  ‘ 

' T'Vr'N^  ^*‘Nv'*L 

; 53  5r'<2  NO  NO  NO 


*'Ns~id  CA  W N<i 

- 5^  Jr  "Si  ".i,  ri?  ^ rjt 
I'S  ■" 


iO(5^CC>'^30GlOOG<5r>Tl’"!ti"3!OX5r)<5^G10030QO 

r"i  O<C0rHC05Oi-iC0u0G(G15£>t".ail>.--i"^5£>"3! 


+ I + I + + 


+ I ++  I ++  I + 


"si^  ;s  U;  Si  .S^,-Si  s*  --^Si  ilg  5i. 

nO  nO  nO  nO  S-s_  '+-v*«n>  5^no;*'*c-v-<  n^^n^j  ^ Gif 

53  5S  53  53  5r53'53NONO  nO'^S-^  ns^ 


Nid 


o^©^OTfQoo'i'«f^O)ooooc^©)coo 

.— (r-^COG^f— 1*— .(^CHi— i^CDCD'^^’^CO 


+ 


+ + + + I + 


+ 


C*  5Si"ai  51^  .Si'S  ;rs"«  ■•>,;;«  5>  ^ 

S>  S S S si?  Si'~  Si'<3*5i^,SiJr  crG"Si 
sssss*sss*s  s*^  Si  Si  Si 

G«G(O'!ti'st!&»a000G»"f01OG»5j000O 

COGlGtr"!'— !|— II— lO)f— iCOrHCOrJlCO 

I + 


+ I + + 


+ + I + 


NO  nO  nO  nO  nO^nO  nO  cJ*  O ^ 

G^OGi'^QOGi'^'^G^OOOO^COO^COO 

r-iCOt-^'^^r-tO^G^i— ir-iCDr-lC^i-HTfCD) 

l + l I I+  + + +I  + I I I 1 + 


N?i 


nC.  e>no 

53  53  ?5  NO  NO 


NV.Nvi'^^N^  G1 

Os’^Nid  r*-  *<»  30  cT^  ♦sJ^Gie  «-*  SL  NO 

^‘^N^  NO  •■N-  *'>‘^ 

o ?jS-^Sv^2?i55i  55i^GC 

0)CD^CD'^QOOOCOCDOD5DG^G^O^CDCO^©< 
,-ii— (TtHC-2-HCOCOi— irHCOCGG^»-t 

l + l + l l + i+  + +l++l  I+  + 


•s-v'^'^No'^iNO 

Si  'S*'C?  Si"S  Ss 

S s S "S  "S  I<o^i«o-"S  "S  kO  "S  o 

0<(iCi'5t!C05GQOC01000(X)Gt'^!Gl5r>SDG(-'tlG( 
f— I — iCOCO"f-"iCO  f-iCOCOi— iG»r-i 


+ 


+ + + I + 


+ 


+ + + 


. 

S S S S ^S*SS  S S"0“s'k^iSi  Si"S3  "S3^vi^ 
0l00CD3OC03DQ05jDGOG«"if''tlCOG5G»3O-'*'G5 

— ec.  rrii— ».— ifrifts>i— 4 


fS  f>*  pG!  ts 


CO 


I i+  + + +l++l  I I I++I+  + 


' r^  :~i'N 


53  ^ 5J  CJ-  lij  15;  5j 


5?i- 


‘-Sr^ 


'CDCO&^O^O^O^CDGOQOGOCDG^CDG^'^CO 

nHf-i  r-4C0f-irHTti  ,— ,COr-NG^ 


+ 


+ + + 


+ I + + 


xMR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


645 


The  preceding  Tables  contain  the  complete  system  of  the  covariants  and  contra- 
variants  of  the  ternary  cubic,  i.  e.  the  covariants  are  the  cubic  itself  U,  the  quartin- 
variant  S,  the  sextinvariant  T,  the  Hessian  HU,  and  an  octicovariant,  say  0U  ; the 
contravariants  are  the  cubicontravariant  PU,  the  quinticontravariant  QU,  and  the 
reciprocant  FU. 

The  contravariants  are  all  of  them  evectants,  viz.  PU  is  the  evectant  of  S,  QU  is 
the  evectant  of  T,  and  the  reciprocant  FU  is  the  evectant  of  QU,  or  what  is  the  same 
thing,  the  second  evectant  of  T. 

The  discriminant  is  a rational  and  integral  function  of  the  two  invariants ; repre- 
senting it  by  R,  we  have  R=64  S^-~ T^. 

If  we  combine  U and  HU  by  arbitrary  multipliers,  say  a and  6/3,  so  as  to  form  the 
sum  aU-f-GjSFIU,  this  is  a cubic,  and  the  question  arises,  to  find  the  covariants  and 
contravariants  of  this  cubic  : the  results  are  given  in  the  following  Table  : — 

No.  68. 

aU+6|3HU  =aU+6/3HU. 

H(aU+6/3HU)=  (0,  2S,  T,  8S^  /3)®U 

+ (1,  0,  -12S,  -2TI«,i3rHU. 

P(aU+6/3HU)=  (1,  0,  12S,  4T^a, /3)TU 

+ (0,  1,  0,  -4SX«, /3)^QU. 

Q(aU+6/3HU)=  (0,  60S,  SOT,  0,  -120TS,  -24T^-f  576S^5;«, /3)TU 
+ (1,  0,  0,  lOT,  240S^  24TS5;;a,  (3)^QU. 

S(aU+6/3HU)  = (S,  T,  24S^  4TS,  T^-48S^^a,  /3)^ 

T(aU+6/3HU)=(T,  96S^  60TS,  20T^  240TS^  -48T^S+4608S^  -8T^4-576TS®^a, /3)^ 
R(«U+6/3HU)  = [(1,  0,  -24S,  ~8T,  -48S^Ia, /3)^]  ^R. 

F(aU-l-6/3HU)  =(1,  0,  -24S,  -8T,  (3yFU 

+ (0,  24,  0,  0,  -48T'X^^, /3)^(PU)^ 

+ (0,  0,  24,  0,  96SXa,  i3)TU.QU 

+ (0,  0,  0,  8,  0ja,/3r.(QUr. 

We  have,  in  like  manner,  for  the  covariants  and  contravariants  of  the  cubic 
6aPU+/3QU,  the  following  Table — 

No.  69. 

6«PU-f;3QU  =6aPU+|3QU. 

H(6aPU-r,SQU)  = (-2T,  48S^  18TS,  ’P-f  16S^  Ja,  |3)TU 
+ (8S,  T,  -8S^  -TS^a, /3)=*QU. 

P(6aPU-f/3QU)  = (32S^  12TS,  P-f32S^  4TS^^a,  |3)^U 

+ (4T,  96S^  12TS,  P-32S^Ja,  |3)^HU. 

4 Q 2 


646 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


(a,  f3)=HU 


S(6aPU+|3QU)  = 


Q(6aPU+(3QU)=  f +384T  ^ 

+ 120T"S+7680 
+ lOT^  +3200TS^ 

+ 480W, 

+ 30T^S, 

+ IT"  — 24T"S"+512S® 

+ f - 24T"  + 4608S^  ^ 

+ 1920TS^ 

+ 480T"S, 

+ 30T®  4-1920TS^ 

+ 120’PS"+7680  S®, 

— 6PS  + 768TS" 

+ IP  +192 
+ 128TS^ 

+ 18PS+384  S%(a,(3) 

+ IP  + 64TS^ 

+ 5PS^-  64 

- 8P  + 4608TS^  ’’ 

+ 1920PS"+ 73728  S®, 

+ 360PS +38400TS", 

i+  20P  + 8960PS^  tcc,(^y 

+ 840PS"+  7680TS^  | 

+ 36PS  + 384PS"+24576  S^  j 

+ IP  - 40PS"+  2560TS®  J 

R(6«PU+/3QU)=[(48S,  8T,  -96S^  -24TS,  -P- i3)"]^R^ 
F(6aPU+/3QU=(  192  S,  32T  ,—384  S"  96T  S 

+ ( 0 ,512  192TS"  , 24PS 

+ (13448^  352TS,  24P— 1152S^  -288TS' 


T(6aPU+(3QU)  = 


•64S^5;a,  (3)"0U 
/3)".U 

20PS  +64S"Xa,  ^)"U 


- 4P 

rp3 


P ij 

.HUil 


+ ( 48T, 


288TS 


24P+1536S^  144TS" 


I«,  ^)"(HU)t 


The  tables  for  the  ternary  cubic  become  much  more  simple  if  we  suppose  that  the 
cubic  is  expressed  in  Hesse’s  canonical  form ; we  have  then  the  following  table  : — 

No.  70. 

U=x^  +3/^ + + 6 Ivi/z . 
s = _/+p. 


!v 


MR.  A.  CAYLEY’S  THIRD  MEMOIR  UPON  QUANTICS. 


647 


T =1—20/'— 8/®. 

R =_  (1-1-8/')'. 

HU  =/V+3/'+2')-(1+2/')^^2. 

0U  = ( 1 +8/')'(3/'2'+2'a:'-|-,r'3/') 

+ ( — 9/®)  (^'+3/' + 2')' 

+ ( — 2/ — 5/^— 20/^)  {x^-\-y^-\-z^)xyz 

4-  ( — 1 5/' — 78/'  + 1 2/')a?y  z'. 

0,U  =4(l  + 8/')'(3/'«'+a'.*'+<r'3/') 

+ (-  l-4/'-4/®)y+y+2')' 

+ (4/+ 100/'+ 1 12/7)(^'+3/'+«')xyz 

+ (48/'+552/'+48/').i?'3/V. 

0^,U=  — 2(1  +8/')'(3/';z'+«'a;'+a;'3/') 

+ ( 1 — 1 0/')  ( j?' +?/' +2')' 

+ (6/ — 180/' — 96/^)(j:'+3/'-|-  z^)xyz 
+ (6/'— 624/'—  192/').^■'^/V. 

PU  + 

QU  = ( 1 - 1 0/')  (1'+^'+^')  - 6/'(5  + 4/')!;?^. 

FU  =-4(l+8/')(;j'^'+^'r+f;j') 

+ (f+^^  + ^^)^ 

-24/'(f+^'+^')|;,^ 

-24/(l+2/')|V^', 

to  which  it  is  proper  to  join  the  following  transformed  expressions  for  0U,  0;U,  0^,U, 
viz. 

0U  =(1 +8/')'(3/'2'+2'^'+:j;'3/') 

+ (-2/'-/®)U' 

+ (2/-5/')U.HU 

+ (-3/'  )(HU)'. 

0^U  =4(1 +8/')'(3/'2'+2:'^'+a?'3/') 

+ (— l + 12/'+4/®)U' 

+ (-16/+4/'  )U.HU 
+ (-12/'  )(HU)'. 

0,^U=  — 2(1 +8/')'(3/'«'+2'j?'+.'r'3/') 

+ (l_i6/'-6/®)U' 

+ (6/  )U.HU 

+ (6/'  )(HU)'. 

The  last  preceding  table  affords  a complete  solution  of  the  problem  to  reduce  a 
ternary  cubic  to  its  canonical  form. 


[ 649  ] 


XXXI.  The  Bakerian  Lecture. — On  the  Electro-dynamic  Qualities  of  Metals*'. 
By  Professor  William  Thomson,  M.A.,  F.R.S. 


Received  February  28, — Read  February  28,  1856. 


1.  An  electrified  body  may  be  regarded  as  a reservoir  of  potential  energy,  and  any 
material  combination  in  virtue  of  which  bodies  can  receive  charges  of  electricity  is  a 
ource  of  motive  power.  The  development  of  mechanical  effect  from  the  potential 
energy  of  electricity,  or  through  electric  means  from  any  source  of  motive  power, 
may  take  place  in  a great  variety  of  ways.  For  instance,  electro-statical  attractions 
and  repulsions  may  become  direct  moving  forces  (as  in  “ Franklin’s  Spider”),  to  do 
work  in  the  discharge  of  an  electrified  conductor  or  in  the  continued  use  of  a con- 
tinuous supply  of  electricity ; or  the  forces  of  current  electricity  may,  as  in  any  kind 
of  electro-magnetic  engine,  become  working  forces  on  bodies  in  motion ; or  the  whole 
energy  of  the  discharge  may,  as  discovered  by  Joule,  be  converted  into  heat,  which 
again  may  be  transformed  into  other  kinds  of  energy ; or  the  heat  evolved  and 
absorbed  by  electricity,  in  a circuit  of  two  different  metals,  at  the  places  where 
it  crosses  the  junctions  from  one  metal  to  the  other,  being  a thermal  result  of 
dynamic  moment'f-  when  the  junction  at  which  heat  is  evolved  is  at  a higher  tempe- 
rature than  the  junction  at  which  heat  is  absorbed,  may  be  used  in  a thermo-dynamic 
engine.  Again,  a thermo-electric  current  is  a dynamic  result  derived  from  a definite 
absorption  of  heat  in  one  locality  and  a definite  evolution  of  heat  in  a locality  of 
lower  temperature. 

2.  Of  these  various  kinds  of  action,  all  except  the  first  mentioned,  depend  essen- 

* The  author  has  to  acknowledge  much  valuable  assistance  in  the  various  experimental  investigations 
described  in  this  paper,  from  his  assistant  Mr.  M'^Farlane,  and  from  M.  C.  A.  Smith,  Mr.  R.  Davidson, 
Mr.  F.  Maclean,  Mr.  John  Murray,  and  other  pupils  in  his  laboratory. 

t Either  an  evolution  of  heat  at  a temperature  higher,  or  an  absorption  of  heat  at  a temperature  lower,  than 
that  of  the  atmosphere,  may  be  taken  advantage  of  to  work  an  engine  giving  mechanical  effect  from  heat ; by  using 
the  atmosphere  in  one  case  as  a recipient  for  discharged  heat,  in  the  other  as  the  source  of  the  heat  taken  in. 
Or  an  evolution  of  heat  at  any  temperature  and  an  absorption  of  heat  at  any  lower  temperature,  may  be  taken 
advantage  of  for  the  same  purpose,  in  a limited  material  system,  neither  taking  heat  from  nor  parting  with  heat 
to  any  external  matter.  Hence  such  a double  thermal  effect  may  be  said  to  possess  “ dynamic  moment.”  See 
the  author’s  “ Account  of  Carnot’s  Theory  of  the  Motive  Powder  of  Heat,”  §§  4 to  11,  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinb. 
Jan.  2,  1849 ; also  his  “ Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,”  §§  8,  13,  23  to  30,  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinb.,  March  17, 
1851,  and  “ Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,  Part  VI.  Thermo-electric  Currents,”  § 102,  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinb., 
May  1, 1854.  The  series  of  articles  under  the  general  title  “ Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,”  have  been  republished 
in  a succession  of  Numbers  of  the  Philosophical  Magazine,  viz.  §§  1 to  80,  Vol.  July  to  Dec.  1852 ; §§  81  to 
96,  Vol.  Jan.  to  June,  1855  ; §§  97  to  181,  Vol.  Jan.  to  June,  1856. 


650  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


tially  on  certain  definite  properties  of  matter  in  regard  to  which  different  metals 
have  remarkably  different  qualities.  Thus  in  electro-magnetic  engines  the  electric 
conductivity  of  the  coils  through  which  the  current  passes,  and  the  magnetic  induc- 
tive capacity  and  retentiveness  of  the  iron  cores  of  the  electro-magnets,  are  essentially 
involved : and  as  essentially,  when  permanent  magnets  are  used,  the  magnetic 
properties  of  steel,  loadstone,  or  other  bodies  possessing  strong  retentiveness  for 
magnetism.  In  the  simple  conversion  of  any  kind  of  energy  into  heat  by  means  of 
electric  currents  in  metals,  their  electric  conductivities  are  essentially  and  solely 
concerned. 

The  inverse  thermo-electric  transformation  of  energy  into  an  evolution  and 
absorption  of  heat,  at  loealities  of  different  temperature,  in  quantities  differing  from 
one  another  hy  the  thermal  equivalent  of  the  work  spent  in  maintaining  the  current*, 
depends  essentially  on  certain  distinct  properties  of  metals  in  regard  to  which  their 
various  qualities  are  shown  by  the  differences  of  their  positions  in  the  thermo-electric 
series  at  different  temperatures;  and  the  accessory  circumstances  of  such  operations 
are  influenced  by  the  electric  and  thermal  conductivities  of  the  metals  used.  The 
same  properties  are  involved  in  the  direct  thermo-electric  transformation  of  energy 
in  which  electric  currents,  sustained  by  the  communication  of  heat  in  a hot  locality 
and  the  abstraction  of  a less  quantity  of  heat  in  a locality  lower  in  temperature,  either 
produce  any  mechanical  action,  or  are  allowed  to  waste  all  their  motive  power  in  the 
frictional  generation  of  heat'f-. 

* See  “ Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,  Part  VI.  Thermo-electric  Currents,”  §§  105,  110. 

t “ ....  a current  cannot  pass  through  a homogeneous  conductor  without  generating  heat  in  overcoming 
resistance.  This  elFect,  which  we  shall  call  the  frictional  generation  oy  has  been  discovered  by  Joule  to  be 
produced  at  a rate  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  strength  of  the  current ; and,  taking  place  equally  with  the 
current  in  one  direction  or  the  contrary,  is  obviously  of  an  irreversible  kind”  (Dyn.  Th.  Heat,  § 104).  This 
definition  was  given  merely  to  render  circumlocution  unnecessary  in  frequently  referring  to  a mode  of  electric 
action  which  bore  an  obvious  analogy  to  the  action  of  a common  fluid  generating  heat  by  friction  among  its 
particles  as  a dynamical  equivalent  to  Avork  spent  upon  it  from  without  in  forcing  it  to  circulate  in  a tube,  or 
otherwise  keeping  it  in  motion.  It  appears  to  me  highly  probable,  however,  that  what  I have,  with  reference 
only  to  recognized  electric  currents,  defined  as  the  frictional  generation  of  heat,  is  precisely  the  mode  of  action 
by  which  all  the  heat  is  generated  in  every  case  when  two  solids  are  rubbed  together.  Certainly  when  two 
bad  conductors  of  electricity  are  rubbed  together,  a portion  of  the  heat  of  friction  is  generated  in  visible  electric 
flashes ; and  a charged  Leyden  battery  contains,  in  potential  energy,  a dynamic  equivalent  for  a portion  of  the 
heat  of  friction  between  rubber  and  glass  never  made  till  the  battery  is  discharged.  As  certainly  a portion  of 
the  heat  of  friction  between  a metal  and  a bad  conducter  of  electricity  is  invisibly  generated  by  electric  currents 
through  a very  minute  depth  of  the  metallic  substance  beside  its  rubbed  surface.  The  first  effect  of  chemical 
forces  of  affinity,  as  Joule  has  so  powerfully  demonstrated  in  a variety  of  cases,  is  to  press  electricity  into 
motion ; which  motion  may  either  subside  into  heat  close  to  the  locality  of  the  combination  (as  when  rough 
zinc  is  dropped  into  dilute  sulphuric  acid),  or,  reactively  resisting  the  chemical  combination,  may  transmit  the 
work  to  a locality  distant  from  the  source,  and  may  there  either  generate  heat  in  a permanent  metallic  or  other 
undecomposable  conductor,  or  may,  without  any  generation  of  heat  at  all,  be  wholly  spent  in  effecting  decom- 
positions against  chemical  affinities  infinitely  little  less  powerful  than  those  from  which  it  proceeds,  or  in  raising 
weights.  So  it  appears  highly  probable  that  the  first  effect  of  the  force  by  which  one  solid  is  made  to  slide  upon 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  651 


3.  All  properties,  then,  of  electric  and  thermal  conductivity,  of  magnetic  inductive 
capacity  and  retentiveness,  and  of  thermo-electric  rank  and  its  variations  from  one 
temperature  to  another,  may  be  characterized  as  electro-dynamic ; and  the  degrees 
to  which  these  properties  are  possessed  by  different  substances  may  be  called  their 
electro-dynamic  qualities.  Again,  the  variation  which  absolute  magnetic  inductive 
capacity,  and  magnecrystallic  axial  differences,  experience  with  change  of  tempe- 
rature may  obviously  be  made  the  means  of  a transformation  of  heat  into  common 
mechanical  energy,  and  we  have  thus  a set  of  magneto-dynamic  properties  of  matter 
which  may  almost  in  the  present  state  of  science  be  regarded  as  intrinsically  electric, 
but  which  at  all  events  (when  we  consider  that  the  motions  contemplated,  taking 
place  as  they  do  under  magnetic  force,  cannot  but  be  accompanied  by  electric 
currents)  may  be  fairly  classed  under  the  general  designation  of  electro-dynamic. 
The  variations  of  intrinsic  magnetism,  of  magnetic  inductive  capacity,  and  of  magne- 
crystallic properties,  produced  by  variations  of  temperature,  are  therefore  included 
among  the  electro-dynamic  qualities  of  metals  which  I propose  to  investigate,  although 
I have  as  yet  made  no  progress  in  this  branch  of  the  subject. 


PART  I.  ON  THE  ELECTRIC  CONVECTION  OF  HEAT.  §§  4 to  77. 

4 to  18.  Theoretical  Indications. 

4 to  9.  Origin  of  the  Investigation. 

4.  In  first  attempting  an  application  of  the  principles  of  the  Dynamical  Theory  of 
Heat  to  show  the  mechanical  relation  between  cause  and  effect  in  thermo-electric 
currents,  I supposed  the  effects  thermal  and  mechanical  that  can  be  produced  by  a 
thermo-electric  current  in  any  part  of  its  circuit  to  be,  as  first  suggested  by  Joule, 
due  to  the  heat  absorbed,  according  to  Peltier’s  discovery,  at  the  liot  junction  in 
virtue  of  the  current  crossing  it,  and  I pointed  out  that  the  current  crossing  the  cold 
junction  must  evolve  a quantity  of  heat  which,  were  this  supposition  true,  would  be 
less  than  that  absorbed  at  the  hot  junction,  by  an  amount  precisely  equivalent  to  all 
the  effects,  produced  by  the  current  in  the  rest  of  the  circuit*. 

5.  Introducing  Carnot’s  principle,  as  modified  in  the  Dynamical  Theory  of 

another  is  electricity  set  into  a state  of  motion ; that  this  electric  motion  subsides  wholly  into  heat  in  most 
cases,  either  close  to  its  origin  and  instantaneously,  as  when  the  solids  are  both  of  metal,  or  at  sensible  distances 
from  the  actual  locality  of  friction  and  during  appreciable  intervals  of  time,  as  when  the  substance  of  one  or  both 
the  bodies  is  of  low  conducting  power  for  electricity ; and  that  it  only  fails  to  produce  the  full  equivalent  in 
heat  for  the  work  spent  in  overcoming  the  friction,  when  the  electric  currents  are  partially  diverted  from  closed 
circuits  in  the  two  bodies  and  in  the  space  between  them,  and  are  conducted  away  to  produce  other  effects  in 
other  localities.  Still,  no  hypothesis  need  be  implied  by  using  the  expression  “ the  frictional  generation  of 
heat  by  an  electric  current,”  as  defined  in  the  passage  quoted,  and  it  is  introduced  into  the  present  paper  with 
no  other  justification  than  its  convenience. 

* Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,  March  17,  1851,  § 17. 

MDCCCLVI.  4 R 


652  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Heat*,  I found  a relation  between  the  quantities  of  heat  absorbed  or  evolved  by 
currents  crossing  metallic  junctions  at  different  temperatures;  which  led  imme- 
diately to  a general  expression  for  the  electrical  condition  of  a circuit  of  two  metals 
with  their  junctions  kept  at  any  stated  temperatures. 

6.  From  this  it  appeared  that  the  electro-motive  force  should  follow  the  same  law 
of  variation  in  every  case,  being  expressed  by  a constant,  (representing  the  thermo- 
electric difference  between  the  two  metals,)  multiplied  into  an  absolute  function  of 
the  temperatures  of  their  junctions,  namely,  the  difference  of  their  temperature  on 
the  absolute  thermometric  scale  since  proposed  by  Mr.  Joule  and  myself,  and  demon- 
strated by  our  experiments'!'  to  agree  very  approximately  with  their  difference  of 
temperature  as  indicated  by  an  air-thermometer.  Finding  this  conclusion  contra- 
dictory to  the  statements  made  by  experimenters,  that  the  electro-motive  force  does 
not  vary  with  the  temperature  of  the  junctions  according  to  the  same  law  in  circuits 
composed  of  different  metals,  I perceived  that  Peltier’s  discovery  did  not  afford  a 
sufficient  explanation  of  the  source  whence  a thermo-electric  current  derives  its 
energy,  but  that  electric  currents  must  possess  the  previously  undiscovered  property 
of  producing  different  thermal  effects  in  passing  from  cold  to  hot  and  from  hot  to 
cold  in  the  same  metal,  and  must  possess  this  property  to  different  amounts  in 
different  metals. 

7.  Taking  this  new  property  of  electric  currents  into  account  along  with  that 
discovered  by  Peltier,  and  introducing  an  application  of  Carnot’s  principle,  I arrived 
at  expressions  for  the  relations  between  the  heat  absorbed  and  evolved  in  various 
parts  of  a circuit  of  any  different  metals,  and  between  the  electro-motive  force  and 
the  temperatures  of  the  junctions,  which  appear  to  be  in  complete  accordance  with 
the  facts.  These  investigations  were  communicated  in  December  1851,  to  the  Royal 
Society  of  Edinburgh  :|:. 

8.  Still  simpler  theoretical  considerations  (§§  10  to  18  below)  regarding  the  source 
of  energy  drawn  upon  in  a thermo-electric  current,  make  it  certain  that  the  pheno- 
mena of  inversion  discovered  by  Gumming  could  not  exist,  unless  the  metals  present- 
ing them  had  the  property  of  experiencing,  when  unequally  heated,  unequal  thermal 
effects  from  electric  currents  passing  through  them  from  hot  to  cold,  and  from  cold 
to  hot.  Having  satisfied  myself,  both  by  an  examination  of  the  evidence  afforded  by 
Becquerel’s  experiments  (the  original  investigation  on  the  subject  by  Gumming  being 
at  that  time  unknown  to  me),  and  by  actual  observation,  in  experiments  of  my  own 

* This,  the  true  form  of  Carnot’s  principle,  was  first  published  by  Clausius  in  May  1850  (Poggendorff’s 
‘ Annalen’).  It  had  occurred  to  myself,  and  I had  used  it  in  discovering  the  true  expression  for  the  duty  of  a 
perfect  thermo-dynamic  engine  shortly  before  that  time.  It  was  not,  however,  until  the  beginning  of  the  year 
1851  that  I thought  on  a demonstration  which  would  probably  be  admitted  as  conclusive  in  establishing  the 
principle,  and  my  investigation  on  the  subject  was  only  communicated  in  March  1851  to  the  Royal  Society  of 
Edinburgh.  See  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Ed.  of  that  date,  “ Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,”  § 14. 

t “ On  the  Thermal  Effects  of  Fluids  in  Motion,”  Transactions,  June  1854. 

t See  Proceedings  of  that  date,  and  Philosophical  Magazine,  June  1852. 

§ See  below.  Part  II.  §§  79,  80,  81,  83,  84,  &c. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  653 


that  the  doubts  which  various  writers  had  thrown  on  the  existence  of  thermo-electric 
inversions  were  groundless,  I concluded  with  certainty  that  the  newly  conceived 
thermal  effect  of  electricity  in  unequally  heated  metals  really  exists.  But  the 
theory  left  it  undecided  what  the  absolute  nature  and  amount  of  this  effect  may  be, 
and  only  showed  how,  by  observations  on  thermo-electric  currents,  its  difference  in 
different  metals  may  be  determined. 

9.  I therefore  had  recourse  to  direct  experiment  on  the  thermal  effects  of  elec- 
tric currents  in  unequally  heated  conductors,  not  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of 
the  peculiar  effect  anticipated,  but  to  ascertain  its  nature,  with  moreover  a view 
of  ultimately  determining  its  absolute  amount,  in  some  particular  metal  or  metals. 
Before  proceeding  to  describe  experiments,  by  which  1 have  now  discovered  the 
quality  of  the  new  effect  in  several  cases,  1 shall,  without  entering  on  the  mathe- 
matical details  of  the  theory,  or  the  full  application  of  Carnot’s  principle,  repeat  in 
a few  words  so  much  of  my  first  communication  on  the  subject  to  the  Royal  Society 
of  Edinburgh,  as  to  show  the  reasoning,  founded  on  incontrovertible  mechanical 
principles,  which  made  me  commence  the  experimental  research  with  the  certainty 
that  the  property  looked  for  existed,  whether  I could  find  it  or  not. 

10  to  15.  General  inferences  regarding  the  Electric  Convection  of  Heat  from 

Dynamical  Principles. 

10.  Gumming  has  discovered  that  in  many  cases  when  one  of  the  junctions  of  a 
thermo-electric  circuit  of  two  metals  is  kept  at  a fixed  temperature,  if  that  of  the 
other  be  elevated  gradually  from  equality,  an  electro-motive  force  is  produced,  which 
first  increases  to  a maximum,  then  diminishes,  vanishes  for  a certain  temperature  of 
the  junction,  and  acts  in  the  contrary  direction  with  gradually  increasing  strength 
as  the  temperature  is  further  raised.  It  is  clear  that,  at  exactly  that  temperature  of 
the  hot  junction  for  which  in  any  such  case  the  electro-motive  force  is  a maximum, 
the  two  metals  must  be  thermo-electrically  neutral  to  one  another,  and  must  present 
reverse  thermo-electric  relations  for  temperatures  below  and  above  this  point.  Hence 
the  thermal  effect  depending  on  the  direction  of  a current  crossing  the  junction  of  two 
such  metals  must  be  for  temperatures  above,  the  reverse  of  what  it  is  for  tempera- 
tures below,  the  neutral  point,  and  must  vanish  when  the  metals  are  exactly  at  this 
temperature. 

11.  For  although  Peltier  himself  supposed  the  effect  he  had  discovered  to  depend 
on  the  conducting  powers  of  the  two  metals  for  heat,  and  remarked  as  an  anomaly 
the  case  of  bismuth  and  copper,  for  which  his  supposition  was  violated,  his  own 
experiments  show  the  truth  to  be,  that  in  a circuit  of  two  metals  an  absorption 
of  heat  at  the  junction  where  the  temperature  is  higher,  and  an  evolution  of  heat  at 
the  other,  must  be  produced  by  the  thermo-electric  current  which  is  caused  by  the 
maintaining  of  the  difference  of  temperature  between  the  junctions.  That  this  is 
universally  true  when  the  temperatures  of  the  two  junctions  are  on  the  same  side  of 

4 R 2 


054  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


the  neutral  point,  cannot,  in  the  present  state  of  science  as  regards  the  theory  of  heat, 
be  reasonably  doubted. 

12.  If,  therefore,  a circuit  of  two  metals  have  one  junction  kept  at  the  neutral 
point,  and  the  other  at  some  lower  temperature,  the  current  excited  will  cause  the 
evolution  of  heat  at  the  cold  Junction,  but  neither  absorption  nor  evolution  of  heat 
at  the  hot  junction;  and  in  the  rest  of  the  circuit  there  will  be  effects  either  purely 
thermal,  or  thermal  and  mechanical  or  chemical,  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
resistance  against  which  the  electro-motive  force  is  allowed  to  work.  The  source 
from  which  the  electro-motive  force  derives  its  energy  to  produce  these  effects  cannot 
be  at  the  hot  junction  (§  10),  where  heat  is  neither  absorbed  nor  evolved,  nor  at  the 
cold  junction  (§  11),  where  heat  is  evolved,  nor  of  course  in  any  uniformly  heated 
part  in  either  metal,  through  all  of  which,  provided  the  metal  has  no  thermo-electric 
crystalline  characteristic,  there  can  be  nothing  but  a frictional  evolution  of  heat; 
that  is,  it  is  nowhere  but  in  those  portions  of  the  circuit  where  the  temperature 
varies  between  that  of  the  cold  and  that  of  the  hot  junction.  In  those  portions, 
therefore,  there  must  be  as  much  heat  absorbed,  in  virtue  of  the  current,  as  is  equi- 
valent to  the  aggregate  mechanical  value  of  the  heat  evolved  at  the  cold  junction, 
and  all  the  effects,  thermal,  mechanical,  and  chemical,  produced  in  the  rest  of  the 
circuit. 

13.  If,  for  example,  an  electro-magnetic  engine  be  introduced  into  the  circuit,  and 
be  allowed  to  work  at  such  a rate  as  to  reduce,  by  its  inductive  reaction,  the  strength 
of  the  thermo-electric  current  to  an  infinitely  small  fraction  of  what  it  is  when  the 
engine  is  at  rest,  the  heat  absorbed  in  virtue  of  the  current  in  the  unequally  heated 
parts  of  the  two  metals  will  be  equal  to  the  heat  evolved  at  the  cold  junction,  together 
with  the  thermal  equivalent  of  the  work  done  by  the  engine,  and  will  be  simply  pro- 
portional to  the  strength  of  the  current.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  etigine  be  forced 
to  work  a little  faster,  so  as  to  overbalance  by  an  infinitely  small  amount  the  ther- 
mal electro-motive  foree,  and  cause  a reverse  current  in  the  circuit,  there  must  be 
heat  evolved  in  virtue  of  this  current  in  the  unequally  heated  parts  of  the  two  metals 
to  an  amount  equal  to  the  heat  absorbed  at  the  cold  junction,  together  with  the  ther- 
mal equivalent  to  the  work  done  against  electro-magnetic  forces  in  the  engine.  It 
follows  that  in  the  unequally  heated  portions  of  the  two  metals,  the  current  passing 
from  cold  to  hot  in  one,  and  from  hot  to  cold  in  the  other,  must  produce  a thermal 
effect,  in  simple  proportion  to  its  owm  strength,  constituting  on  the  whole  an  absorp- 
tion of  heat  when  the  thermal  electro-motive  force  is  allowed  to  produce  a current, 
and  an  evolution  of  heat  when  a current  is  forced  by  other  means  in  the  contrary 
direction. 

14.  Hence,  for  any  two  metals  which  are  thermo-electrically  neutral  to  one  another 
at  a certain  temperature,  and  which  possess  reverse  thermo-electric  properties  for 
temperatures  above  and  below  the  neutral  point,  we  conclude  the  following  propo- 
sitions ; — 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  655 


(1)  In  one  or  other  of  the  metals  (and  most  probably  in  both)  there  must  be  a 
thermal  effect  due  to  the  passage  of  electricity  through  a non-uniformly  heated  por- 
tion of  it,  which  must  be  an  absorption  of  heat  or  an  evolution  of  heat,  according  to 
the  direction  of  the  current  between  the  hot  and  cold  parts,  and  proportional  in 
amount  to  the  whole  quantity  of  electricity  that  passes  in  a stated  time. 

(2)  The  amount  of  this  effect,  with  the  same  strength  of  current  and  the  same 
difference  of  temperatures,  must  differ  in  the  two  metals  to  such  an  extent,  that  the 
effect  of  a current  in  passing  from  cold  to  hot  in  one  metal,  together  with  the  effect 
of  an  equal  current  passing  from  a place  equally  hot  to  a place  equally  cold  in  the 
other,  may  amount  to  the  absorption  or  evolution,  the  existence  of  which  has  been 
demonstrated. 

15.  The  reversible  thermal  effect*  of  electric  currents  in  single  metals  of  non- 
uniform  temperature,  which  has  been  thus  established,  may  obviously  be  called  a 
Convection  of  Heat  by  electricity  in  motion.  To  avoid  circumlocution,  I shall 
express  it  that  the  Vitreous  Electricity  carries  heat  with  it,  when  this  convection  is  in 
the  “ nominal  direction  of  the  current.”  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  convection  is 
against  the  “ nominal  direction  of  the  current,”  it  will  be  said  that  the  Resinous  Elec- 
tricity carries  heat  with  it, 

16  to  18.  Dynamical  Theory  applied  to  draw,  from  thermo-electric  data,  inferences 
regarding  the  Electric  Convection  of  Heat  in  Copper  and  in  Iron. 

16.  The  application  of  the  preceding  theorem  to  the  particular  case  of  copper  and 
iron  is  a consequence  of  Cumming’s  discovery,  that,  if  one  junction  in  a circuit  of 
two  arcs  of  those  two  metals  be  kept  cold,  and  the  other  be  heated  gradually,  a 
current  at  first  sets  from  copper  to  iron  through  the  hot  junction  with  increasing 
strength  ; but  begins  to  diminish  after  a certain  temperature,  which  Becquerel 
found  to  be  about  300°  Cent.,  is  exceeded ; falls  away  to  nothing  when  a red  heat  is 
attained;  and  sets  in  the  reverse 'f  direction  when  the  elevation  of  temperature  is 
pushed  higher. 

* See  an  article  by  the  author,  entitled  “ On  a Universal  Tendency  in  Nature  to  the  Dissipation  of  Mecha- 
nical Energy”  (Proceedings  Roy.  Soc.  Edinb.,  Feb.  16,  1852,  and  Phil.  Mag.,  Oct.  1852),  where  all  natural 
operations  are  divided  into  two  great  classes,  “reversible”  and  “irreversible.”  See  foot-note  on  § 2 above, 
for  an  example  of  the  second  class. 

t Having  myself  experienced  some  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  reverse  current  in  the  manner  described  by 
M.  Becquerel,  in  which  one  junction  was  heated  in  the  flame  of  a spirit-lamp,  while  the  other  was  kept  at 
the  atmospheric  temperature,  I found  that  it  could  be  obtained  so  as  to  be  observed  with  the  greatest  ease  by 
means  of  a very  ordinary  galvanometer  and  an  iron  wire  with  copper  wires  twisted  round  its  ends,  by  keeping 
the  lower  junction  at  a temperature  considerably  above  that  of  the  atmosphere,  at  100°  Cent,  for  instance ; 
and  I ascertained  that  when  both  junctions  were  kept  at  a very  high  temperature,  in  the  flame  of  a spirit-lamp 
for  instance,  and  one  of  them  cooled  a little  below  the  temperature  of  the  other,  the  current  produced  was  the 
reverse  of  that  which  the  same  difference  occasioned  when  both  junctions  were  at  ordinary  temperatures.  See 
Part  II.  below  for  further  developments  on  this  subject. 


566  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Some  observations  of  Regnault’s  having-  appeared  to  indicate  240°  Cent,  as,  more 
nearly  than  300°,  the  temperature  of  the  hot  junction  which  gives  the  current  its 
maximum  strength,  I concluded  the  following  proposition : — 

17*  “When  a thermo-electric  current  passes  through  a piece  of  iron  from  one  end 
kept  at  about  240°  Cent.*,  to  the  other  end  kept  cold,  in  a circuit  of  which  the 
remainder  is  copper,  including  a long  resistance  wire  of  uniform  temperature  through- 
out, or  an  electro-magnetic  engine  raising  weights,  there  is  heat  evolved  at  the  cold 
junction  of  the  copper  and  iron,  and  (no  heat  being  either  absorbed  or  evolved  at  the 
hot  junction)  there  must  be  a quantity  of  heat  absorbed  on  the  whole  in  the  rest  of 
the  circuit.  When  there  is  no  engine  raising  weights,  in  the  circuit,  the  sum  of  the 
quantities  evolved,  at  the  cold  junction,  and  generated  in  the  ‘resistance  wire,’  is 
equal  to  the  quantity  absorbed  on  the  whole  in  the  other  parts  of  the  circuit.  When 
there  is  an  engine  in  the  circuit,  the  sum  of  the  heat  evolved  at  the  cold  junction 
and  the  thermal  equivalent  of  the  weights  raised,  is  equal  to  the  quantity  of  heat 
absorbed  on  the  whole  in  all  the  circuit,  except  the  cold  junction -I-.” 

18.  Hence,  if  the  reversible  part  of  the  effect  of  a current  from  hot  to  cold  in  iron 
is  an  evolution  of  heat,  the  corresponding  effect  in  copper  must  be  a greater  evolu- 
tion of  heat.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  a cooling  effect  be  produced  by  a current 
from  hot  to  cold  in  iron,  there  must  be  either  a less  effect  of  the  same  kind,  or  a 
reverse  effect,  in  copper.  It  is  left  to  experiment  to  determine  which  of  the  two 
hypotheses  is  true  regarding  iron ; and  should  it  turn  out  to  be  the  latter,  to  ascer- 
tain which  of  the  two  remaining  alternatives  regarding  copper  must  be  concluded. 
With  this  object  I commenced  the  experimental  researches  which  I now  proceed  to 
describe. 

§§  19  to  77-  Expej'imental  Investigation  of  the  Electric  Convection  of  Heat  in  Copper, 

in  Iron,  and  in  some  other  Metals. 

§§19,  20.  Unsuccessful  attempts,  and first  result. 

19.  I began,  more  than  four  years  ago,  by  observing  carefully  the  ignition  pro- 
duced in  short  wires  of  copper,  iron,  and  platinum  by  electric  currents  alternately 
in  the  two  directions,  thinking  that  some  of  the  effects  described  by  various  experi- 
menters, as  showing  a superior  heating  power  in  the  positive  electrode,  might  possibly 
be  dependent  on  the  convective  agency  which  I was  endeavouring  to  discover.  But 
I never  observed  the  slightest  variation  in  the  position  of  the  incandescent  part  of  the 

* I have  since  ascertained  (see  Part  II.  belovr),  by  keeping  the  ends  of  an  iron  wire,  with  copper  wires  from 
the  galvanometer  soldered  to  them,  in  separate  vessels  of  hot  oil,  and  determining  different  temperatures  of  the 
two  which  give  no  current,  that  the  neutral  point  for  the  particular  specimens  of  iron  and  copper  which  I used 
must  be  about  284°  Cent.  I should  therefore,  at  present,  substitute  284°  for  240°  in  the  proposition  quoted  in 
the  text ; without  further  research,  however,  it  is  impossible  to  ^ironounce  upon  the  limits  between  which  the 
neutral  point  of  various  specimens  of  copper  and  iron  wires  may  be  found  to  lie. 

f Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  Dec.  15,  1851,  republished  in  Phil.  Mag.,  June  1852. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  657 


wire,  with  a sudden  reversal  of  the  current.  Sometimes  the  incandescence  was 
assisted  by  a spirit-lamp  flame  applied  to  the  middle  part  of  the  wire,  and  the  ends 
were  kept  cool  by  wet  threads.  Sometimes  in  a long  wire  with  a current  through  it 
not  quite  strong  enough  to  keep  it  at  a red  heat,  a small  part  was  made  incan- 
descent by  a slight  application  of  heat  as  nearly  as  possible  at  one  point,  by  a spirit- 
lamp  flame.  Still  there  was  never  observed  the  slightest  motion  of  the  incandescent 
part,  when  the  current  was  suddenly  reversed,  and  I concluded  that  whatever  had 
been  observed  in  the  way  of  different  heating  effects  of  the  positive  and  negative 
electrodes,  must  have  been  owing  to  peculiar  agencies  of  the  current  in  passing 
between  metal  and  rarefied  air,  or  to  some  other  cause  than  thermal  convection  in 
metals ; and  I saw  that  more  powerful  tests  would  be  required  to  bring  out  the  result 
I looked  for. 

20.  I next  made  experiments  on  a conductor  of  bar  iron  bent  into  two  equal 
upward  vertical  branches  on  each  side  of  the  horizontal  part,  which  was  kept  im- 
mersed in  a vessel  of  hot  oil,  while  the  upper  ends  of  the  vertical  branches  were  kept 
cool  by  streams  of  cold  water.  Vessels  of  water  were  applied  round  the  two  vertical 
branches,  as  calorimetric  arrangements  to  test  heat  evolved  or  absorbed  in  them  by 
the  agency  of  a current  sent  down  one  and  up  the  other  from  a nitric  acid  battery  of 
sixteen  small  iron  cells,  arranged  as  a single  element. 

The  current  was  sent  first  for  half  an  hour  in  one  direction,  then  half  an  hour  in 
the  contrary  direction ; and  so  on,  with  a reversal  every  half-hour.  The  water  round 
the  two  vertical  branches  was  kept  constantly  stirred,  and  thermometers  in  fixed 
positions  in  them  were  observed  at  frequent  intervals  during  the  experiments,  which 
were  each  continued  for  about  two  hours.  A comparison  of  all  the  readings  taken 
showed  a rather  higher  mean  temperature  in  the  branch  down  which  the  current  was 
passing  than  in  the  other ; indicating,  differentially,  a cooling  effect  in  the  branch 
through  which  the  current  passes  from  the  hot  middle,  and  a heating  effect  in  the 
other.  This  experiment  appeared  to  show  that  ‘^the  resinous  electricity”  carries 
heat  with  it  in  an  iron  conductor;  but  the  irregular  variations  of  temperature  in  each 
thermometer  were  so  much  greater  than  the  differential  effect  deduced,  that  I could 
not  consider  the  conclusion  satisfactorily  established. 

^§21  to  29.  Unsuccessful  attempts  with  large  bar  conductors. 

21.  There  were  diflSculties  connected  with  the  arrangements  of  the  calorimetric 
vessel,  which  made  me  judge  that  it  would  be  better,  instead  of  testing  the  average 
temperature  of  two  portions  of  the  conductor,  each  extending  the  whole  way  from 
the  hot  middle  to  the  cold  ends,  to  simply  test  the  temperature  of  as  nearly  as  pos- 
sible one  point  midway  between  the  hot  and  cold  on  each  side ; and  it  appeared  that 
the  heating  could  be  more  easily  applied  and  better  regulated  by  a source  of  heat  at 
the  middle  of  a straight  horizontal  conductor,  than  by  the  plan  I had  followed  in  the 
arrangement  just  described.  I therefore  got  bars  of  copper  and  iron,  with  holes  to 
admit  the  bulbs  of  sensitive  thermometers,  made  to  the  following  dimensions : — 


658  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Copper  conductor.  Iron  conductor, 
inches.  inches. 

Whole  length  ...  16  24 

Breadth 1 2 

Depth 2^  3 

Depth  of  hollows . . 2 2^ 

Diameter  of  hollows.  4 -r 


These  relative  dimensions  were  chosen  so  that  the  conducting  powers  of  the  two 
bars  for  electric  currents,  and  consequently  for  heat  also,  might  be  not  very  unequal. 

A vessel  of  tin-plate,  perforated  to  admit  the  bar  through  its  sides,  was  soldered 
round  the  middle  of  each  conductor,  and  two  others  so  as  to  leave  about  2 inches  at  the 
ends  of  the  conductor  projecting  beyond  them.  The  parts  of  the  conductors  within 
these  vessels  were  about  3 inches  long  in  the  copper  and  4^  inches  in  the  iron,  and  the 
parts  between  the  middle  vessel  and  the  vessels  at  the  two  sides  were  and  2 inches 
respectively.  The  bores  for  the  thermometer  bulbs  were  exactly  in  the  middle  of  the 
last-mentioned  parts.  In  experimenting  on  either  conductor,  the  central  vessel  was 
generally  filled  with  oil  or  water,  and  kept  hot  by  a gas-lamp  below  it.  Streams  of  cold 
water  from  the  town  supply-pipes  were  kept  flowing  through  the  two  lateral  vessels. 

22.  To  make  these  streams  constant,  whatever  variations  of  pressure  might  occur 
in  the  supply-pipes,  a cistern  in  a fixed  position  above  the  conductor  was  kept  full 
(overflowing),  and  the  coolers  were  supplied  by  pipes  from  this  cistern.  The  supply 
often  failed  for  several  minutes,  and  sometimes  for  much  longer ; and  after  an  expe- 
riment (Nov.  19,  1853)  was  nearly  lost  from  this  cause,  a plan  was  arranged  to 
lift  water  up  from  a larger  cistern  (into  which  the  exit-streams  from  the  coolers  were 
discharged),  and  to  pour  it  into  the  smaller  cistern  above,  so  as  to  keep  the  stream 
constant  in  quantity  (although  not  quite  invariable  in  temperature)  even  when  the 
proper  supply  failed. 

23.  A galvanic  battery  for  exciting  a current  through  these  conductors  was  pre- 
pared, consisting  at  first  of  four,  and  ultimately  of  eight,  large  iron  cells,  each 
measuring  internally  12  inches  deep,  10^  inches  broad,  and  2^  inches  from  side  to 
side;  eight  porous  cells,  each  12  inches  deep,  10  inches  broad,  and  2 inches  from 
side  to  side;  and  eight  zinc  plates,  each  9^  inches  by  10  inches.  The  iron  cells 
were  charged  with  a mixture  of  nitric  acid  two  parts  (bulk),  sulphuric  acid  three 
parts,  and  water  two.  The  porous  cells  were  charged  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid. 
In  each  of  the  cells  there  were  1^  square  feet  of  zinc  surface  exposed  to  2^  square 
feet  of  iron,  and  the  electro-motive  force  was  not  far  from  double  that  of  a single 
cell  of  Daniell’s. 

24.  After  preliminary  experiments  in  which,  with  oil  in  the  central  vessel  kept  hot 
by  a gas-lamp,  the  temperatures  were  too  unsteady  to  allow  any  results  of  value  to 
be  obtained,  water  was  substituted  for  oil  in  the  central  vessel,  and  was  kept  boiling 
briskly  by  the  gas,  the  place  of  the  water  evaporated  being  frequently  supplied  by 
small  quantities  of  boiling  water  poured  in,  so  that  ebullition  never  ceased.  The 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  659 


irregularities  having  been  found  to  be  much  diminished,  experiments  were  made  in 
the  following  manner. 

25.  Four  of  the  large  iron  cells,  arranged  as  a single  galvanic  element,  were  used 
to  excite  the  current.  The  experiment  lasted  about  two  hours,  during  which  the 
current  was  sent  through  the  conductor  for  twenty  minutes  at  a time,  alternately  in 
the  two  directions,  twice  in  each  direction.  Several  minutes  were  spent  in  changing 
the  direction  of  the  current;  the  stiffness  of  the  electrodes,  and  the  clamps  used  for 
the  connexions  which  had  to  be  changed,  rendering  the  process  very  troublesome. 
Readings  of  the  thermometers  were  taken  at  intervals  of  five  minutes  during  the  flow 
of  the  current  in  both  directions,  as  well  as  for  some  time  before  the  current  com- 
menced and  after  it  ceased. 

26.  The  results  of  this  experiment  manifested,  among  great  irregularities  in  the 
indications  of  the  thermometers,  a very  decided  differential  variation  between  the 
two  every  time  the  direction  of  the  current  was  changed ; and  appeared  so  pro- 
mising, that  a series  of  further  experiments  on  the  same  copper  conductor,  and  on 
the  iron  conductor  similarly  arranged,  were  immediately  commenced,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  testing  decisively  the  conclusion  which  had  been  indicated,  and  for  discover- 
ing the  corresponding  effect  in  iron.  To  avoid  the  loss  of  time  and  the  derange- 
ment in  the  position  of  the  conductor  by  the  shifting  of  the  heavy  clamps  and  stiff 
electrodes  between  its  ends,  in  changing  the  direction  of  the  current,  a commutator, 
by  which  the  change  could  be  effected  nearly  instantaneously,  was  constructed  on 
the  following  plan. 

27.  Four  square  holes,  each  of  1 inch,  in  a square  block  of  mahogany,  were  fitted 


with  bottoms  of  thick  copper  slabs,  passing  through  the  mahogany,  and  cemented 

MDCCCLVI.  4 s 


660  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

with  red  lead  so  as  to  hold  mercury,  which  was  poured  into  each  hole.  The  copper 
slabs  projected  outside  to  distances  of  about  an  inch,  and  each  bore  a bundle  of  100 
No.  18  copper  wires  soldered  to  it,  two  of  which,  connected  with  diagonally  opposite 
copper  slabs,  served  as  battery  electrodes,  while  the  other  two  were  clamped  to  the 
ends  of  the  conductor  to  be  tested.  The  four  slabs  have  only  to  be  connected  by 
two  conducting  arcs  parallel  to  one  pair  or  to  the  otlier  of  the  sides  of  the  square,  to 
send  the  current  one  way  or  the  other  through  the  conductor;  which  was  done  by 
means  of  two  heavy  brass  castings,  as  shown  in  the  diagram  (fig.  1).  This  com- 
mutator has  been  used  in  a considerable  variety  of  experiments,  and  has  been  found 
very  convenient.  It  gives  the  means  of  reversing  almost  instantaneously  a very 
powerful  current,  without  the  necessity  of  bending  any  of  the  electrodes  or  deranging 
any  part  of  the  apparatus,  and  the  conductors  involved  in  it  are  so  strong  that  it 
occasions  very  little  resistance. 

28.  As  the  supposed  dififerential  effect  had  appeared  not  to  be  increased  after  the 
first  five  minutes  of  the  flow  of  the  current  in  either  direction,  shorter  periods  of 
various  lengths  were  tried,  and  more  frequent  observations  of  the  thermometers  were 
made,  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  the  gradual  variation  of  the  temperature  in 
the  conductor,  towards  its  final  distribution  as  affected  by  the  current.  Four  more 
large  iron  cells  were  added  to  the  battery,  which  made  it  consist  in  all  of  eight 
cells,  arranged  as  a single  galvanic  element,  exposing  20  square  feet  of  iron  to  10^ 
square  feet  of  zinc  surface.  As  the  strength  of  current  thus  produced  would  be 
nearly  double  of  that  given  in  the  previous  experiment,  any  true  effect  of  the  kind 
sought  would  be  augmented  in  the  same  ratio ; and  might  be  expected,  both  on  this 
account  and  because  of  the  improved  system  of  observation,  to  become  much  more 
decided.  These  expectations,  however,  were  not  borne  out  by  the  results.  The  irre- 
gularities certainly  became  much  diminished,  but  with  these  the  differential  effect  on 
the  thermometers,  following  the  reversals  of  the  current,  either  quite  disappeared,  or 
became  very  much  less  considerable  than  that  which  had  been  observed  in  the  first 
experiment,  and  which  I afterwards  was  led  to  attribute  to  some  derangement  in  the 
position  of  the  conductor  occasioned  by  shifting  the  heavy  clamps  and  stiff  electrodes 
from  between  its  two  ends,  causing  the  thermometer  bulbs  to  alter  a little  in  their 
positions  in  the  hollows. 

29.  Many  experiments,  both  on  the  copper  and  iron  conductor,  were  made,  from 
October  1852  to  March  1853,  and  the  results  of  the  observations  (on  each  of  the 
two  principal  thermometers  either  every  half-minute,  or  every  quarter-minute,  during 
an  experiment  of  about  two  hours)  carefully  reduced;  with  much  labour  at  first 
when  arbitrary  scale  thermometers  were  employed,  but  afterwards  with  far  greater 
ease  when  centigrade  thermometers,  constructed  for  this  investigation  at  the  Kew 
Establishment,  were  received  and  brought  into  use. 

In  the  months  of  September  and  October  1853  the  investigation  was  taken  up 
again.  The  thermometric  observations  which  had  been  made  in  the  previously  com- 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  661 


pleted  experiments,  were  all  reduced,  on  the  plan  of  the  Tables  given  (§§  47  and  56) 
below  for  subsequent  experiments,  and,  when  thus  tested,  they  appeared  to  contain 
some  indications  of  the  effect  looked  for.  Several  more  sets  of  observations  of  the 
same  kind  were  therefore  executed,  but  with  various  modifications  of  details.  Still 
no  decided  result  could  be  obtained,  and  I concluded  from  all  the  experiments 
which  had  been  made,  that  the  anticipated  effect  must  be  too  small  to  be  discovered 
without  either  increasing  the  sensibility  of  the  test  or  diminishing  the  irregularities. 
I therefore  prepared  new  apparatus,  by  which  the  former,  and  as  much  as  possible  of 
the  latter  object,  would  be  attained. 


30  to  34.  Improvements  and  Modifications  of  Apparatus. 

30.  Instead  of  increasing  the  power  of  the  battery,  which  I reserved  as  a later 
resource,  if  necessary,  or  of  increasing  the  length  of  the  conductor  between  the  heater 
and  the  coolers  on  each  side,  which,  while  it  would  increase  in  the  same  ratio  the 
amount  of  the  effect  looked  for,  would  increase  in  a duplicate  ratio  the  time  that 
would  have  to  be  given  to  allow  it  to  reach  a stated  proportion  of  its  limiting  value, 
I had  conductors  made  of  about  the  same  length  as  the  others,  but  of  considerably 
less  section. 

31.  With  a view  to  perfecting  and  testing  the  action  of  the  heater  and  coolers, 
each  conductor  was  made  up  of  a number  of  slips  of  flat  sheet  metal,  bent  and  placed 
together,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  diagram  (fig.  2).  The  slips  were  held  firmly 


together  by  a vice,  while  collars  of  sheet  copper,  separated  from  them  by  vulcanized 
india-rubber,  were  soldered  round  them  in  the  places  for  the  sides  of  the  heater  and 
coolers.  Tin-plate  vessels,  as  shown  in  the  diagram,  were  then  put  together,  and 
soldered  to  these  collars.  The  interstices  between  the  slips  and  the  india-rubber,  and 

4 s 2 


662  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  xMETALS. 

the  metal  collars  round  the  india-rubber,  were  stopped  with  red  lead,  and  after  some 
trouble  were  made  water-tight.  Thus  the  heater  and  coolers,  without  any  metallic 
communication  with  the  conductor,  served  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  required  sup- 
plies of  hot  and  cold  water  round  it  in  the  proper  places.  The  spaces  for  the  ther- 
mometers were  firmly  stopped  below  with  corks  fitted  to  support  the  lower  ends  of 
the  bulbs  in  perfectly  fixed  positions  (fig.  3).  Little  collars  of  cork  were  put  round 
the  tubes  just  above  the  bulbs,  and  pushed  down  into  the  upper  end  of  the  hollow  so 
as  to  hold  the  thermometers  firmly  and  prevent  all  motion  of  their  bulbs. 

32.  Various  methods  of  heating  the  central  part  of  the  conductor  were  tried. 
First,  as  in  previous  experiments,  water  in  the  central  vessel  was  kept  boiling  either 
by  a gas-lamp  under  it,  or  by  steam  blown  into  it  from  a separate  boiler ; then  a com- 
plex system  with  a boiling  fountain,  by  which  I attempted  to  get  a perfectly  uniform 
stream  of  water  at  a constant  temperature,  as  little  short  of  boiling  as  possible,  to 
flowthrough  the  open  spaces  between  the  different  slips  within  the  central  vessel, 
was  used  during  several  experiments.  Lastly,  water  filling  the  eentral  vessel  was 
kept  at  a very  constant  temperature,  near  the  boiling-point,  by  a gas-lamp  below  it, 
regulated  by  a person  watching  the  indications  of  a thermometer  with  its  bulb  fixed 
in  the  middle  space  between  the  slips,  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  centre  of  the 
compound  conductor.  This  last  I found  to  be  by  far  the  best  plan,  and  I used  it  in 
all  subsequent  experiments  in  which  any  external  application  of  heat  to  the  conductor 
was  required. 

33.  Each  cooler  was  divided  into  four  compartments  by  partitions  of  tin-plate, 
stopping  all  communication  from  one  to  another,  exeept  through  the  spaces  between 
the  different  slips  composing  the  conductor.  A constant  stream  of  cold  water  (§  22), 
introduced  by  the  eompartment  nearest  to  the  middle  of  the  conductor,  and  drawn 
off  by  an  overflow  pipe,  from  a compartment  next  the  end,  was  thus  forced  to  flow 
all  through  among  the  different  slips,  and,  as  I found  by  placing  thermometers  in 
various  positions  in  each  compartment,  gave  a very  satisfactory  effect  in  fixing  the 
temperature  of  the  whole  section  of  the  conductor. 

34.  The  experiments  were  made  in  other  respects  exactly  as  described  above 
28  and  29) ; the  electric  current,  however,  not  being  often  again  kept  up  for  a 

longer  time  than  ninety-six  minutes,  since  the  fumes,  which  always  began  to  rise  from 
the  battery  after  the  current  had  been  flowing  for  about  an  hour,  began  after  half  an 
hour  more  to  occasion  great  irregularities  and  inconvenience  by  causing  the  liquid 
(which  sometimes  became  very  hot,)  to  foam  and  overflow  in  some  of  the  iron  cells. 
The  atmosphere  had  been  in  previous  experiments  sometimes  rendered  intolerable  for 
the  observers,  by  the  acid  vapour ; but  this  evil  was  done  away  by  covering  the  battery 
with  cloths  kept  moist  with  ammonia  and  water,  and  by  moistening  other  surfaces 
in  the  neighbourhood  in  the  same  way,  so  that  the  fumes  never  got  far  without 
meeting  vapour  of  ammonia  and  combining  into  white  clouds,  which  were  perfectly 
innocuous. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  663 


.35  to  38.  First  Experiments  with  Multiple  Sheet  Copper  Conductor. 

35.  The  copper  conductor  on  the  new  plan  was  first  used  in  an  experiment  on  the 
28th  of  October,  1853;  with  the  central  vessel  heated  by  steam,  and  a current  from 
the  eight  large  iron  cells  kept  flowing  for  seventy-two  minutes,  alternately  in  con- 
trary directions,  six  times  six  minutes  each  way.  The  thermometers  were  noted  every 
half-minute.  The  observations  thus  recorded,  when  thoroughly  examined,  indicated 
a slight  differential  cooling  effect  in  the  part  of  the  conductor  in  which  the  nominal 
current  was  from  cold  to  hot,  and  a heating  effect  where  it  passed  from  hot  to  cold ; 
that  is  to  say,  a convection  of  heat  in  the  nominal  direction  of  the  current,  or  as  I 
shall  call  it  to  avoid  circumlocution,  a convection  of  heat  by  vitreous  electricity. 

36.  A second  experiment  with  the  same  conductor  was  made  on  the  2nd  of 
November,  1853,  in  which  the  current  was  kept  flowing  for  ninety-six  minutes,  eight 
times  six  minutes  each  way,  and  the  thermometers  were  noted  every  quarter-minute. 
An  examination  of  the  recorded  results  indicated  still  the  same  kind  of  effect,  but  to  a 
much  smaller  extent.  Thus  the  final  average,  for  the  alteration  of  difference,  between 
the  temperatures  at  A and  B due  to  the  flow  of  the  current  for  six  minutes  in  one 
direction,  after  it  had  been  flowing  for  six  minutes  in  the  contrary  direction,  amounted 
to  "039°  Cent,  in  the  first  experiment,  and  to  only  ’0143°  in  the  second  experiment. 
A full  analysis  of  the  progress  of  the  differential  variation  of  temperature  during  the 
flow  of  the  current  is  given  in  Tables  I.  and  II.,  § 56  below,  and  shows  through  what 
fluctuations  the  final  alterations  are  reached.  The  temperatures,  at  the  ends  of  the 
successive  times  of  flow  in  one  direction  or  the  other,  and  the  evaluation  of  the  mean 
final  effect,  ai-e  shown,  for  each  experiment,  in  the  following  abridged  Tables. 

37.  The  observations  made  during  the  first  period  (that  is  the  time  from  starting 
till  the  second  reversal  of  the  current)  are  rejected  from  the  average  in  every  case  of 
experiments  on  the  new  conductors,  because  they  were  found  to  show  so  great 
absolute  elevations  of  temperature  (due  to  the  frictional  generation  of  heat  by  the 
current)  that  no  alteration  of  difference  between  the  thermometer  observed  during 
them  could  be  relied  on  as  an  effect  depending  on  the  direction  of  the  current. 


664  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUAIATIES  OF  METALS. 
38.  Conductor  composed  of  thirteen  slips  of  sheet  copper. 

Experiment  1.  October  28th,  1853. 


(Current  six  times  six  minutes  in  each  direc- 

Augmentations 

tion.)  Differences  of  temperatures  after 

of  differences 

six  minutes  of  current  entering 

from  middles  to 

\ 

By  end  next  A. 

By  end  next  B. 

ends  of  periods. 

: Periods. 

Ta-Tb  = D. 

Ta-Tb  = D'. 

D'-D. 

I. 

QO 

2-09 

o 

o • 

1 

11. 

2*07 

2-10 

-03 

; III. 

2*15 

2-11 

— •04 

! IV. 

2-16 

2-13 

~*03 

' V. 

2*01 

1*99 

—•02 

VI. 

1*80 

2-02 

•22 

I Means  for  five  periods.. 

2-038 

2-070 

•032 

1 

Augmentation  of  differ-'! 

ence  during  periods  > — *07 

included  

Deduct  average  augmentation  per  half- 1 

•007 

period  

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current 

...  0°-039, 

in  favour  of  Vitreous  Electricity. 

Experiment  11.  November  2nd,  1853. 


(Current  eight  times 

six  minutes  in  each  direction.)  Temperatures  and 

Augmentations  of 

1 

differences  of  temperature  after  six  minutes  of  current  entering 

differences  from 
middles  to  ends  of 

By  end  next  A. 

By  end  next  B. 

periods. 

Periods. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Ta-Tb  = D. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Ta-Tb  = D'- 

D'-D. 

I. 

53-79 

52-43 

i-36 

54-00 

52-70 

i-30 

O 

-•06 

II. 

53-68 

52-42 

1-26 

53-51 

52-23 

1-28 

•02 

, III. 

53-86 

52-57 

1-29 

53-79 

52-63 

1-16 

-•13 

IV. 

53-90 

52-60 

1-30 

53-99 

52-63 

1-36 

•06 

V. 

54-09 

.52-72 

1-37 

54-05 

52-68 

1-37 

•00 

i VI. 

55-10 

54-00 

1-10 

54-15 

52-86 

1-29 

•19 

VII. 

53-99 

52-80 

1-19 

54-10 

52-80 

1-30 

•11 

j VIII. 

54-00 

52-50 

1-50 

54-00 

52-60 

1-40 

— 10 

Means  for  seven  period> 

54-0886 

52-8014 

1-2871 

53-9414 

52-6329 

1-3086 

•02143 

Augmentation  of  difference  during  periods  included  *10 


Deduct  average  augmentation  per  half-period  *00714 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current  0°*01429, 


in  favour  of  Vitreous  Electricity. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  665 


§§  39  to  43.  Decisive  Experiments  with  Multiple  Sheet  Iron  Conductor. 

39.  These  experiments  seemed  therefore  on  the  whole  to  establish  a probability  in 
favour  of  the  convection  of  heat  by  the  so-called  positive  electricity,  when  a current 
is  kept  up  through  an  unequally  heated  conductor.  The  convective  effect,  if  of  this 
kind,  ought  (§  18)  to  be  less  in  iron  than  in  copper,  I therefore  had  little  expectation 
of  finding  an  indication  of  it  in  the  iron  conductor  which  (§  31)  had  been  in  the 
course  of  preparation ; but  as  soon  as  it  was  ready  for  use  I made  the  following 
experiments,  and  was  much  surprised  by  the  result,  which  became  manifest  before 
the  first  of  them  was  finished. 

40.  Conductor  composed  of  thirty  slips  of  sheet  iron. 


Experiment  III.  November  12th,  1853. 


(Current  six  times  eight  minutes  in 
differences  of  temperature  after 

By  end  next  A. 

each  direction.)  Temperatures  and 
eight  minutes  of  current  entering 

By  end  next  B. 

Augmentations  of 
differences  from 
middles  to  ends  of 
periods. 

Periods. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta=D. 

Ta- 

T 

Tb-Ta=D'. 

D'-D. 

I. 

51-43 

53-56 

2-13 

51-48 

53-49 

2-01 

0 

--12 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

51-62 

51- 73 

52- 01 
51-30 
51-14 

53-30 

53-26 

53-80 

53-00 

52-98 

1-68 

1-53 

1-79 

1-70 

1-84 

51- 41 

52- 03 
51-32 
51-00 
50-69 

5321 

53-87 

53-42 

52-95 

52-80 

1-80 

1- 84 

2- 10 

1- 95 

2- 11 

-12 

-31 

-31 

-25 

-27 

Means  for  five  periods.. 

51-56 

53-268 

1-708 

51-29 

53-25 

1-96 

-252 

Augmentation  of  difference  during  periods  included  ...  -10 

Deduct  average  augmentation  per  half-period -010 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current  0°-242, 

in  favour  of  Resinous  Electricity. 

666  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Experiment  IV.  November  19tb,  1853. 


(Current  seven  times  eight  minutes  i 
differences  of  temperature  after 

By  end  next  A. 

ti  each  direction.)  Temperatures  and 
;ight  minutes  of  current  entering 

By  end  next  B. 

Augmentations  of 
differences  from 
middles  to  ends  of 
periods. 

Periods. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta  = D- 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta- 

D'-D. 

I. 

5^50 

59-30 

i-80 

58-02 

59-84 

i-82 

°-02 

IL* 

48-20 

51-15 

2-95 

46-82 

49-79 

2-97 

-02 

III. 

46-49 

49-13 

2-64 

47-01 

49-95 

2-94 

•30 

IV. 

48-41 

51-69 

3-28 

48-31 

51-99 

3-68 

•40 

V. 

48-36 

51-74 

3-38 

48-18 

51-80 

3-62 

•24 

VI. 

48-00 

51-20 

3-20 

48-00 

51-49 

3-49 

•29 

Vll. 

48-31 

51-51 

3-20 

48-06 

51-60 

3-54 

•34 

Means  for  five  periods.. 

49-3243 

52-2457 

3-14 

49-20000 

52-35143 

3-454 

•314 

Augmentation  of  difference  during  periods  included...  0'57 

Deduct  average  augmentation  per  half-period *057 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current  0‘'*2575 


in  favour  of  Resinous  Electricity. 


41.  A full  analysis  of  the  differential  variations  throughout  each  of  these  experi- 
ments, derived  from  observations  of  the  thermometer  taken  every  quarter  of  a 
minute,  was  made  in  each  case  immediately  after  the  conclusion  of  the  experiment 
(see  Tables  I.  and  II.  47  below),  and  was  sufficient  to  convince  me  that  the  true 
effect  in  the  iron  conductor  is  of  the  kind  indicated  by  the  preceding  summary  of 
the  effects  apparent  at  the  ends  of  the  periods. 

42.  To  try  whether  or  not  the  very  considerable  effect  thus  discovered  depended 
on  some  inequality  in  the  conductor  itself,  I made  an  experiment  on  the  25th  of 
November  1853  exactly  like  the  two  preceding,  with  the  exception  that  the  middle 
vessel  previously  used  as  a heater  was  filled  with  cold  water  at  the  commencement. 
The  current  was  sent  six  times  eight  minutes  in  each  direction  ; the  thermometers  were 
noted  every  quarter  of  a minute;  and  the  observations  were  reduced  and  compared 
in  the  usual  way.  The  result  gave  no  effect  of  the  kind  observed  in  the  preceding 
experiments,  but  (probably  because  of  a temporary  failure  in  the  water-supply  for  the 
coolers)  showed,  on  the  contrary,  a deviation  in  the  mean  difference  of  temperature 
amounting  to  °‘029  Cent.,  being  about  a tenth  part  of  the  amount  of  that  effect,  but 
in  the  opposite  way  according  to  the  direction  of  the  current  through  the  conductor. 
Before  the  experiment  was  concluded  boiling  water  was  poured  through  the  central 
vessel  and  left  filling  it,  but  with  no  lamp  below.  The  two  thermometers  (A  and  B) 
being  thus  raised  to  about  27°  Cent.,  the  current  was  again  started  and  was  sent 
through  the  conductor  for  three  times  four  minutes  in  each  direction.  The  thermo- 
meters rose  each  nearly  2°,  but  fell  again  by  nearly  5^°  before  the  conclusion.  The 
mean  differential  result,  whether  from  these  three  periods  (amounting  to  °‘05  Cent.), 

* Rejected  because  of  a failure  in  the  water-supply  through  the  coolers  during  the  whole  of  Period  I. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  667 


or  from  the  last  two  of  them  without  the  first  (°‘025  Cent.),  was  of  the  same  kind  as 
in  the  first  two  experiments.  This  experiment  then  conclusively  demonstrated  that 
the  effect  previously  discovered  was  really  owing  to  the  heat  in  the  central  part  of 
the  conductor,  and  not  to  any  inequality  in  the  metal  of  the  conductor  itself,  nor  to 
any  accidental  disturbing  agency. 

43.  It  was  thus  established,  that  the  Resinous  Electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  an 
iron  conductor. 

^§44  and  45.  Experiment  with  Copper  Conductor,  repeated. 

44.  The  very  small  effect  I had  discovered  of  the  opposite  kind  in  the  copper  con- 
ductor required  confirmation  ; and  indeed  the  analysis  of  the  progress  of  the  varia- 
tion (see  Tables  I.  and  II.  § 56  below)  was  so  unsatisfactory,  that  I felt  it  quite  an 
open  question,  whether  it  was  the  true  effect,  or  merely  an  accidental  coincidence  of 
irregularities;  and  I thought  it  improbable  that  contrary  effects  should  really  exist  in 
copper  and  in  iron.  I made  on  the  26th  of  November  another  experiment  on  the 
copper  conductor,  with  the  current  flowing  six  times  eight  minutes  each  way  (instead 
of  eight  times  six  minutes,  as  before,  because  the  analysis  seemed  to  show  that  the 
effects  which  had  chanced  to  appear  in  the  average  results  of  the  six  minutes  might 
disappear  with  longer  periods*)  ; but  I got  still  a very  small  result  of  the  same  kind. 
The  full  analysis  (Table  III.)  was  equally  unsatisfactory  with  those  of  the  two  pre- 
ceding experiments  on  the  same  conductor.  The  following  numbers  show  the  tem- 
peratures at  the  reversals,  and  the  final  result,  as  in  the  previous  abridged  tables. 

45.  Conductor  composed  of  thirteen  slips  of  sheet  copper. 


Experiment  V.  November  26,  1853. 


(Current 

six  times  eight  minutes  in 

each  direction.)  Temperatures  and 

Diminutions 

differences  of  temperature  after  eight  minutes  of  current  entering 

of  differences 
from  middles  to 

Periods. 

By  end  next  A. 

By  end  next  B. 

ends  of  periods. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta=D. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta=D'. 

D'-D. 

I. 

50-88 

52-78 

i-90 

50-88 

52-72 

1-92 

--02 

II. 

50-64 

52-49 

1-85 

50-53 

52-32 

1-79 

-I--06 

III. 

50-38 

52-29 

1-91 

50-01 

52-00 

1-99 

— -08 

IV. 

50-14 

52-08 

1-94 

49-90 

51-83 

1-93 

+ -01 

V. 

49-60 

51-61 

2-01 

49-48 

51-52 

2-04 

— -03 

VI. 

49-11 

51-22 

2-11 

48-80 

50-92 

2-12 

— -01 

Means  for  five  periods 

49-974 

51-938 

1-964 

49-744 

51-718 

1-974 

--01 

Augmentation  of  difference  during  periods  included...  *20 

Add  average  augmentation  per  half-period  -l-0'02 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current  -Ol, 


in  favour  of  Vitreous  Electricity. 


* I now  believe  that  a true  effect,  amounting  to  from  °‘01  to  °'02,  was  really  reached  in  three  or  four 
minutes,  and  that  in  the  latter  parts  of  the  half-periods  there  was  no  sensible  augmentation  of  this  effect,  but 
MDCCCLVI.  4 T 


668  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

46.  Another  experiment  was  also  made  on  the  new  iron  conductor,  and  results  as 
decisive  as  those  in  the  first  two  experiments  were  obtained.  The  following  abridged 
Table  shows  sufficiently  the  character  of  the  effect  demonstrated  ; and  the  analysis  of 
the  progress  of  variation  is  given  in  the  full  table  (Table  III.  § 47)  below. 

Experiment  VI.  December  2,  1853. 


Conductor  composed  of  thirty  slips  of  sheet  iron. 


Periods. 

(Current  six  times  eight  minutes  in 
differences  of  temperature  after  e 

By  end  next  A. 

each  direction.)  Temperatures  and 
ight  minutes  of  current  entering 

By  end  next  B. 

Augmentations 
of  differences 
from  middles  to 
ends  of  periods. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta=D. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta=D'. 

D'-D. 

I. 

54-76 

56-33 

0 

1-57 

5°4-80 

56-66 

1-86 

°-29 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

54- 97 

55- 01 
55-22 
55-31 
55-12 

56-68 

56-70 

56- 90 

57- 08 
57-00 

1-71 

1-69 

1-68 

1-77 

1-88 

54-89 

54- 93 

55- 08 

55-07 

54-84 

56-80 

56- 86 

57- 10 
57-12 

57-03 

1-91 

1- 93 

2- 02 
2-05 

2-19 

-20 

-24 

-34 

-28 

-31 

Means  for  five  periods 

55-126 

56-872 

1-746 

54-962 

56-982 

2-020 

-274 

Augmentation  of  differenceTg  — T^during  included  periods  -33 

Deduct  average  augmentation  per  half-period -033 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current  0°-241, 

in  favour  of  Resinous  Electricity. 

47.  The  following  Tables  show  the  progress  of  variation  of  the  difference  between 
the  temperatures  of  the  two  tested  localities  (A,  B)  of  the  iron  conductor,  during 
each  of  the  three  regular  experiments  referred  to  above,  as  derived  directly  from 
the  quarter-minute  or  half-minute  observations  actually  made  in  the  course  of  each 
experiment. 

only  irregular  fluctuations,  sometimes  counteracting  and  reversing  the  true  effect,  but  generally  only  diminish- 
ing it  and  increasing  it  alternately,  and  always  maintaining,  during  the  whole  latter  half  of  the  aggregate  of 
the  half-periods,  an  average  deviation  of  the  kind  noted  as  the  final  result.  A careful  consideration  of  the 
Tables  I.,  II.  and  III.  given  below,  § 56,  for  the  copper  conductor  and  of  their  graphical  representation  (see 
Diagram,  § 57),  is,  I think,  sufficient  to  establish  this  view.  [April  9,  1856.] 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  669 


Mean  augmentation  of  difference  in  favour  of) 

thermometer  next  entering  current  J 

Differences  of  augmentation  in  equal  intervals  I 

from  beginning  and  middle  of  a period,  summed  1 

for  five  periods J 

Differences  of  augmentation  during  correspond- 1 

ing  half-minutes  of  first  and  second  halves  of  > 

a period,  summed  for  five  periods J 

Augmentations  during  half-minutes,  summed  for  \ 

five  periods j 

^ Jri  b_l 

Augmentations  of  difference  Tg  — Tj^ 

(in  hundredths  of  a degree  Cent.),  during 

Periods 

§. 

O 

O 

o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

1 1 
to  ^ to  O 

o 

> First  half- 

1 1 

05  1 to  Or  to  O 

j iiilllUl/C  AIL  A/UlICIJt 

1 entering  by  end  next 

1 min. 

o 

O 

U) 

CO 

to 

CO 

CO 

to 

1 1 1 1 1 

00  CO  I—  H-  kt^ 

1 

> Second  half- 

1 1 

VJ  1 o CO  to  to 

W entering  by  end  next 

b9|M 

§. 

5* 

o 

o 

CJi 

Cl 

•M 

to 

CO 

1 1 1 1 
k—  CJt  to  05  to 

t© 

> Third  half- 

oi  j 05  o to  re  --1 

1 bJ  entering  by  end  next 

2 min. 

o 

6 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 

to 

CO 

1 I 1 1 1 

CO  CO  CO  to  05 

o 

> Fourth  half- 

1 

CO  1 CO  CO  C;rT 

^ j W entering  by  end  next 

bO 

g_ 

o 

to 

CO 

to 

CO 

CO 

o 

i 

05 

1 1 1 1 1 

kii.^  05  CO  to  — 

t© 

D*  Fifth  half- 

1 

rfi.  1 — tn  tfk.  Co  H- 

o 

ra  entering  by  end  next 

3 min. 

o 

GO 

00 

CO 

1 1 1 1 1 I 

00  1 ^ Cji  ^ O ^ 

^ j i®"  Sixth  half- 

05 

+ 

1 

05  O O’  ^ 

minute  ot  current 
entering  by  end  next 

9^ 

5 

p 

I—* 

to 

a 

1 

1 1 1 1 

O to  — 05  to 

o 

> Seventh  half- 

Or  [ O CO  rfi-  CO  Cn 

oj  1 W entering  by  end  next 

4 min. 

p 

CO 

o 

CO 

o 

05 

1 1 1 1 1 

CO  1 ^ H-  o o ^ 

^ j >■  Eighth  half- 

00 

CO 

ktk.  O Cn  to  to 

. 1 minnte  of  cm  lent 

,L  1 entering  by  end  next 

»!- 

3. 

5* 

o 

CO 

to 

CO 

to 

to 

III  ii 

05  1 O CO  to  CO  to 

1 > Ninth  half- 

CO 

III  1 III 

1 O to  O — 1 I— 

entering  by  end  next 

5 min.  | 

p 

CO 

CO 

•<1 

Cf 

1 

CO 

le 

SB  i-  to  !-■  1 Ui 

1 1 1 

o k—  to  kft^  Oi  1 k-- 

Tenth  half- 

— minute  of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

p 

tOlM 

5 

5* 

o 

to 

bd 

to 

to 

to 

1 

05 

1 1 I 

O CO  o CO  o 

> Eleventh  half- 

Tninnte  nf  current 

k— • 

- itf.oMkeroi-i“  entering  by  end  next 

6 min. 

o 

CO 

to 

CO 

1 

Mil  \ > Twelfth  half- 

o ^ to  k-  t©  1 ^ 1 • 

fco 

CO 

1 1 

k^  CO  05  kU.  to 

1 

iilillUtO  All  AyUllA/lll> 

® entering  by  end  next 

a 

bSlM 

g 

5' 

0 

to 

to 

CO 

to 

to 

CO 

[ 

CO 

1 1 1 1 
to  1 1--  to  N-  CJI  — 

1 > Thirteenth  half- 

p 

111  {1 
— 1 o M re  o © 1 re 

? entering  by  end  next 

1 

5‘ 

o 

CO 

to 

CO 

CO 

1 j II 

1 o o ^ CO  cji 

1 j j>  Fourteenth  half- 

p 

|i-  — coN-^liil?^  entering  by  end  next 

5 

5* 

0 

to 

CO 

CO 

I 

to 

1 1 1 
to  to  t©  CO  •-* 

1 j Fifteenth  half- 

p 

— entering  by  end  next 

8 rain,  j 

p 

ti 

td 

to 

to 

[ 

to 

o 

1 1 

N-  o — O CO  1 kiik. 

>■  Sixteenth  half- 

p 

00 

1 1 

o Oi  N-  rfi.  o 1 — 

entering  by  end  next 

fu'' 

3 

2 

5 

d 

Ul 

p 


3 

S: 

cT 

2. 

5’ 

> 

CO 

o 


5’  “73 
P P 


►=2  cz) 


1 1 

O' 

II 

CD 

o 

p 

e— 

P 

6 

iZ 

-3 

o 

cr 

CD 

u 

03 

p 

tr— 

II 

CD 

II 

Or 

lO 

o 

P 

3 

GO 

Q- 

O 

O 

O 

O 

?E 

o5 


P 


Cn 


p 

U> 

JW 

td  '* 


oo 

p 

00 

p 


^/3 

fD 

P 


o 

'-Id 

p 


p 

a> 

3 

“C 

p 

p 

c 

CD 

05 

o 

S 

D 

5' 

op 


S’ 

I-S 

o 

a 

crp 


cn- 

S' 

fD 

O 

o 

p 

cn 


H 

> 

w 

r 

m 


g 

o 

a! 

o. 

< 

3 

p 

o 

p 

t-i- 

p 

o 

1—1 

o 

b3 

3 

3- 

3 

3" 

V. 

O 

00 

O 

pi 

oo 

3 

O 

P 

o 

3 

CL 

" 

SST" 

O 

3 

<rr 

TD 

O 

—5 

P' 

o 

o 

o 

3 

cr 

*3 

O 

in 

in 

3 

(Tt- 

3 

&. 

P 

O 

3 

cr 

3 

C/3 

3 

O 

“5° 

CC 

i-i* 

O 

sheet  iron. 

4 T 2 


670  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Table  II.  November  19th,  1853,  Con- 
Middle  of  conductor  in  water  kept 
Streams  of  water  at  temperature 


Temperatures  at  middle  points  A,  B of  the  parts  between  heater  and 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

1 s ^ 

sL  ^ 

1 e 4^ 
^ ^ 

1 s 

(D 

S 

•4^ 

4>  S 

-1^ 

a> 

fl 

•4-a 

. ° a 
a C 'a 

•4^ 

A (u  a 
1 ti-d 

. -1^ 
c3  g a 
1 

• c ^ 
^ c 

o)  £1 

-p  h ts 

, "c 

U 4? 

-2^  G 

-4-3 

X 

s 

-4-3 

J.  = c 
-t-  G ^ 

a 2 

“ s ” 

^ 'S 

-u.  X 
.*  e 4> 
aj  GJ  ^ 

« S3  ^ 

4i  ^ 

5 G 'd 

Augmentations  of  difference  Tg— 

t; 

3 C 

J 4) 

=3 

3 S 
J 4) 

o 

a 

4> 

IS 

•D 

t 3 a 
o <u 

t-  ?3  fl 
o c; 

03  3 C 

3 a; 

s g g 

t3 

O 

c 

Jd  =3  S3 
2 o 4J 

3 ^ S 
5-  a <“ 

«J  s c 

p CJ  <D 

® S S5 

CT"  u OJ 

(in  hundredths  of  a degree  Cent.),  during 

>> 

=^o 

x 

CT"  O ^ 

cr  o ^ 

JS  ° ^ 

cr*  o 

pD 

j:  "o  ^ 

o 32 

•5 

Periods 

^ .s 

pCH  >- 

a “ 6c 
O g a 

" a| 

^ .2  60 
•a  3 a 
£ a 'C 

“is  <u 

S-S 

o a 
fe-g 

bO 

.S 

‘G 

OJ 

-I-* 

A 

,2^  fcJD 

^ s s 

£ c 'G 

a-g 

:S  ^ bj3 
X C3  .2 

^ S 

a 2 60 
a g a 

S.S  -g 

“ s| 

■5  a bo 

'S,  a a 
60  g -r; 

f^a  .2 
a 

rC  (U 
-f*  -4-3 

C P 

iS-S 

s 

be 

fl 

2 60 
£ §■! 

I 2 to 
> a.a 

S3 

';5  4? 

w a-s 

^ fcD 
=5  £ 
fe  S3  ’G 

HS| 

g 2 60 
2a® 

■S  -I  'B 

Eh  ^ a 

<U 

4) 

4> 

0) 

4) 

•u 

0) 

4) 

a> 

4) 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

I. 

-3 

-2 

-I 

-1 

- 4 

-2 

- 4 

-1 

4 

-2 

-4 

4 

3 

1 

-1 

2 

2 

— 2 

1 

1 

-1 

2 

1 

-1 

-3 

1 

II* 

3 

5 

-1 

1 

0 

-5 

6 

4 

5 

-2 

15 

1 

7 

0 

10 

-2 

38 

2 

-6 

9 

8 

-5 

0 

0 

13 

-1 

III. 

0 

1 

-2 

3 

- 3 

-3 

- 1 

1 

-1 

1 

0 

-3 

-1 

5 

-3 

2 

- 4 

-2 

-2 

3 

1 

2 

-2 

-1 

0 

0 

IV. 

0 

-3 

0 

1 

3 

3 

- 3 

2 

5 

2 

-1 

3 

4 

4 

5 

1 

- 4 

0 

6 

1 

-3 

2 

4 

4 

4 

2 

V. 

I 

0 

-1 

0 

- 4 

3 

- 3 

2 

-2 

1 

0 

3 

-1 

1 

-1 

1 

- 1 

1 

0 

1 

-1 

1 

-2 

0 

-3 

1 

VI. 

0 

2 

-3 

2 

- 5 

3 

- 2 

3 

0 

1 

-3 

1 

-2 

3 

-6 

3 

- 1 

0 

-2 

1 

-1 

1 

-2 

-1 

-1 

2 

VII, 

0 

1 

1 

0 

- 3 

1 

- 2 

0 

-2 

2 

— 2 

3 

-1 

3 

0 

2 

- 1 

2 

-1 

4 

-2 

3 

-1 

2 

-2 

1 

Augmentations  during  quarter-minutes,  summed  1 
for  five  periods  J 

1 

1 

-5 

6 

-12 

7 

-11 

8 

0 

7 

-6 

7 

-1 

16 

-5 

9 

-11 

1 

1 

10 

-6 

9 

-3 

4 

-2 

6 

Differences  of  augmentation  during  correspond-  ] 

ing  quarter-minutes  of  first  and  second  halves  1 

0 

11 

19 

19 

7 

13 

17 

14 

12 

9 

15 

7 

8 

of  a period,  summed  for  five  periods J 

Differences  of  augmentation  in  equal  intervals’! 

from  beginning  and  middle  of  a period,  summed  i- 

0 

11 

30 

49 

56 

69 

86 

100 

112 

121 

136 

143 

151 

for  five  periods  J 

Mean  augmentation  of  difference  in  favour  of  1 
thermometer  next  entering  current  / 

°-000 

°011 

°030 

°-049 

'^•056 

°-069 

°-086 

O 

O 

o 

°-112 

°-121 

°'136 

°-143 

°-151 

U 

min 

If 

min. 

2-2- 

min 

2| 

min 

3j 

min. 

4 

After  the  conclusion  of  this  experiment  the  current  was  started  in  one  direction  and  broken,  and  | 
effect,  when  the  heater  and  coolers  were  kept  regular,  on  either  thermometer  amounted  to  about  1°'4,  i 


* Period  II,  rejected  because  the  water-supply,  which  had  failed  during  the  whole  of  Period  I., 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  671 


diictor  composed  of  thirty  slips  of  sheet  iron, 
boiling  by  steam  blown  into  it. 

6°  running  through  the  coolers. 

coolers Initial  Ta=56°-44,  Tb=58°-28  ; Final  Ta=48°-06,  Tb=51°-59. 


14. 


15. 


U ^ X 

2 a S 
£ 


C3 

rP  S -S 

g 

A.  B. 


£ ® rO 

S S MJ 
£ s S 
a 

E'il 

<u 

A.  B. 


16. 


1 X 

" g a 

I S'g 

5^  O 03 

g^  fco 

(U  5 C 

'I  -2 

</2  P ^ 

03 

A.  B.' 


17. 


I a I 
S 

3 in  'a 
c?  3 a 
o a 

c o ^ 

"S  =<  .5 
S a C 
"a  .2 

<u  a ^ 

M S 

A.  B. 


18. 


3 

II  ^ 

.a  a 'S 

g 

A.  i B. 


19. 


^ 

a a 

CJ  P 


03  03 

.P  ^ 

« Z'° 

03  P be 

p 

03  C S 
.2  'g  -2^ 

Z ^ g 

A.  B. 


15  £ 

CS  u,  'P 
P ZS  p 
03  03 

*3  0-0 
•P  P bo 
p p .5 

03  C Jh 

5^*3  ^ 
H « c 

03 

A.  B. 


20. 


21. 


h ^ X 

■2  a 2 

Is  a a 
3 "5 

o'  3 a 
03  03 

■^3  a 

a 3 'S 

U -3  (D 

^ S ^ 
H S 

A.  B. 


22. 


a a <D 

age 

a'^'a 

-a  g £ 

« p Xi 

^ p be 

>.P.S 

p '3 

H ® 

A.  B. 


23. 


«5  P ^ 

P “"P 

p C 
rd  P ® 
is  *^5  >» 
^ P X 

S &D 

>»'5  p 

C p ‘S 

Sp  ® 

^ ^ p 

A,  B. 


24. 


03 


03 


3 S P 
Si  S 'a 
3 a 
al  a a 
e "3  >. 
3 a as 

"2  .2 
A.  a .a 
P *c 

|a| 

A.  B. 


25. 


-2  3 a 

£ s “ 

p ^ ^ 


03  03 


1“ 


? a| 

Eh  S 
A.  B. 


26. 


03  ^ 

-H-  e 03 

^ P cs 
cs  OJ 

Sh  ^ ^ 

^ p p 

^ p p 

'i-i 

« o ^ 
.2  Ml 

(>.  3 a 
a .H '? 

a *3  .2 
Eh  a 

A.  B. 


27. 


S £ « 

gi  ^ 

X P P 

^ 03  03 

i o.S' 

.5 

^ P >-i 

e 'P 

03  S "g 
^ 03 

H 

A.  B. 


28. 


03 


*3  P g 

cd  03  H 

111 

.a  o « 


a -3  a 
S S r 
^ a 
H 

A.  B 


29. 


30. 


03  _ 5.^ 

e P 

cd  03  P 

S'S'g 

.a  S 5 

P 0,0 
^ .S  faD 
t>>  P P 
-g  ^P 

I S g 

H 

A.  B. 


g g 

^ tD 
P P 
P 'S 
*P  P 


31. 


03  ' 


03 


B. 


>H  J*' 

«d  C rrt 

=>  3 a 
O'  g £ 

"cc  'a  ^ 

” a ai 
'S  2 M) 
£>a.a 
.2.5  g 
a!  a 2 
H - g 

A.  B. 


32. 


03 


P . 
cd  S ^ 

rp  03  O 

P .£ 


03 


A. 

0 

-4 


- 4 
4 


-3  2 
-2  -1 


-1 

2 


0 

-12 


0 


-3-1 
-2  5 


-1 


1 -1 
0 16 


-1 

2 


2 
-11 


- 3 

- 3 

- 1 
- 2 

1 


0 

5 

0 

-2 

-1 


1 

1 

-1 

-1 

2 


2 

2 

-1 

-1 

0 


-10 


-4 


15 


-1 


-1 


12 


-2 


-5 


-1 


- 4 


-1 


11 


19 


-3 


13 


-8 


152 


163 


171 


190 


°152 


3^  min. 


°-163 


•171 


°-190 


187 


•187 


200 


206 


213 


205 


213 


219 


222 


°-200 


°206 


°-213 


°-205 


°-213 


°-219 


3f  min. 


4 min. 


41  min. 


41  min.  4fmin 


5 min. 


51  min. 


54  min. 


5f  min.  6 min. 


°-222 


61  min. 


-2 

1 

0 

3 

0 


-1 

3 

0 

0 

-1 


-3 
2 

1 -1 


0 

-3 


-2 

1 

0 

1 

0 


-3 

-1 

0 

-2 

0 


2 
- 2 
0 

- 1 
1 


-3  8 


-7 


- 4 


-3 

4 

-1 

-2 

-1 

-3 


-1 


11 


-3 


10 


221 


’•221 


232 


“•232 


241 


238  243 


61  min. 


6f  min. 


’•241 


7 min. 


°-238 


71mm. 


’•243 


71  min. 


253 


257 


’•253 


7f  min. 


°-257 


8 min. 


Started  in  the  other  direction  and  broken,  several  times ; and  it  was  found  that  its  absolute  heating 


1 only  commenced  giving  a stream  through  the  coolers  at  the  commencement  of  the  second  period. 


672  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS 


Table  III.  December  2nd,  1853.  Con-  [. 

Middle  of  conductor  at  I 
Streams  of  water  at  temperature 

Temperatures  at  middle  points  A,  B of  the  parts  between  heater  and  '} 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

^ <V 

1 1-  <3 

4-9  X 

-w  X 

^ "x 

^ X 
^ <u 

X 

.*  - (V 

"x 

1 ^ a; 

4-9 

^ X 

J-  X 
. - C 

^ X 
c 

;h 

X 

c 

V = 

V — 

53  c 

5 c 

53  c 

c 

U 

<v 

J ^ 

L>  S 

it  § C 

S_i  .n  ^ 

if 

5 c 

nj  C ^ 

c 

3 

Augmentations  of  difference  Tg— 

5 c 

J 

- '3 
3 C 
J (U 

H 

3 C 

<V 

t: 

3 3 
J <3J 

(U 

3 3 

J u 

cj  ; 

- 

3 3 

J ^ 

C3 

3 

- 'C 

3 3 

J CJ 

■e  ' 
^ , 

3 S 

J <3 

« C'^ 

t:  3 3 
ed  u 

-2  ^ T3 

b =3  2= 
C3  o C 

« 5 a 
s.  s s 

2 ^ 
c3  3 3 
3 C C 

c5  t 

3 3 
cr 

3 

c 

(in  hundredths  of  a degree  Cent.),  during 

3 %-i  >. 

-C3  ® 

O 

3"  O ^ 

3*  o ^ 

^ O ^ 

^'13  >» 
- ® ^ 

g-'s.g* 

>> 

-3  O jD 

>% 

^ o 

_a  <4- 

C c 

>» 

,£2 

Periods 

■*■=»  fcf, 

.i:  ^ .£ 
^ E ^ 

3 ^ to 
o ^ s 
Q 5 T* 

•3  s .5 

tc 

3 3 E 

O C S-. 

-S  ^ fac 

^ 3 ,2 

.3 

^ to 
X 3 .S 

w .S  O 

■g  3 fcO 

> 3 ‘S 

01  •—  CSJ 

^ ^ fcD 
^.1 1 

:S  " tc 
= 3 .S 
z -S  53 

■5  if  fco 

S g-E 

H -5  <u 

3 <5^  to 

" 2-S 

« .a  o3 

« to 
*c  3 .S 

>.s  S3 

3 <1. 
c -b 
2 = 
t-  c 

to 

•5 

c 

5 "c 

■“  y a 

- "3 

s 

^ "s 

3^ 

- "c 

3 

*-  3 

H S 

- 'c 

H ^ 

(D 

<V 

0) 

O) 

<3 

O) 

Cl 

c 

c 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

I. 

0 

0 

1 

2 

0 

1 

-2 

2 

-1 

1 

3 

1 

-] 

2 

0 

2 

2 

2 

0 

2 

-2 

2 

3 

3 

-1 

1 

II. 

4 

0 

-] 

0 

-2 

1 

-1 

3 

-2 

1 

-1 

1 

-2 

2 

-3 

1 

0 

1 

-1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

-4 

2 

III. 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

-1 

1 

0 

1 

-1 

0 

0 

2 

0 

3 

0 

3 

0 

3 

-1 

3 

-1 

2 

-2 

1 

IV. 

0 

1 

0 

1 

-2 

0 

1 

0 

-2 

1 

-4 

1 

-3 

3 

-2 

2 

0 

3 

-2 

2 

-2 

1 

-2 

2 

-1 

0 

V. 

0 

1 

-1 

-3 

0 

3 

-1 

4 

-1 

(» 

0 

-1 

-1 

4 

-3 

5 

-1 

] 

-2 

2 

-1 

1 

-1 

2 

-2 

-1 

VI. 

0 

0 

-1 

0 

0 

1 

-1 

1 

-1 

0 

-1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

2 

-1 

1 

-1 

2 

0 

2 

0 

3 

-2 

0 

Augmentations  during  quarter-minutes,  summed  1 
for  five  periods  f 

5 

2 

-3 

-2 

-4 

5 

-3 

9 

-6 

3 

-7 

1 

-6 

11 

-8 

13 

— 2 

9 

-6 

9 

-4 

7 

-3 

9 

-11 

2 

Differences  of  augmentation  during  correspond-  “I 

ing  quarter-minutes  of  first  and  second  halves  1 

— 

3 

1 

9 

12 

9 

8 

17 

21 

11 

15 

11 

12 

13 

of  a period,  summed  for  five  periods J 

Differences  of  augmentation  in  equal  intervals  ] 

from  beginning  and  middle  of  a period,  summed  1 

3 

2 

+7 

19 

28 

36 

53 

74 

85 

100 

111 

123 

136 

for  five  periods J 

Mean  augmentation  of  difference  in  favour  ofl 
thermometer  next  entering  current  j 

°'003 

°-002 

“•007 

°019 

°-028 

°-036 

°-053 

O 

O 

O 

6 

GO 

0 

O 

o 

“111 

°-123 

°-136 

1 min. 

IJii 

11  n 

Ur 

2*  n 

.34  min. 

PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS 


673 


ductoi*  composed  of  thirty  slips  of  sheet  iron, 
temperature  95°  Cent. 

7°’5  running  through  the  coolers. 

coolers Initial  Ta=54°-20,  Tb=55°70  ; Final  Ta=54°-84,  Tb=57°-03. 


u. 


I 

« C 2 

•4J  ^ S 

cc  S -tS 
Pa  a 

O ^ 

§ ,2  to 

0)  p c 

c 'C 

P *5 

r®  ® C 


A.  B. 


15. 


hi  V QJ 

« S'? 

g.5  5 
o ^ 
« if  50 

S s.S 
«.S  S3 
S £ c 


i.  B. 


-2 


16. 


cS  ^ 

a ^ 

cr 


_ a 

o o 
^ {>» 

if  50 
3 C 


17. 


^ o o 

£-0.0 

5^  if  50 
is  -S  s 

S.s  'g 

£ as 

M a) 


18. 


A.  B.  A.  B. 


-1 


<u  to 

S 3 .5 

J3  S 

•SPg 


A.  B 


19. 


s fc:  '3 
a,  3 3 

3*  o <u 

>» 

« 

§ 2 ho 
3 S C 
D C 'C 

.a  q a 

« q 


A.  B.  A.  B 


20. 


3 q 2 

-g  ^ 3 

cs  b 

a ^ a 

o 
n ^ 

o 


if  50 


O) 


® a -r 

a;>  C 


-1 


21. 


a 

a a 


(a 


50 


^3  = 

a a ’C 

<l>  <D 

^ fi  -g 

H Qi 


A.  B. 


-1 


22. 


« 

2m  ^ 

Jh  T3 

3 q 


M 2 

5“  q S 
3 c -2 
2 a q 
p o 
H 

A.  B. 


23. 


0^  JJ 

TS  a; 
Cl  C 
cS  3 3 

3 2 TS 

O'  q q 

5 

^ o ^ 
if  50 

3 .2 

fi  .£  S3 

gas 

H " 

A.  B. 


24. 


I 5 3 
q'C'O 
r-  3 q 
.3  q q 

"q  3h 

q o j2 

=2  3 so 
ti.  3 .3 
-3  q 3 

3 -q  3 

gas 

A.  B. 


-1 


25. 


!3  <u 

§ b' 

cr  C5 
h-i  o ^ 


Vi 


O) 


"c  c! 

*S  if 

g:  a S 

H '2-^ 


A.  B 


-1 


26. 


“ q 3 

S E 3 

S.^'3 

3^  q q 

^ O q 

■s  'q 

X o ^ 
if  50 

.s 

(i  fl 


A.  B. 


-1 


27. 


^ <U 

o a> 
C ^ 

^ ^ bO 

I 2-S 

4.^  .mM  OJ 
1=3  fl  is 
0^  " S3 
^ O 

H 

A.  B. 


-] 


0 


28. 


la  3 “ 
3 .3  == 

^ o 0) 

s 't?  ^ 

To°.3 


3-3  3 

g s s 

t>  OJ 

H 

A.  B. 


29. 


(S3  « C 

^ =S  J= 
42  « a> 
O ,.o 
^ 50 

>»  a .S 

^ fl  ^ 

^ a -2 

CJ  S3 

H “ 

A.  B. 


-] 


30. 


I -u 

Jh  a ^ 

^ 2 

§ 3 C 

gn  « 

.=3  O 


if  50 
■42  -g  p 
.2  p ‘C 

43  4) 

Has 

3 


A.  B. 


-1 


31. 


« 3 g 
q « 
q h 
3 q C 

q'  q)  <u 

“S  ‘S  ^ 
S °3= 
'S  if  tc 
^ 3 .3 
54  P 
.2  •-  4^ 

-3  a s 

H ” § 


A.  B. 


32. 


A.  B. 


0 


-1 

0 

-1 

-3 

-1 


0 

-2 

1 

1 

0 


-6 


-6 


-2 


-5 


-1 


0 

-] 

-1 

1 

0 

-1 


0 

1 

1 

-1 

-2 

-1 


0 

-1 

0 

] 

0 


11 


11 


11 


11 


10 


147 


155 


164 


175 


186 


192 


203 


211 


221 


226 


227 


•147 


•155 


•164 


•175 


”•186 


•192 


’•203 


’•211 


°-221 


’•226 


°-227 


ij  min. 


3f  min. 


4 min. 


4Jmin. 


44  min. 


4f  min. 


5 min. 


5^  min. 


o^mm. 


5f  min. 


6 min. 


-1 


228 


230 


229 


231 


233 


234 


237 


241 


’•228 


’•230 


'’•229 


’•231 


°-233 


°-234 


’•237 


’•241 


6imin. 


64  min. 


6|  min. 


7 min. 


7}  min. 


74  min. 


7f  min. 


8 min. 


674  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

48.  The  gradual  augmentation  of  the  difference  T^— Tg  from  its  value  at  a time 
when  the  current  had  been  flowing  for  eight  minutes  entering  by  the  end  next  B, 
consequent  upon  reversing  the  current  and  letting  it  flow  continuously  entering  by 
the  end  next  A,  is  shown  by  the  numbers  at  the  foot  of  each  table,  as  a mean  result 
derived  from  a single  experiment.  The  mean  of  the  results  of  the  three  experiments 
is  shown  by  the  following  numbers,  and  is  exhibited  by  a curve  in  the  Diagram  (fig.  4) 
of  § 57  below. 

Current  entering  by  end  next  A. 


Time  from  instant  1 
of  reversal  in  quarter-  ^ 
minutes J 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

29 

30 

31 

32 

Mean  Augmenta-  ] 

MO 

MO 

00 

o 

iC 

CO 

to 

CO 

'CO 

MO 

CO 

!>• 

O 

00 

’rH 

CT) 

00 

CO 

CO 

00 

CO 

CO 

MO 

00 

CO 

0) 

CO 

CO 

oo 

MO 

C-O 

O Tfl 

MO 

o 

CO 

tioii  of  diiference  > 

O 

o 

o 

»— 1 

CO 

lO 

CO 

CTi 

CO 

lO 

MO 

!>. 

00 

00 

oo 

o 

1— 1 

04 

CO  CO 

CO 

Tfl 

T . T 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

r-( 

r— i 

l-H 

04 

04 

04  04 

04 

04 

04 

04 

^ A J 

■ 

' 

• 

■ 

‘ 

* 

* 

■ 

* 

■ 

" 

• 

• 

' 

' 

’ 

49.  That  Vitreous  Electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  copper  is  indicated  by  each  of 

the  three  experiments  on  the  thirteen  slip  conductor  adduced  above,  but  by  so  narrow 
an  effect ; amounting  on  an  average  to  only  0°‘02  Cent.,  which  corresponds  to  a 
reading  of  half  that  amount,  or  of  a degree,  being  ^Q-th  of  a division  on  the 

scale  of  each  thermometer;  with  such  discrepancies  among  the  results  of  the  dif- 
ferent experiments  (Oct.  28th,  effect  *039,  Nov.  2nd,  ’OHS,  Nov.  26th,  *01);  and  with 
so  great  fluctuations  in  the  course  of  each  experiment  (see  Tables  I.,  II.,  III.,  § 56 
below) ; that  I did  not  venture  to  draw  from  them  so  seemingly  improbable  a con- 
clusion, as  that  the  convective  effects  in  copper  and  in  iron  should  be  in  contrary 
directions.  The  dynamic  theory  (§  18)  was  fully  satisfied  by  the  demonstration 
which  the  experiments  gave,  that  the  convective  effect  is  undoubtedly  in  iron  a 
conveying  of  heat  in  the  direction  of  the  Resinous  Electricity^  and  that  it  is  less  in 
amount  in  copper,  whether  in  the  same  direction  as  in  iron  or  in  the  contrary  direction. 
But  it  was  still  an  object  of  great  interest,  (in  fact  an  object  of  much  greater  interest 
than  any  verification  of  conclusions  from  the  dynamic  theory,  which  were  in  reality  as 
certain  before  as  after  the  experiments  directly  demonstrating  them,)  to  ascertain  the 
actual  nature  of  the  convective  effect  in  copper,  and  I therefore  endeavoured  to  make 
more  decisive  experiments  for  discovering  it. 

50.  The  three  experiments  which  had  been  made  were  quite  sufficient  to  prove  that 
the  convective  effect,  whatever  its  true  nature  might  be,  was  nearly  insensible  to  my 
thermometers  without  either  more  powerful  currents  or  a more  sensitive  conductor. 
To  work  with  more  powerful  currents  would  have  increased  immensely  the  labour  of 
carrying  out  the  experiments,  and  would  besides  involve  a large  addition  to  the  battery 
which  had  been  used  hitherto.  I preferred  therefore  to  make  the  conductor  more 
sensitive,  which  I saw  could  be  done  by  diminishing  the  body  of  metal  in  the  tested 
parts,  and  so  preventing  the  looked-for  thermal  effect  from  being  so  much  conducted 
away  from  the  localities  of  the  thermometers  as  it  had  been.  I accordingly  had 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  675 

several  slips  of  copper  cut  away  from  each  side  of  the  conductor  in  the  parts  between 
the  heater  and  the  coolers,  leaving  the  parts  within  these  vessels  unchanged. 

51.  Several  experiments  were  made  on  the  conductor  thus  reduced  successively  to 
smaller  and  smaller  numbers  of  slips  ; but  the  results  did  not  appear  much  more 
decided  than  they  had  been  in  the  experiments  on  the  unreduced  conductor,  until  it 
was  tried  with  all  the  slips  but  two  cut  away.  Thus  with  four  slips  left,  the  following 
results  were  obtained  : — 

52.  Copper  conductor  reduced  to  four  slips. 


Experiment  VII.  P'ebruary  1854. 


(Current  six  times  eight  minutes  in  each  direction.)  Temperatures  and 
differences  of  temperature  after  eight  minutes  of  current  entering 

Augmentations  of 
differences  from 
middles  to  ends  of 

By  end  next  A. 

By  end  next  B. 

periods. 

Periods. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Ta-Tb=D. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Ta-Tb=D'- 

D'-D. 

I. 

46-00 

45-24 

-76 

45-92 

45-27 

■65 

— •11 

II. 

45-82 

45-19 

-63 

46-01 

45-43 

^58 

— '05 

III. 

46-00 

45-50 

•50 

46-02 

45-54 

•48 

—•02 

IV. 

46-20 

45-77 

•43 

46-21 

45-76 

•45 

•02 

V. 

46-18 

45-80 

•38 

46-09 

45-71 

•38 

•00 

VI. 

46-09 

45-72 

•37 

46-05 

45-68 

•37 

•00 

Means  for  five  periods.. 

46-058 

45-596 

-462 

46-076 

45-624 

•452 

— •010 

Diminution  of  difference  during  periods  included  *28 

Add  average  diminution  per  half-period 4- ‘028 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current *018, 


in  favour  of  Vitreous  Electricity. 

The  effect  shown  here  is  of  the  same  kind  as  had  been  found  in  all  the  previous 
experiments,  but  was  still  too  small  to  be  very  satisfactory.  Some  unknown  cause 
made  the  difference  T^ — Tg  to  diminish  so  much  through  the  whole  experiment  as  to 
overpower  the  apparent  tendency  of  the  current  from  B to  A to  increase  it,  and  the 
abridged  table  has  on  this  account  a very  unsatisfactory  appearance  as  regards  the 
conclusion  drawn  from  it  after  the  proper  correction  for  their  diminution  is  applied : 
but  the  full  examination  of  the  progress  of  variation  in  the  course  of  the  experiment 
shown  in  Table  IV.  below  is  much  less  unsatisfactory,  and  shows  undoubtedly  the 
true  convective  effect  in  copper. 

53.  The  following  results,  derived  from  the  first  experiment  made  on  the  conductor 
reduced  to  two  slips,  show  a very  marked  increase  in  the  effect,  and  make  the  result 
quite  apparent  even  without  the  full  analysis  given  below  in  Table  V. 


4 u 


MDCCCLVI. 


676  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Experiment  VIII.  February  23rd,  1854. 


Copper  conductor  reduced  to  two  slips. 


1 

i 

1 

1 

(Current  seven  times  six  minutes  in 
diiferences  of  temperature  after 

By  end  next  A. 

each  direction.)  Temperatures  and 
;ight  minutes  of  current  entering 

By  end  next  B. 

Diminutions  of 
differences  from 
middles  to  ends  of 
periods. 

Periods. 

Ta* 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta  = D. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta  = D'. 

D'-D. 

I. 

54*81 

56°*31 

1*50 

55*47 

56*88 

o 

1*41 

*09 

II. 

55*90 

57*32 

1*42 

56*37 

57*63 

1*26 

*14 

III. 

56*70 

57*99 

1*29 

57*16 

58*29 

1*13 

•16 

IV. 

57*49 

58*70 

1*21 

57*80 

58*91 

Ml 

*10 

V. 

57*80 

58*98 

1*18 

58*18 

59*20 

1*02 

•16 

VI. 

58*29 

59-80 

1*51 

58*37 

59*80 

1*43 

*08 

VII. 

58*27 

59*80 

1*53 

58*08 

59*50 

1*42 

*11 

Means  for  six  periods... 

57*4083 

58*7650 

1*3567 

57*663 

58*888 

1*2283 

*1283 

Augmentation  of  differences  during  periods  included  *01 


Add  average  augmentation  per  half-period *0008 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current  0"°1291> 


i in  favour  of  Vitreous  Electricity. 

54.  The  effect  here  shown  is,  as  regards  amount,  unmistakeable,  and  it  appeared 
quite  to  establish  the  conclusion  I had  not  ventured  to  draw  from  the  previous  expe- 
riments on  the  copper  conductor.  As  it  was  clear  that  diminution  in  the  power  of 
the  conductor  had  now  begun  to  augment  its  sensibility  for  the  effect  under  investi- 
gation, I had  it  further  reduced  by  cutting  away  from  its  breadth,  above  and  below, 
between  the  heaters  and  the  bends  for  the  thermometer-bulbs  on  the  two  sides,  and 
on  the  other  sides  of  those  bends  as  far  as  the  coolers.  An  experiment  was  then 
made  which  led  to  the  following  results : — * 

Experiment  IX.  March  7th,  1854. 


Copper  conductor  diminished  in  breadth. 


(Current  seven  times  six  minutes  in  each  direction.)  Temperatures  and 

Diminutions  of 

differences  of  temperature  after 

six  minutes  of  current  entering 

middles  to  ends  of 

By  end  next  A. 

By  end  next  B. 

periods. 

Periods. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-T^=D. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

TB“‘TAi=D'. 

D'-D. 

I. 

58-61 

58*00 

1*39 

5^56 

58-98 

1*42 

-*03 

II. 

58*19 

59*69 

1-50 

58*74 

60*01 

1*27 

*23 

III. 

59*12 

60*70 

1*58 

59*61 

61*08 

1*47 

*11 

IV. 

59*91 

61*53 

1*62 

60*18 

61-75 

1*57 

*05 

V. 

60-50 

62-18 

1*68 

61  15 

62-53 

1*38 

*30 

VI. 

61-71 

63-02 

1-31 

61*87 

62*91 

1-04 

*27 

VII. 

61-07 

62-80 

1*73 

61*07 

62*62 

1*55 

*18 

Means  for  six  periods... 

60-083 

61-653 

1*57 

60-4367 

61*8167 

1*38 

•19 

Augmentation  of  differences  during  periods  included...  *13 

Add  average  augmentation  per  half-period =*01083 


*20083 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  677 


After  this  experiment  I considered  it  quite  established  that  the  Vitreous  Electricity 
carries  heat  with  it  in  copper. 

55.  The  conductor  was  still  further  diminished  in  breadth  (so  as  to  be  only  an  inch 
broad  in  the  parts  between  the  heater  and  coolers  on  each  side),  and  an  experiment 
was  made  before  my  class  on  the  19th  April,  1854,  leading  to  the  following  results, 
shown  as  in  the  abridged  tables  of  the  preceding  experiments. 


Experiment  X.  April  19th,  1854. 

Copper  conductor  of  two  slips,  further  diminished  in  breadth. 


(Current  seven  times  six  minutes  each  way.)  Temperatures  and 
differences  of  temperatures  after  six  minutes  of  current  entering 

Diminutions  of 
differences  from 
middles  to  ends  of 

By  end  next  A. 

By  end  next  B. 

periods. 

Periods. 

Ta- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta=D. 

T'a- 

Tb- 

Tb-Ta  = D'. 

D-D'. 

I. 

74-30 

76-60 

2-30 

74-81 

77-50 

2-69 

-•39 

II. 

73-80 

76-48 

2-68 

75-32 

78-10 

2-78 

-•10 

III. 

76-25 

79-42 

3-17 

76-17 

79-18 

3-01 

•16 

IV. 

76-33 

79-51 

3-18 

76-28 

79-37 

3-09 

•09 

V. 

75-60 

78-69 

3-09 

75-20 

78-07 

2-87 

•22 

VI. 

74-80 

77-70 

2-90 

75-00 

77-75 

2-75 

•15 

VII. 

74-10 

76-84 

2-74 

75-42 

78-20 

2-78 

-•04 

Means,  Period  I.  off  ... 

75-147 

78-107 

2-96 

75-565 

78-445 

2-88 

•08 

Augmentation  of  differences  during  periods  included...  *09 

Add  average  augmentation  per  half-period  *0075 


Add  average  augmentation  per  half-period  *0075 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current  °*0875 


Means,  Periods  I.  and  1 
VII.  off  / 

76-356 

78-36 

3-004 

75-594 

78-494 

2-90 

•104 

Augmentation  of  differences  during  periods  included...  -06 
Deduct  average  augmentation  per  half-period 

Effect  due  to  reversal  of  current  

-006 

*110 

The  effect  here  obtained,  although  of  quite  a decisive  character,  does  not  appear  to 
show  any  increased  sensibility  resulting  from  the  further  diminution  in  the  breadth 
of  the  conductor. 

56.  The  following  Tables  \^prmted  after  apart  of  § 58]  show  a complete  analysis 
of  the  results  of  the  seven  experiments  on  the  copper  conductor  which  have  been 
adduced. 


4 u 2 


678  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


57.  The  average  progress  towards  the  final  eflfect  of  a reversal,  as  indicated  by  the 
numbers  at  the  ends  of  these  Tables,  is  exhibited  graphically  for  the  copper  conductor 
in  the  different  states  in  which  it  was  used  in  the  experiments,  in  the  following 
Diagram,  along  with  the  curve  exhibiting  the  corresponding  reverse  eflfect  in  the  iron 
conductor. 

The  uppermost  curve  represents  the  results  of  three  experiments  with  the  Iron  con- 
ductor (thirty  slips),  the  points  marked  * representing  the  mean  of  three  days’  observa- 
tion, and  the  points  marked  that  of  two  days’  observation.  The  lowest  curve 
represents  the  results  of  three  experiments  with  the  Copper  conductor  (thirteen  slips), 
the  points  marked  V denoting  three  days’,  and  the  simple  dots  • two  days’  observa- 
tion. The  middle  curve  represents  three  experiments  with  the  Copper  conductor  (two 
slips),  the  points  marked  O denoting  the  mean  of  three  days’  observation. 

Fig.  4. 


1 

— 

1 

1 i -4 

1 

A-* 

r i 

--'I 

. 

y 

- 

/7 

7 

7 

/ 

- 

- 

/ 

‘ 

/ 

7^ 

7 

/ 

7 

r _ 

- 

V 

/ 

/ 

V- 

- 

/ 

y' 

/ 

7 

7^-/' 

V— \ 

\ 

• 

1 

__ 

7^ 

- 

' 

_ — - 

i 

i 

1 

! 

. 

— 2 

5 

8 

58.  The  diminution  of  the  conducting  power  in  the  copper  conductor  had  so 
markedly  augmented  the  looked-for  indication  of  a convective  eflfect,  that  it  was  to 
be  expected  a corresponding  augmentation  might  be  obtained  by  treating  the  iron 
conductor  similarly.  Instead,  however,  of  cutting  up  the  iron  conductor,  which,  as 
it  stood,  possessed  sensibility  enough  to  give  a very  decided  result,  I prepared  a new 
iron  conduetor  on  a much  smaller  scale.  It  appeared  that  the  smaller  the  conduct- 
ing power  for  the  same  strength  of  current,  and  the  same  diflferenee  of  temperatures 
between  hot  and  cold,  the  greater  would  be  the  indication  of  convective  eflfect ; and 
the  greatest  indication  would  therefore  be  obtained  by  \ Continued  after  Table  VII.] 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  679 


B p 
o ^ 
§ CR 


3 ° 


o Si 

B 35 

et>  o 
2.  ^ 
s W. 

oq  s 

£ ^ 
o o 
D £ 


CP  rs 


^ l-H  [ 


^ c 
£ cr? 

o-  B 
tr 

S 3 


&• 


2 cb 

r H 
D-  I 

s ^ 

2.W 

3 

CR 


g 

3* 


I 

CO 


Ml  I 

CO  1-^  Cr  bC 


O Cji  O Cjx  Ci 


>•  First  half- 
— minute  of  current 
Cd  entering  by  end  next 


to  ■<»  — 05  *■ 


I I 

cc'^'^  o«^ 


^ Second  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


£L 


Oi 

P 

o 

H 

to 


tn 

fcO 

o 

d 

cc 


3 


I 

os 


In  CO  >&■  O 05 


to  >-•  OS  to 


> Third  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


to 

3 


os  C I— ■ 1^-  os 


Fourth  half- 
— minute  of  current 
0:  entering  by  end  next 


I ^ 1 

os  i-i  05  I—  to 


OS  1-'  OS  ifr.  to 


> Fifth  half- 
— minute  of  current 
bd  entering  by  end  next 


os 

3 


I 

os 


L ' ' ' 

O 05  to  to 


to  — to  01  05 


^ Sixth  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


I-*  o»  to  to 


On  05  CO  OS  — 


> Seventh  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


I I I 
I—  os  t5t  to  05 


I I 

to  to  Os  v> 


> Eighth  half- 
— minute  of  current 
ra  entering  by  end  next 


fca(M 

3. 

5' 


I 1 


I I 

os  It.,  os  I— I —I 


j®"  Ninth  half- 
— minute  of  current 
td  entering  by  end  next 


■VI  os  o os  o 


> Tenth  half- 
— minute  of  current 
Cd  entering  by  end  next 


t9{x< 

3 


I I 

to  CO  O Cn  ^ 


C5  O GO 


> Eleventh  half- 
— minute  of  current 
bd  entering  by  end  next 


05 

3 


I I I 

05  00  to  it.  VI 


I I I 

..  CJ1  On  I-.  o 


j®"  Twelfth  half- 
— minute  of  current 
bd  entering  by  end  next 


[Tables  belonging-  to  § 56.] 

Table  I.  October  28th,  1853.  Conductor  composed  of  thirteen  slips  of  sheet  copper. 

Middle  of  conductor  in  water  kept  boiling. 

Streams  of  water  at  temperature  6°  running  through  the  coolers. 

Temperatures  at  middle  points  A,  B of  the  parts  between  heater  and  coolers : — Initial  Ta=55°-20,  Tb=52°-94  ; 


680  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS 


Table  II.  November  2nd,  1853.  Con- 
Middle  of  conductor  in  water  kept 
Streams  of  water  at  temperature 


Temperatures  of  middle  points  A,  B of  the  parts  between  heater  and 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

. = s 

a 

^ ts 

1 e 

*-i  C3 

-4^ 

, c g 
if 

^ t? 

^ c S 

■£  a ^ 

. « - 

47  b 

^ X 

. e 5^ 

U.  47 

^ b'H 

>i  c g 

q;  ^ G 

S - 

ii| 

t< 

47  ^ 

^ ts 

>«  47  G 

47  G 

tH  ^ 

Augmentations  of  difference  T^— Tb 

eS  O OJ 

P 

g S § 

Cd  47  47 

g 3 § 

rt  d § 

O 47 

G O 47 

g 3 S 

cr^'4='  >> 

C7  47 

C3  CJ  OP 

(in  hundredths  of  a degree  Cent.),  during 
Periods 

" 3 a 

E.S  'S 

a -e 

no 

S « bO 

O 3 C 

J 

“ a-s 

O ^ 

'H  ^ fao 
:s  3.5 
£ G S 

® a 

J- 

■5  « tp 

3 a. a 

o c 4. 

-2 

cy  o ^ 

.£5  " so 

E S-C 

al 

4 

i bCi 

3 .G 

3 ^ 

3 -M 
^ G 

j:  ° ^ 

C 5 bO 

s 3 a 

See 

47  .pH  fls 

W G +5 

® c 

.c 

^ « bo 

% C 

•SPc'C 

M *G  47 

a g 

o'  o ^ 
rS  if  bo 

o o .a 

^ G Sh 

^ a^ 

O ^ 

'S  ^ bO 

C S G 

G *C 

H ‘3  47 

07 

47 

47 

47 

47 

47 

47 

47 

47 

47 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

■B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

I. 

Ce 

- 7 

5 

1 

0 

- 4 

-3 

-2 

1 

-5 

-5 

- 9 

0 

22 

- 1 

-5 

-1 

0 

2 

-11 

j 

II. 

0 

13 

0 

- 1 

- 8 

- 3 

4 

-6 

10 

-3 

-4 

- 4 

- 1 

2 

- 4 

7 

2 

9 

- 5 

-10 

i 

III. 

7 

- 1 

6 

0 

- 5 

3 

-6 

7 

- 2 

0 

-7 

- 8 

7 

-1 

11 

- 9 

- 3 

7 

- 7 

11 

1 

IV. 

1 

- 1 

3 

4 

0 

- 1 

1 

-2 

- 1 

-1 

-6 

2 

- 2 

9 

7 

- 3 

10 

- 2 

- 3 

- 5 

1 

V. 

-5 

9 

2 

- 5 

13 

0 

-5 

7 

- 2 

-1 

3 

- 6 

5 

-1 

- 3 

8 

- 4 

2 

— 7 

- 7 

VI. 

4 

10 

1 

-15 

1 

18 

-2 

2 

- 2 

0 

-3 

0 

- 3 

3 

3 

- 1 

10 

0 

- 6 

0 

VII. 

-5 

9 

-1 

3 

- 5 

-10 

4 

-1 

7 

5 

4 

- 9 

5 

4 

- 8 

15 

- 4 

1 

- 6 

- 7 

VIII. 

7 

- 9 

-2 

- 1 

- 5 

0 

-1 

-2 

- 8 

4 

6 

5 

12 

-1 

-10 

- 5 

2 

- 6 

- 1 

0 

! 

Augmentations  during  quarter-minutes,  summed  "I 

9 

30 

9 

-15 

- 9 

7 

-5 

5 

2 

4 

-7 

-20 

23 

15 

- 4 

12 

13 

11 

-35 

-18 

1 

! 

for  seven  periods J 

1 

Differences  of  augmentation  during  correspond-  "I 

1 

ing  quarter-minutes  of  first  and  second  halves  ^ 

21 

24 

16 

10 

2 

— 

13 

8 

16 

2 

17 

1 

of  a period,  summed  for  seven  periods J 

I 

Differences  of  augmentation  in  equal  intervals'! 

i 

from  beginning  and  middle  of  a period,  summed  > 

21 

3 

13 

23 

25 

12 

4 

20 

18 

35 

1 

for  seven  periods J 

1 

1 

Mean  augmentation  of  difference  in  favour  of! 
thermometer  remote  from  entering  current...  J 

0 

© 1 

0 

•002 

°-009 

°016 

°018 

O 

O 

o 

© 

°-003 

°-014 

°-013 

°-025 

1 

i 

1 

1 

\ min. 

i min. 

f rain. 

1 mill. 

li  min. 

H min. 

1|  min. 

2 min. 

2J  rain. 

2^  min. 

i 

! 

PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  681 


ductor  composed  of  thirteen  slips  of  sheet  copper, 
boiling-hot  by  steam  blown  into  it. 

10°’4  running  through  the  coolers. 

coolers Initial  Ta  = 54°-10,  Tb=52°*80;  Final  Ta=54°-68,  Tb=53°-38. 


11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

1 ^ ts 

u ^ a; 

^ S fi 

S S'? 

S 

£ fl 

1 ^ 

Ill 

1 fc;  -a 

U(  X 

if  c c 

cd  H ^ 

1 X 

C ^ 

0 c 

h -2  'G 

1 .Li 

2 S a 

2 S'g 

^ 4^ 

if  e « 

Jh  GJ  ® 

^ tH  ^ 

a 2 ^ 

O' 

. -w 

X 

S C C 
§ 

t 

X 

i^  0 s 

t-  « ® 

g S'? 

-si 

2 g a 

*-■  I-*  ^ 

2 ^ 

it  'k 
if  "S  S 
c3  ^ ^ 

=J  H "2 

it 

07  "S 

s g « 

cr  1:  g 

U ^ 

if  -M.  X 

^ g a 

&S'? 

i -4-. 

if  --  X 
e 07 
eS  <y  C 

U 0) 

h 

6 V 

CT* 

cr 

j 

5.  u " 

a- 

J 0) 

cr 

^ 0 07 

^‘g  g 

-3  S g 

•n 

j 07 

pC 

J07 

1— 

i-C  o ^ 
g “ to 

^ 3.C 

>> 

^ ® -a 

^ fco 
'95.= 

S « bO 

-2  ^ .5 

— “ts  >> 

S 2 to 

2 S-S 

pS  0 ^ 

c s fco 

5^  g-c 

0 ,3 

1 “ 

S a .S 

5 'S  >» 

c 0 

22  M 
■p  a ,a 

-a  'H 

§ 2 60 
2 3 .a 

a 

S -2  60 
2 3 .a 

®pQ 

■2f  ^ fco 

s”  'a:  >> 

1.2  60 
-e  S -S 

CJ  0 ^ 

S « W) 
-^c‘§ 

a ^ 

r3 

"V  < 
^ " 
0 

=!  ^ 

^ pO 

!f  bD 

3 .C 

1h 

s 0 .0 

2 6^  to 

2 -2 

‘3  V 

w S -g 

0) 

H' 

3 .2 

“ a 

V 

2 _s 

^ s 
a> 

3 0 

^ £3 

<y 

S a 2 
ti.  a ^ 

0) 

.■H|^ 

0) 

0) 

> 

0) 

C/2 

a « 
=>3 

tb'i  5 

S ® 

■S  ■ 
Z 

3 -2 

07 

^■§2 

07 

07  ‘S  ^ 

^ a -g 

H £ 

C ‘3  ^ 

2 a a 

07  • 
& 
H 

" fl 

07 

I’ 

H 

32 
- c 

07 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

A. 

B. 

5 

3 

- 6 

10 

- 1 

9 

- 7 

-6 

18 

-11 

- 3 

4 

-5 

-4 

- 2 

3 

10 

6 

-4 

- 5 

4 

9 

- 6 

-13 

7 

-2 

4 

11 

4 

- 1 

0 

- 4 

4 

-2 

- 2 

5 

0 

- 2 

- 5 

6 

-4 

9 

10 

0 

6 

- 2 

3 

- 2 

- 7 

- 5 

- 7 

1 

- 4 

-6 

4 

1 

3 

- 3 

- 6 

-11 

- 2 

2 

6 

7 

14 

0 

-10 

-10 

-4 

-3 

- 4 

- 9 

- 2 

7 

5 

3 

10 

- 1 

- 2 

- 4 

-12 

4 

4 

- 4 

-7 

6 

6 

0 

- 5 

0 

- 4 

1 

4 

- 5 

5 

8 

4 

3 

- 4 

- 4 

1 

- 8 

-4 

1 

- 2 

13 

3 

- 1 

10 

-5 

-3 

- 3 

0 

- 5 

3 

- 3 

- 2 

8 

0 

-4 

8 

8 

- 4 

7 

-7 

3 

1 

- 8 

13 

- 2 

-4 

-12 

- 4 

8 

- 6 

0 

0 

-2 

6 

1 

10 

- 3 

-10 

1 

-46 

7 

-24 

5 

57 

Pt 

— t 

-12 

- 1 

-9 

-4 

-17 

0 

24 

10 

-3 

3 

4 

- 6 

3 

- 3 

- 2 

4 

-5 

- 4 

2 

- 2 

4 

4 

5 

-8 

- 8 

0 

- 1 

3 

- 1 

6 

7 

-1 

5 

- 1 

- 3 

- 3 

8 

- 1 

- 9 

13 

- 3 

- 3 

- 7 

2 

0 

- 8 

0 

- 5 

— i 

1 

0 

-2 

3 

1 

3 

2 

3 

- 1 

4 

6 

- 1 

2 

- 3 

2 

2 

4 

13 

0 

- 9 

0 

6 

-4 

0 

- 1 

12 

-13 

- 4 

-17 

-46 

5 

-29 

15 

85 

- 1 

-24 

15 

-9 

13 

-10 

-20 

36 

4 

7 

- 4 

5 

22 

-21 

-10 

- 9 

-7 

6 

-18 

-25 

13 

51 

44 

-86 

39 

22 

-10 

-32 

-11 

17 

11 

2 

-24 

10 

- 

3 

48 

92 

6 

45 

67 

57 

25 

14 

31 

42 

44 

20 

O 

o 

0, 

002 

°034 

°-066 

°-004 

°-032 

°-048 

0 

6 

0 

6 

00 

0 

0 

5 

°-022 

°-030 

°-031 

! 

1 0 

0 

2|  min. 

3 min. 

3i  min. 

3 j min. 

3f  min. 

4 min. 

4J  min. 

44  min. 

4f  min. 

5 min. 

5}  rain. 

5^  min. 

5f  min. 

6 min. 

682  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS 


I 


Table  III.  November  26th,  1853.  Con-  j 

Middle  of  con-  i 

Temperatures  at  the  middle  points  A,  B of  the  parts  between  heater  and  j 


Diminutions  of  difference  — Tj^ 

(in  hundredths  of  a degree  Cent.),  during 
Periods 


g 60 
S.S 


A.  B 


1 ^ ^ 
S § = 

« 3 O 

3 u « 
O'tM  >> 

C g 60 
O 3 C 


a 


3. 


.J,  g a 

g tl-a 

3 C 
a 0^ 

^ o Xi 

^ 3 bQ 
’S  ® 

e.i| 


^ g fi 

§ « s 

p ».5 

O (S  u 
*P  ^ 

a a 

O) 


5. 


A ^ a 

a S 
a 

^ R bD 

jS  "3  _a 
S a 

S "c 


A S a 

g e-s 

P P 
ec  O a 
a '+-I  >> 

s B ^ 

X p . 

w .s 

s- 


7. 


i 3 « 

P o a 
^ ® -a 

fl-S 
O)  © P 
> ff‘u 


<u  ■ 


^ s 


8. 


■e  g' 
§ 3 


2 


.g- 

bo  ^ 

a fi 

I 2 

a 

o 


-2  fcD 
a'§ 

si 

a 


10. 


e 07 

S a 

u ^ 
a a 

O 07 


S fco 
p .2 


11. 


b -3 
3 3 


w a ■ 


12. 


i a g 

li'i 

Sod 

°''S  ^ 
^ 0.0 

iJS  g 60 
^ 3 .S 

a 3 !- 

H 'S  g 

^ a s 

3 


13. 


s 

o 3 3 
O'  3 3 


S g 60 

l§l 


I. 


II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 


0 


0 

-2 

-1 

0 

2 


0 

0 

-I 

-1 

-1 


1 

I 

0 

1 

-I 


Diminutions  during  quarter-minutes,  summed! 
for  five  periods  j 


-I 


-I 


-3 


I 

I 

0 

1 

-I 

-I 


0 

-1 

0 

-2 

-2 

-5 


-I 

0 

1 

1 

-2 

-I 


-I 


I 

0 

0 

-2 

0 

-1 

-3 


1 

0 

0 

0 

-3 

0 


-I 


-2 

1 

-2 

I 

-I 

-2 

-3 


-I 


~I 


0 

0 

1 

1 

1 

0 

1 

2 

-1 

0 

-1 

1 

1 

4 

0 

0 

0 

-2 

-2 


Differences  of  diminution  du;ing  corresponding  "I 
quarter-minutes  of  first  and  second  halves  of  > 
a period,  summed  for  five  periods J 


-3 


-3 


-2 


-5 


Differences  of  diminution  in  equal  intervals  from  "1 
beginning  and  middle  of  a period,  summed  for  I 
five  periods  J 


-1 


14 


23 


18 


10 


Mean  augmentation  of  difference  in  favour  ofl 
thermometer  remote  from  entering  current ...  J 


-"•OOS 


-°-006 


-°-001 


°-000 


°-006 


’■009 


’•007 


’•007 


’•007 


°014 


°-023 


°-018 


“•OlO 


, after  reversal  and  flow  for 


i min. 


f mm. 


1 min. 


imin. 


■J  mm. 


f min. 


2 min. 


2^  min 


24  min. 


3 min. 


3^  min. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  683 


( ictor  composed  of  thirteen  slips  of  sheet  copper. 

‘^Do-llictor  at  99°  Cent. 

atidi  ( olers:— Initial  T^=50°-96,  Tb=52°-89  ; Final  Ta=48°-80,  Tb  = 50°-92. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24, 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 


32. 


ilB 


B. 


O .Q 

" 60 


A.  B. 


3 S'g 

5 <11 


« 60' 
s.s 
.3  S3 
S ^ 


A.  B. 


0 


A.  B. 


-2  S c 

CT*  o 0^ 

-g 

s s * 

fcD*3  , 

a ® 


A.  B. 


<u  ® 60 

2 3.S 


A.  B. 


-1 


72  o ^ 


A.  B. 


o u 

i " 60 
S .2 
fl  fl  £3 
cu  O) 

£ 9 a 

Eh  o 


A.  B. 


-1 


-1 


_ a 


2 .2 

S Sh 

a '3  .2 

2 ® a 

> o 

H 

A.  B. 


0 


rt  S 

Si  c 

^ s « 

r—  o <i; 
^ 

3 °'a 

'*t  3 60 

>>■3  E 

'a  .2  a 

a a 2 
H 

A.  B 


-1 


'S  'a  ^ 

3 o .a 
■2  a 60 

i'c'S 
g si 

^ (D 

H 

A.  B. 


53  X 

^ ^ <V 

3 a a 
3 e!  'a 
Cr'  3 c 
- o a 

i 

S o.£5 

J a to 

!>.+;  3 

q3  *3  S3 
^ S 3 
H a 


A.  B 


-1 


a X 
t;  a a 
cs  a a 

S.  a -a 
a*  a a 
rt  a a 

13  "a  ^ 

X o .3 

■?  a 60 
a .2 
a .2  S 
g a| 

H <“ 

A.  B. 


0 


0 


ale 
a“  a ^ 
rt  3 a 

o a; 
s=J  «+-i  c>» 
o)  o ■ 

D £JD 

2 -S 
a a -2 

0)  s- 


A.  B 


;-i  ^ o 

g S « 

-S  cj  a; 
5 %-i 

^ ® rO 

'5  ^ bD 

S'g-n 

a -a  a 

2 a S 

H 

A.  B. 


-1 


■£ 

P3  dj  fl 

'^pp 

^ O 4> 

.S  ® ^ 

« ^ fcjO 

.5 

a.2  g 

a 3 .,3 
teas 

H <“ 

A.  B. 


-1 


o-  a 
J3  O ,0 


+f  P c 

•P  0 

El  2 3 


A.  B. 


2 a § 

S ^ 

H I 0 0 

“ O C3 

<*H  >> 

^ fee 


£ S p 

tH  0% 


A.  B. 


a ^ 
o C 


O QJ 

5 'tS  ^ 

O O J3 


bo 


0 


a a 

2.  2 'S 

2 ” a 
H “ 

A.  B. 


! -i’ 


r-i'j 


-1 

0 

0 

1 

2 


-3 


1 

-1 

-3 

0 

-4 

-7 


0 

-1 

-1 

0 

0 


-3 

0 

-2 

0 

-2 


-2 


-2 

-3 

-1 

2 

0 

-4 


1 

—2 

0 

0 

0 

-] 


3 3 


1 

-1 

-1 

0 

0 

-1 


1 

0 

-] 

0 

-1 

-1 


1 

-2 

0 

1 

-1 

-1 


— 2 
-2 
0 
0 
-3 

-7 


0 

0 

1 

-1 

-1 

-1 


-1 

0 

0 

0 

-1 

-2 


0 

0 

1 

-1 

1 


-2 


-4 


12 


-5 


-6 


_2 


-1 


-6 


-6 


10 


14 


26 


26 


21 


15 


13 


13 


13 


12 


10 


10 


’«! 


SJait 


106 


°-010 


°014 


°-024 


°-026 


’•026 


°-015 


°-013 


°-013 


'•013 


’•012 


°-006 


°-006 


’•006 


°-000 


’•004 


’•006 


’•010 


°-010 


3|min. 


4 min. 


4:^  min. 


4imin. 


5 min. 


5 J min. 


5|min. 


6 min. 


6Jmin. 


6i  min. 


6|min. 


7 min. 


7i  min. 


7imin. 


74  min. 


8 min. 


I 

i 


4 X 


MDCCCLVI 


684  PROFESSOn  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS 


Mean  augmentation  of  difference  in  favour  of] 

thermometer  remote  from  entering  current ...  J 

Differences  of  diminution  in  equal  intervals  from  1 

beginning  and  middle  of  a period,  summed  for 

five  nerinds 

Differences  of  diminution  during  corresponding] 

half-minutes  of  first  and  second  halves  of  a 

period,  summed  for  five  periods  

*■ 

Diminutions  during  half-minutes,  summed  for] 

fivft  nftriods 1 

r 

Diminutions  of  difference  Tb  — 

(in  hundredths  of  a degree  Cent.),  during 
Periods 

1 

O 

1 

1 

i 

MM 

K-  to  ^ 

1 

> 

First  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

5’ 

O 

o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

1 

1 1 

© H-  o ^ 

cd 

1 min. 

1 

o 

1 

to 

1 1 1 
— to  ' CO  1— ' 

1 

> 

Second  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

ko 

© 

g 

CO 

fcO 

1 

to  © CO  © CO 

o. 

« 

»|M 

3, 

5* 

1 

o 

1 

1 

« H-  CO  — t— 

1 

to 

Third  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  hy  end  next 

05 

O 

o 

CO 

CO 

1 

N-  o to  to  fco 

p3 

2 min. 

1 

1 

1 i 1 

> 

Fourth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

o 

o 

U) 

U) 

1 1 
h-  ^ to  — M-  I 

w 

1 

s* 

o 

o 

© 

X 

1 

Ml  1 

^ ^ ^ CO 

> 

Fifth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

cn 

© 

© 

so 

i ! 

^ to  ^ to 

© 

w 

3 min.  j 

0 

© 

1 

O O fco  o o 

> 

Sixth  half- 
minute of  eurrent 
entering  by  end  next 

© 

© 

cn 

so 

O H-  o -- 

V. 

w 

min. 

o 

© 

© 

1 

o © ‘-^  © © 

© 

> 

Seventh  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  hy  end  next 

© 

© 

1 

kO  CO  ko  to 

w 

4 min. 

© 

© 

J. 

1 1 
© — © © c;i 

© 

> 

Eighth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

x 

© 

© 

1 

W © to  to  © 

ta 

3 

© 

to 

io 

1 1 

© © © kO  H- 

to 

Ninth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

© 

CO 

- 

1 

o © >— • ^ 

© 

w 

5 min. 

© 

tc 

1 

1 

1 1 

— *-  © © N- 

1 

> 

Tenth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

U) 

to 

1 

to 

oolU 

« 

Vx 

B. 

o 

© 

I'O 

1 

ooi.— 

> 

• 

Eleventh  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

© 

1 

N-  © ^ © © 

Ci 

d 

o 

© 

to 

tc 

o 

o 

E> 

Twelfth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

3* 

CO 

CO 

H-OO-O 

so 

w 

3, 

5* 

o 

© 

to 

kC 

1^ 

1 1 

o — © ^ *- 

?■ 

Thirteenth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

05 

to 

Cn 

- 

o o H-  © o 

- 

td 

o 

© 

to 

1 

CO 

1 1 

CO  ^ H-  © to 

k 

Fourteenth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

5' 

I'O 

to 

1 

O H-  N-  ta-  — 

co 

1 

3^ 

5‘ 

p 

© 

t'O 

1 

1 1 

■ O N-  N-  to  ^ 

u 

k 

Fifteenth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

to 

t>0 

to 

t'O 

1 

1 

' ©©©►--© 

i o 

1 

IX 

0 

© 

1 

kc 

© © © © to 

k 

Sixteenth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  hy  end  next 

X 

X 

lu. 

I 

to 

i 

© © ^ © — 

« 

Table  IV.  Februaiy  1854.  Copper  conductor  reduced  to  four  slips. 

Stream  of  water  at  60°  Cent,  through  middle  of  conductor. 

Streams  of  water  at  temperature  5°*9  running  through  coolers. 

Temperatures  at  middle  points  A,  B of  the  parts  between  heater  and  coolers: — Initial  Ta=44°'17}  Tb=45°’36  ; 

Final  Ta=:45°-68,  Tb=46°-05. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  685 


Mean  augmentation  of  difference  in  favour  of] 

thermometer  remote  from  entering  current ...  J 

Differences  of  diminution  in  equal  intervals  from  I 

beginning  and  middle  of  a period,  summed  for  J- 

six  periods  J 

Differences  of  diminution  during  corresponding  "I 

half-minutes  of  first  and  second  halves  of  a y 

period,  summed  for  six  periods J 

Diminutions  during  half-minutes,  summed  for  1 

six  periods  J 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

Diminutions  of  difference  Tg  — 

(in  hundredths  of  a degree  Cent.),  during 

Periods 

td- 

5* 

O 

O 

Cji 

00 

00 

to 

II  III 

CO  — CO  N- 

1 

Cl 

^ First  half- 

05 

1 1 

CO  H-  o to  CO  H-* 

I 

W entering  by  end  next 

1 min. 

o 

6 

to 

(X> 

cc 

CO 

05 

1 1 

CO  CO  o 1-- 

1 

k^ 

t*"  Second  half- 

iijiiiutc  ut  cuiient 

bO 

o 

1 

b©  05  CO  1— * Oi 

cn 

W entering  by  end  next 

min. 

o 

0 

01 

o 

00 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

1 

CO 

II  II 

to  CO  o O CO  Cl 

1 

> Third  half- 

minute  of  cunent 

b© 

o 

H-  O Cl  d Cl  kfJfc. 

td  entering  by  end  next 

t>s 

3 

s' 

o 

6 

05 

Oi 

00 

OO 

1 

I 1 t 

H-  Cl  o Cl  b©  to 

Fourth  half- 

! 1 

CO  to  b©  1--  N-  o 

C5 

td  entering  by  end  next 

tsi>- 

3 

5* 

0 

o 

00 

U) 

CO 

CO 

00 

1 

bO 

o 

III  1 

05  05  05  to  o 

to 

Fifth  half- 

Cl 

1 

to 

1 1 

05  to  I—*  o CO  b© 

o 

W entering  by  end  next 

3 min. 

o 

d 

CD 

05 

1 

05 

i-  ‘ ' 

O to  Co  1-^  Co 

CO 

Sixth  half- 

05 

I 1 I 

^ O to  N-  .-1  to 

1 

td  entering  by  end  next 

min. 

o 

d 

o 

00 

CO 

CO 

1 1 

o H-  t--  o CO  CO 

1 

Seventh  half- 
lililiLjtc  of  miieiit 

CO 

to  to  I--  Ife.  o o 

1 

td  entering  by  end  next 

4 min. 

o 

d 

CO 

00 

CO 

00 

o 

1 1 

O to  * 1-^  Co 

1 

> Eighth  half- 

GO 

k— 

1 1 

H-  to  H-  O O — 

to 

td  entering  by  end  next 

•uira 

0 

o 

b© 

00 

o 

! 

CO 

1 1 1 1 1 
o H-  N-  OJ  to  to 

1 

k^i^ 

Ninth  half- 

CO 

1 1 1 

O H-  H-i  ^ N-CO 

1 

CO 

minute  ot  current 
td  entering  by  end  next 

5 min. 

p 

o 

b9 

05 

1 

b© 

tc 

1 

O Cl  H- 1 b©  CO  H- 

Cl 

> Tenth  half- 

p 

o 

1 1 1 
k-*  to  CO  CO  CO  to 

k^ 

W entering  by  end  next 

3 

3 

p 

Oi 

CO 

00 

1 

CO 

1 1 

O o to  o to 

I 

05 

Eleventh  half- 
minute  of  ourient 

p 

Cji 

1 

b©  to  o ' H-*  1— * 

I 1 

1 to 

td  entering  by  end  next 

6 min. 

p 

bS 

CO 

CJt 

b© 

1 

05 

II  II 

CO  ^ ^ ^ b©  c 

Cl 

Twelfth  half- 

1 1 

CO  b©  H-  CO  ^ Cl 

to 

iijiiiutc  i-kf 

W entering  by  end  next 

H 

fD 

3 

“O 

ft 

B 

a 

n 

CD 

cc 


l:§. 

m & 

— o- 

f^ 

II  2. 

Cn  p 

o cn 

H w 


I 


( 

s 


Cn 

to 


cr 

ft 


ns 
OO  p 


S O 


H 

> 


o 

o 

B 

O- 

B 

O 


CX)  c 

p 

O ft 


H 

td 


Cn 

p 

C5 


( 


ft 

ft 

B 

S' 

ft 

P 


P 

B 

£L 


ft 

O 

o 

re 

cn 


4x2 


Table  V.  February  23rd,  1854.  Copper  conductor  reduced  to  two  slips. 
Water  kept  at  temperature  99°'5  Cent,  in  heater. 

Sfi-pams  of  water  at  temnerature  5°-6  through  coolers. 


686  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS 


11 


d & 

B g? 


cr5  p 


Pi 


cr?  i-s 

5'5 

(D  2 p 
-s  P o 


B I- 

B 


a < 
S s- 

a “> 
Pj  Ed* 
Ks  d 


2 

■tSS 

■s.s 

Sra 

CO 


p 3 
& CL 


o crq 

1.0 


a 

s-i: 
■s  I 

° I 

P-  m 


iCC; 


O 

B 


2.  p 35 


O o 
s H 
7*  w 


& H 
c >. 


I I 

■ M bS 


' to  O bS  bS 


?*  First  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


bo  I— ' w o 


Ci  CO  — Oi  '-1 


Second  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


oa  00  bo  O CO  O I Oi 


‘ 03  Cn  I— i ifi. 


> Third  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


I I I I I 

Or  — 03  lO  bO  bO 


V>  QJ  ^ 


Fourth  half- 
— minute  of  cui-rent 
W entering  by  end  next 


bO 

»|H 

3 


I I I 

00  03  bo  03  ^ 


I I 

Cjt  bO  03  bo  On  I 


> Fifth  half- 
— minute  of  current 
td  entering  by  end  next 


I I I I I I 

It..  03  to  it'  >3»  ' 


03  03  to  bO  t-O  I— I 


Sixth  half- 

— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


OO 

0 

Cl 

K) 

Cl 

to 

4^ 

1 1 

4^  Cl  to  05  !—•  05 

1 

> 

Seventh  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

§. 

5* 

05 

C5 

1 

o to  05  ^ 

1 

4:1^ 

2 

g 

0 

to 

tc 

1 

to 

1 1 1 1 

o 4i^  Cl  05  4L.  4^ 

o 

> 

Eighth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

oo 

? 

OS 

OS 

00 

05 

1 I 

^ 4^  05  05  to 

05 

a 

4^ 

tai- 

to 

1 

1 1 1 
to  to  o to  to 

1 

> 

Ninth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

p 

P 

p’ 

CO 

1 1 

O O to  ^ 05 

o 

Cl 

B 

o 

to 

1 

Cl 

1 1 

05  4L  Cl  to  O • 

05 

> 

Tenth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

? 

CO 

w 

to 

a 

1 

1 1 

O O ^ O O 

1 

w 

p 

Cl 

o 

to 

os 

1 

Cl 

III  1 

05  ^ riL.  o ^ O 

o 

> 

Eleventh  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

f 

05 

05 

05 

C5 

1 

CO  — to  to 

1 

to 

a 

g 

o 

to 

GO 

o 

1 1 1 1 

05  to  rfi-. 

C5 

> 

Twelfth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

o 

CO 

CO 

1 

o — to  to  05 

o 

2 

Table  VI.  March  7th,  1854.  Copper  conductor  to  two  slips,  and  diminished  in  breadth  to  1|  inch. 

Water  kept  at  temperature  99°  Cent,  in  heater.  Streams  of  water  about  temperature  6°  through  coolers. 

Temperatures  at  middle  points  A,  B of  the  parts  of  the  conductor  between  heater  and  coolers  : — 
Initial  Ta=50°-33,  Tb  = 50°70;  Final  l\=6r-07,  Tb=:62°'62. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  687 


j: 


O C 

3^ 


o Si 

3 ^ 


(R  3 

C S* 


cb  o-  as 
O cn 


O 

3 p »-h 
3 Si, 

^3 

3. 5- 

pu  S 
&■  ET. 


a 

fl 

fl>  ??- 

O* 


I I I 

H-  o I—  to  bO  I— ' 


I I 

CC  ^ O Cn  I'C 


Crr  Cn  Oi  to  U)  to 


. ^ tR  N-  ts 


I I I 

o ^ 00  ^ 


g-S 

s B 


(TD  03  ^ 

S'  5i 


O re 

S H 

Cd 


p.  H 

g >■ 


?"  First  half- 
— minute  of  current 
tfl  entering  by  end  next 


r*  Second  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


C5  In  VI  l>S  bs 


> Third  half- 
— minute  of  current 
W entering  by  end  next 


o 

6 

u< 

<x 

1 

CO 

1 1 1 1 

O H-  H-  bO  tn 

I 

b© 

to 

> 

Fourth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

4^ 

CO 

1 

>4>  1-^  CO  4^  Ci  C7« 

00 

w 

o 

6 

1 

1 III 

CO  »— • o b£»  4^  bO 

1 

CO 

> 

Fifth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

Oil 

o 

to 

o 

1 i 

o Ci  CO  H-  bO 

1 

L© 

td 

o 

129 

to 

1 

l>0 

II  III 

Ci  bO  H--  Ci  rfi. 

1 

1© 

> 

Sixth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

C5 

Cn 

CO 

1 ! 
t©  to  ►-*  t— ' **“  CO 

1 

w 

o 

6 

1 

1 1 

it*.  oc 

1 

> 

Seventh  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

oc 

1 

1 1 i 1 

Cn  t©  bO  ^ H-  c; 

w 

bO 

1 

bO 

Cn 

' ' ' L 

k£k.  o 4^  >--< 

CO 

to 

> 

Eighth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

GO 

c» 

Co 

1 1 1 

GO  ^ 4i^  CO  O C51 

w 

0 

o 

1 

o 

c;i 

1 II  1 1 

Cn 

CO  fc©  I—  ^ bO  b© 

1 

to 

> 

Ninth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

t£i 

tn 

1 

to 

L ' ' ' 

c;  t©  b©  t©  ^ b© 

» 

w 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

1 

1 

1 1 

Ct  l©  O O — b© 

1 

> 

Tenth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

CO 

1 

■M 

II  II 

©R  CO  4ii-  I--  — CO 

1 

Co 

w 

o 

O 

Ct 

CC 

CO 

C5 

1 

to 

1 1 

CO  1-^  CO  tn  1— < 

1 

to 

?> 

Eleventh  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  n^xt 

00 

1 

a 

1 I 1 

CO  CO  C5  o — I-- 

1 

p 

o 

0 
oc 

01 

o 

1 

Cji 

III! 

H-  ►— « i-<  i— 

00 

> 

Tvrelfth  half- 
minute of  current 
entering  by  end  next 

1© 

1 

1 1 1 
o CO  N-  H-  ^ o 

1 

t© 

a 

re 


53 


3-  re 
T=! 

!>"  2. 

il  ^ 

Cl 

00  . 

? > 

C 

y H 
H ^ 

II  ? 

Oi 

w -c 

■ p 

00  -: 

CC 

o 

“ * 

2L  ^ 

^ o 


to 

p 

6 

o 

H 

63 


•^1 

On 

p 

O 

Or 


re 

"C 


>• 

p p 
tr 
ffl 

2 


re 

p 


o 

r;> 


Q- 

re 

o 

cr 

c 

re 

re 

P 


P 

3 

re 

re 

(/> 


o 

c 

CTO 


re 

c 

c 


oc 


re  O 


re 

p 


C/3 

C 

I— 

P 

rr 

re 


P 

c" 

o 


■o 

re 


'TP 

re 


re 

c. 


P £» 

P re 
re  ~ 

c 5* 


re 

P 


688  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

reducing  the  conductor  so  much  that  the  current  through  it  would  generate  heat 
enough  to  keep  up  the  required  difference  of  temperatures  without  any  external 
heater. 

59.  The  new  conductor  was  therefore  made  of  just  two  slips  of  sheet  iron  broad 
enough  to  admit  the  whole  length  of  the  thermometer-bulbs  in  the  same  manner  as 
in  the  conductor  previously  used  ; these  slips  were  bent  in  the  places  for  the  thermo- 
meter-bulbs, but  were  kept  straight  and  bound  close  together  elsewhere.  Gutta- 
percha pipes  were  cut  and  cemented  upon  the  iron  slips  near  their  ends,  so  as  to  lead 
streams  of  cold  water  across  them.  The  part  of  the  conductor  between  these  coolers 
was  packed  round  with  a large  mass  of  cotton  wool,  the  thermometer-bulbs  being 

Fig.  5. 


Steadied  in  the  apertures  prepared  for  them  by  means  of  corks,  as  before  (§31), 
The  breadth  of  the  conductor  was  2^  inches,  the  length  between  the  coolers  only  3^ 
inches  (instead  of  10  inches,  as  in  the  iron  conductors  used  previously),  so  that  too 
great  a time  might  not  elapse  before  such  a nearly  permanent  state  of  temperature  as 
depended  on  the  heating  effect  of  the  current  would  be  reached. 

60.  On  the  25th  of  March,  1854,  an  experiment  was  made  with  this  conductor  in 
the  following  manner: — A constant  stream  of  cold  water  was  maintained  through 
each  of  the  coolers ; a current  from  the  full  nitric  acid  battery  of  eight  large  iron 
cells  was  sent  through  the  conductor  for  twelve  times  four  minutes  in  each  direction, 
that  is  for  ninety-six  minutes  in  all,  and  the  thermometers  were  noted  every  half- 
minute. 

The  actual  observations  of  temperature  are  required  to  show  the  circumstances  of 
this  experiment,  and  I therefore  give  them  as  follows ; instead  of  an  analytical  table, 
such  as  those  by  which  the  results  of  the  preceding  experiments  were  exhibited : — 


! 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  689 


K)  N-  ^ - 

O 9)  to  CO  5 

Time  in  minutes  and  half- 
minutes from  commence- 
ment of  current. 

o n g o o M 

Entering  by  end  ^Entering  by  endg'Entering  by  end  5 Entering  by  end  g'Entering  by  end  ^'Entering  by  endg 
nextB.  c§  next  A.  ^ nextB.  (g  next  A.  next  B.  (g  next  A.  ?? 

fD  fo  0 r&  ft  ft* 

Current. 

q5Cnfti»^»^W03WU>fc*N— i--ooooo«OGo^ciC^**^rf^rf^wwc^co)ti*.c^t^t^wfc^H-oa5>i^'^'^ft^fc9oobO(Xfc9co 
*^■^1— db--’^wcoobrfl(»cc«095*fi‘d505^cS9»k^C5**^cnt^db9i>ucji'^diOOcoaiwCoooo  — cccsobobocirfi'^^'i^ 
rfi.H-G0>t^C0OO^tS)^'<rOt59fO9i^C0ftiO'— CiN-OOiii'-tatSOOOOOOOOOOOOOiii^OOOOOO 

Observed  temperature 
at  A byKew,  No.  114,  T^. 

WtCL-f^OOCpCC0pC»G0'^'*4'*<t^'*^’*^C^«^4^C0t^--i--pOOp“H-l>pfc«O<:»'M9^*fc^N-C0C;CCCpa5fc4iC0tf»*H-Gp 
■— ’*^iuo’*^d;di*^dbMl-i^ci5fcbi:irfii^cb'^Qb^'^cib>--':o»ii-o9»'i>u>kUood50Vx’Mtj)Coo*^oi9 
4i^OC04i-ft^C0^(XC5ftiC0?D0a'i0OO:0C0OC0t0»--t«OG0tnOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 

Observed  temperature 
at  B by  Kew,  No.  91,  Tg. 

pppCCppp»Urf^pppppt«t0ppppppt9p&9CCt0b9fc9t^pCr200i^ppCi9iC^CnpO9^C^k^pi-^p 
00-— U)’^N(^cboO'^rfi‘COfcoofticofci)?£>oc)b9<coi^^i— 
O^00tt^'<»cc^05ci(x^?0tc09ifc©0ft^'0^ftcnc©0^0tafc000c00000c0000tt^000000 

Difference  of  observed 
temperatures  — Tg = D. 

CO  CO  fcO  ^ 

0 G)  to  CO  D 

^C5ftT>fk.COfcO>— 0'<>Cift't<^COtON-O^CiC7X>fi.COtO*— O'<»05ft»tf^C0t0i-iO^05Cr»it..C0U>--O'^05ftt>^C0tCi^O 

Time  in  minutes  and  half- 
minutes from  commence- 
ment of  current. 

0 g 0 0 g g 

Entering  by  end  ^'Entering  by  end  ^'Entering  by  end  ^'Entering  by  end  ^'Entering  by  end  ^'Entering  by  endg" 

nextB.  next  A.  nextB.  c§  ne.xtxi.  tn  nextB.  next  A. 

ft  ft  ft  (t  ft 

Current. 

^V»-«<»’<|^^’<l"*»^’<J'M"<»'<r*^'<»Ci0tCiCt0tCtGia5C5950t9SCi0tC5CiC3a5C50tC5C50tCiCiC5OtCiC5CtC5Ct0tCi 

rf^ppi^fcGt:;pppppfc«tpp?Opppp'*^’Mpp':OppGOpGO^'^pOtC5ft<C?tppft»G5pa50tO;C5ppp 

00^GCG5i--O>P^^Ofti“«0Ot0t«ftiU)Oa5^0^OC0C0C0H-^C0GCC7<?Dt0rf^€CH-#-rfi.C0t0C0«C>OC5GCOOC0H- 

Observed  temperature 
at  A by  Kew,  No.  1 14,  Tj^. 

I^ppp'pppppppp^'^pppc^c^ti^rf^rf^h(^rf^rfi».4^*-»t..ii^t^>*^rf-ppt'0t0t0t0t>0l'0bfl'0l'0wppwp 
►-<>'-^^Oob’^«Gccft»i;«0’^o<^'{^«oc^O'^9»6bco*^‘t^>i^i^cocb  — 0‘^*^t'«co^6iCocbc^^c»ti)H— 
OO9iC0Q0t0t09iOOOOOG0CnO^OC0t0OC0t000C»C0»— CGOCOH-Cfi  — CCCOCsOtO  — :iOCOOtOh-tOOO»— 

Observed  temperature 
at  B by  Kew,  No.  91,  Tg. 

ppppppi{:^);^Cn4:^>(^);^»;^pppppppCOCoCOtU.»U4^t;i>^rf;k.COppfcftOtOt9fcCppppppCOCOpptpp 
Oi— NliitC)Cjtc0»(^^N^c5G0CrTC0C0tbO'--O’--i— Codi^ftCnCOtGi—  ©COCiOCi«ft«ft^ft«ftOW»l^'^^cbct>£i^i— 
CO^COCOCO'XU(CiOftiK-©Orfi^'vitn>— ■©CO©tntO©tn9iCOOt4i«^COU)QO'<JCON-ooCOt»->— H-rfi..C>Oi*i-'<JC0O©O 

Difference  of  observed 
temperatures  Ta — Tg  = D. 

Oi  Ci  0 Ox  Ox  — 

00  0 a to  00  p 

'<l©ftirfi>^COtO>— O*^©Cnkfi^C0t0H-O'<l©9i4i^C0tSi— •OM©ft'>C^C0t0^O'<»©Cnst^C0t4>i-*O^©ft»rf^C0fcCi— ‘O 

Time  in  minutes  and  half- 
minutes from  commence- 
ment of  current. 

, g . g 0 0 g g 

Entering  by  end  £ Entering  by  end  ^'Entering  by  end  g'Entering  by  end  g'Entering  by  end  ^'Entering  by  end  ^ 
next  B.  t§  next  A.  next  B.  ^r  iiext  A.  eg  next  B.  <g  next  A.  ,g 

ft  0 ft  ft  ft  ft 

Current. 

pp'^'^ppppppppp*^O5Gt©©t>iC5tC;nCiCjxCjitnrfi..)ii**C0C0tSt—  ^>--^-1— 

cb4^«ow«5c>db>ufttcjicnrfx^C5tbrfi.Hl-l-(»i^t4>Nl.i-i*tjii^cbco»^i^cbrfil-—  — i-^tbcjtcodicsNl- 6!:cocbfciut?ii©fj^ 
Oh-**- •OO'— OOOt^‘‘©Ot5OOOfti>t^t«^C005t5©Ot©t0N-f0O00t0C0fcti-tnC0Q0©^tttC0Ui©H-C0C0it'^C5 

Observed  temperature 
at  A by  Kew,  No.  114,  T^. 

^^‘f^rf^ppfcGUippppppppppptxOtOUr'H-  — 000©©©c»00  00coppppp0p0pp'^‘7— -7*^ 

— ’*^t^)i^^i^G^cjiCiCiCji'^©CO©4^0d5'— '^C5COCbftifc«COcn5^'^'^<^'^^^ti*^'^'*^COOCO*UCiCji 

OU>t0ftTOO©©H-OO^OOCnt0O9iO©C0H-00C;iO©tC»C0t5O5t^^®^*^®®*‘®^^®®®'^®^‘^ 

Observed  temperature 
at  B by  Kew,  No.  91,  Tg. 

pppppp>^ppC«C^rf^rf^J^pfcOfc«fcGfcf!COCOpCO*^ifi^ttH,is*.>l^CoCOU)tOfcOfc9fcftOtOpprf^a^4^>l^4^ppptO 
^5^Ci^(X©COtO*^N— O<X9?OC0©9i’^©Ofcic^©(Xaifti*Ui-l*?C^©fti9fCjiG5-M©k^C0’M^©C^U)©ftiOfft 
OOOWO'— rfi^rf:H©rfi.O00fc0O9»C0Cn©U>H-O9frfi.H-Ot5O00’MOfcCiC0fc0ttHt5©C0O'^t&O^O^C0C0Q000 

Difference  of  observed 
temperatures  Tj^ — Tg = D. 

S ^ CO  00  00  '^rj 

to  CO  0 © tcB 

©MC5Cn^^;H05^CH-0'<^©ft^rf^CotCl^O^Cift1^^;^COtO^— O^©ft^'C^C0t5h-O’O95ft<>f2*‘C0t0>--O'*^©ft^rfi*-C0t0i— ‘O 

Time  in  minutes  and  half- 

minutes from  commence- 
ment of  current. 

1 Entering  by  endg  Entering  by  end  g'Entering  by  endg  Entering  by  end  g'Entering  by  end  g'Entering  by  endg' 

1 nextB.  eg  next  A.  en  nextB.  (g  next  A.  eg  nextB.  eg  next  A.  eg 

ft  Q 0 ft  ^ « 

Current. 

) 

S^^^i^'^^^^*^^^’!^*^^^'^^'^^'^'^'^^°'>0'0  00  30QCGCGCO0(X00a)GOCC00  00aDa0Ci0  00  00CCQ0CC00  0C00'^'O 

i “Acbcj<cwAowd>oti'E..l.tb.Eeo^ig.i^K:.tiit^^.CiiiLcc5b(ioii:ji'i 

'^^^O'^OOh— |||i.cOCOOOOO«OO^Sl— 'Uii— '©COOO^— 05tOO!S»-OJOi— 'QO^OC^OCOCO'kIh-OM— ‘OtO 

Observed  temperature 
at  A by  Kew,  No.  114,  T^. 

wiwtw»H^tXt©H-i-->--i--i--|>pi^CO*f^Cno*p©©©'Vj»».4VJOCi©©©OOOOH-i— 1— 

w(^ti?<^QnOCnOOPfOO*M'*^0tC0C;iUjO00»t-.00OC0©'*^tt*-CnOtC0t©O‘--OOU»OO'--‘ft’*C0t0©00O»-->— ‘OO 

Observed  temperature 
at  B by  Kew,  No.  91,  Tg. 

1 ^^^C04^COpt^*^rf^COpppl:Gt9fcOtOl9tGppt{^pC^C;ip*fHrfi.rfsi.>t..COCOCOCOCO>tHrf;HC7iCi©©©tnfti>*H05CO 

©©2SoDSS^^X^l^iS^*7^^!r^2'^^^9^^^^*^'^*^COrflHl--^(:o4i-ai.©©U>CnOOCOCOb«©CitOCCCO 

1 ^^‘^C®CO©»P>..(XCiO©COCO>t*.OtCnOH-»t^*<ltO©Cn04H.bti*..OiPifO©©H-*CO'<lO^©Cr^bCiH-*CXCOO  — Oft^O 

1 

Difference  of  observed 
temperatures  T a — Tg = D . j 

61.  Iron  conductor  licntcd  by  electric  current.  Ends  kept  cool  by  streciins  of  wnter  about  6 Cent.  IVIarch  2.5,  1854. 


690  PUOFESSOR-  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


The  differences  of  temperatures  here  tabulated,  and  the  half  sums  of  the  same 
temperatures,  are  graphically  represented  in  Plate  XXXV.  The  result  is  obvious, 
either  with  or  without  the  graphical  representation,  and  affords  a striking  confirma- 
tion of  the  conclusion  first  arrived  at  by  so  different  an  apparatus  (§  31),  that  the 
Resinous  Electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  iron. 

62.  About  the  same  time  another  form  of  the  experiment  was  tried  on  a copper 
tube,  with  a vessel  of  oil  fitted  round  it  in  the  middle,  and  kept  hot  by  a lamp  below 
it,  and  with  gutta-percha  tubes  fitted  to  conduct  streams  of  cold  water  round  it. 
A current  from  the  battery  was  sent  alternately  in  the  two  directions  through  it,  as 
in  the  previous  experiments,  and  it  was  attempted  to  observe  the  thermal  effects  by 
means  of  two  open  thermometer -tubes  with  small  spherical  bulbs,  pushed  into  the 
copper  tube  from  each  end,  and  bent  down  at  right  angles  outside  it,  with  their  lower 
ends  immersed  in  two  cups  of  spirits  of  wine.  The  want  of  any  sufficient  regulation 
of  temperature  to  keep  the  liquid  column  of  these  air-thermometers  within  range, 
made  it  impossible  to  get  any  clear  indication  of  a result  by  this  experiment ; but  on 
the  whole,  there  appeared  to  be  an  effect  of  the  same  kind  as  had  been  previously 
discovered  in  copper. 

63.  A few  weeks  ago,  I began  again  to  make  direct  experiments  on  electrical  con- 
vection with  a view  to  obtaining  additional  evidence  in  support  of  the  conclusion 
which  I had  arrived  at  previously,  and  to  investigate  methods  by  which  the  nature 
of  the  quality  in  other  metals  could  be  discovered  more  readily,  and  the  specific  heat 
of  electricity  in  any  metal  determined  in  absolute  units.  I had  determined  to 
give  up  the  use  of  the  nitric  acid  battery  in  consequence  of  the  inconveniences 
which  had  been  alluded  to  above  (§  34),  and  accordingly  I had  constructed  a large 
Daniell’s  battery;  consisting  altogether  of  eight  wooden  cells  lined  with  gutta 
percha,  and  fitted  with  sheet  copper,  suitably  arranged  with  shelves  to  bear  crystals 
of  sulphate  of  copper ; sixteen  porous  cells,  some  of  which  had  served  previously 
in  the  iron  battery  ; and  sixteen  zinc  plates  of  the  same  dimensions  as  those  previously 
used.  Each  wooden  cell  had  sheet  copper  not  only  round  its  interior,  but  also  a por- 
tion of  the  same  sheet  carried  across  it  so  as  to  divide  it  into  two  spaces,  each  com- 
pletely surrounded  by  the  metallic  surface.  A porous  cell  is  put  into  each  of  these 
spaces,  and  a zinc  plate  into  each  porous  cell ; the  two  zincs  in  the  porous  cells  con- 
tained in  the  same  wooden  cell  being  always  united.  The  ordinary  liquids  of  a 
Daniell’s  battery,  acidulated  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper  and  dilute  sulphuric  acid, 
are  used.  The  whole  battery  power  thus  consists  of  eight  independent  cells,  which, 
with  the  connexions  in  ordinary  use,  may  be  arranged  either  in  one  or  in  two  elements, 
but  which  may  also,  should  there  be  occasion,  be  readily  enough  set  up  in  four  or  in 
eight  elements.  Any  power  may  of  course  be  used  down  to  the  lowest,  with  only  a 
single  porous  cell  and  a single  zinc  plate  in  one  of  the  wooden  cells.  The  sulphate 
of  copper  solution  is  kept  constantly  in  the  wooden  cells,  which  remain  in  a fixed 
position  on  a shelf.  Electrodes  from  the  large  commutator  (§  27),  which  is  fixed 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  691 

to  the  wall  in  an  adjoining  apartment  as  near  as  possible  to  the  middle  of  the  wooden 
cellSj  are  brought  through  the  partition  between  the  two  rooms,  and  kept  always 
ready  to  be  put  in  communication  with  the  two  poles  of  the  battery,  however  arranged. 

This  battery,  or  parts  of  it,  have  been  used  in  nearly  all  the  experiments  described 
below  in  Parts  IV.  and  V.,  and  it  has  been  found  very  convenient.  Some  of  the  wooden 
cells  have  contained  the  acidulated  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper  now  for  more  than 
a year  [/or  more  than  two  years  now,  Nov.  1856],  and  as  yet  their  gutta-percha 
linings  have  shown  no  signs  of  injury. 

64.  The  first  of  the  recent  experiments  on  electrical  convection  was  made  with  an 
iron  conductor  prepared  as  follows  : — 

The  conductor,  XY,  consists  of  two  pieces  of  thin  sheet  iron  8^  inches  long  and 
f of  an  inch  broad,  and  bent  so  that  when  put  together  they  form  three  tubular  spaces, 
A,  B,  C,  fig.  6.  The  iron  is  cut  so  as  to  make  prolongations  of  these  tubes  of  about 


Fig.  6. 


an  inch  beyond  one  side  of  the  conductor.  The  slips  thus  put  together  are  soldered 
so  as  to  make  the  tubes  perfectly  air-tight,  one  end  being  closed,  and  the  other  left 
open  to  receive  the  thermometer-tubes  a,  h,  c,  which  were  cemented  air-tight  with  wax. 
In  soldering,  great  care  was  taken  to  prevent  the  solder  from  spreading  between  the 
iron  slips.  Copper  electrodes  were  now  soldered  to  the  ends  of  the  conductor,  and 
the  junctions  were  enclosed  within  pieces  of  gutta-percha  tube,  g,  h,  through  which 
a continuous  stream  of  cold  water  was  made  to  flow.  The  distance  between  the 
coolers  was  7i  inches,  and  they  were  placed  so  that  the  four  spaces  between  them  and 
A,  B,  C were  all  equal.  Divided  scales  were  attached  to  the  tubes,  of  which  the 
lower  ends  were  immersed  in  small  vessels,  k,  I,  m,  containing  spirits  of  wine.  The 
conductor  between  the  coolers  was  wrapped  in  a large  quantity  of  cotton  wool  re- 
presented by  the  space  within  the  dotted  line. 

To  send  a current  through  the  conductor  thus  prepared,  the  whole  battery,  arranged, 
as  described  below,  in  two  elements,  each  exposing  ten  square  feet  of  zinc  surface  to 
seventeen  square  feet  of  copper,  was  employed : — 


Description  and  Drawing  of  Battery  with  Connexions. 

R,  R and  S,  S,  two  series  of  cells,  each  containing  eight  porous  cells  and  eight  zinc 
plates. 


4 Y 


MDCCCLVI. 


692  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

K,  K and  D,  D,  thick  copper  supports  for  the  zinc  plates,  the  zincs  of  R,  R being 
firmly  clamped  to  K,  K,  and  those  of  S,  S to  D,  D. 

E,  E,  a thick  conductor  connecting  the  coppers  of  series  R,  R together. 

F,  F,  a similar  conductor  connecting  the  coppers  of  S,  S. 


Fig.  7. 


H,  H,  a bundle  of  wires  connecting  the  coppers  of  S,  S with  the  zincs  of  R,  R. 

M,  M,  a wooden  partition  separating  the  battery-room  from  the  experimenting-room. 

L and  M are  two  bundles  of  wire  which  pass  through  holes  in  the  partition  and 
connect  the  commutator  G respectively  with  the  coppers  of  series  R,  R,  and  the 
zincs  of  series  S,  S.  The  bundles  of  wires  O and  P complete  the  circuit  through  XY, 
the  conductor  to  be  tested. 

The  dotted  spaces  round  the  porous  cells  represent  shelves  for  holding  crystals  oi 
sulphate  of  copper. 

65.  After  about  an  hour  and  a half,  the  thermometer  at  the  middle  of  the  conductor 
indicated  170°  Fahr.  (76°7  Cent.) ; and  one  of  the  brass  bridges  of  the  commutator  was 
then  lifted  so  as  to  break  the  circuit.  Immediately  the  liquid  mounted  rapidly  in 
each  of  the  three  glass  tubes  of  the  air-thermometers,  and  it  was  prevented  from 
rising  above  a certain  point  in  the  middle  one  by  completing  the  circuit  again.  The 
column  of  liquid  was  kept  as  steady  as  possible  at  this  point  in  the  middle  air-ther- 
mometer by  a person  observing  it,  and  making  and  breaking  the  circuit  by  means  of 
the  brass  bridge,  while  two  other  persons  noted  the  indications  of  the  two  lateral  air- 
thermometers,  The  current  was  reversed  every  three  or  four  minutes,  and  the  liquid 
in  the  middle  air-thermometer  brought  back  to  the  same  point,  and  kept  as  nearly 
as  possible  to  it.  The  imperfection  of  the  regulating  system  was  such  as  to  make  it 
very  difficult  to  prevent  great  oscillations  in  the  thermometers,  but  the  instantaneous 
manner  in  which  their  indication  followed  the  operations  of  the  break  made  it  cer- 
tain that  the  plan  would  be  perfectly  successful  when  a continuously  acting  regulator 
should  be  introduced. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  693 

66.  As  it  was,  the  result  afforded  a most  striking  and  immediate  confirmation  of 
the  conclusion  previously  arrived  at  regarding  the  electrical  convection  of  heat  in 
iron.  Every  time  the  current  was  reversed,  the  liquid  fell  rapidly  (showing  a rise  of 
temperature)  in  the  thermometer  next  the  end,  by  which  the  current  nominally 
entered,  and  rose  rapidly  (showing  a fall  of  temperature)  in  the  other. 

Mr.  Joule  assisted  in  this  experiment,  and  was  satisfied  with  the  evidence  it  afforded 
in  favour  of  the  conclusion  that  the  Resinous  Electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  iron. 

6/.  Unsuccessful  attempts  were  next  made  with  tubular  conductors  of  different 
metals;  and  in  endeavouring  to  get  decisive  results  regarding  the  qualities  of  copper 
and  brass,  I again  had  recourse  to  the  form  of  conductor  used  in  the  preceding  ex- 
periment. The  new  conductors  were,  however,  made  of  much  thinner  sheet  metal 
than  those  of  the  iron,  to  admit  of  a less  powerful  battery  being  used  ; and  conse- 
quently, in  each  case,  a frame-work  had  to  be  arranged  to  hold  the  conductor  steady. 
Great  difficulties  were  met  with  in  continually  repeated  failures  of  the  air-thermo- 
meters. It  was  therefore  found  necessary  to  have  metallic  tubes  continued  down- 
wards several  inches  from  the  bulbs,  so  as  to  prevent  the  wax  by  which  the  glass  was 
cemented  from  being  melted  by  the  heat.  The  battery,  however,  had  also  to  be 
reduced  to  a single  zinc  plate  in  one  of  the  wooden  cells,  as  with  more  of  the  bat- 
tery than  this,  the  heating  action  had  been  found  to  be  so  sudden  in  the  thin  copper 
and  brass  conductors,  as  almost  immediately  to  melt  the  solder  about  some  of  the 
bulbs,  and  so  make  one  or  more  of  the  thermometers  fail  before  the  regulating 
action  of  the  break  was  applied.  Notwithstanding  all  precautions,  the  central  thermo- 
meter failed  in  each  case,  and  the  action  of  the  lateral  thermometers  was  very  unsatis- 
factory both  in  the  copper  and  in  the  brass  conductor.  Tbe  central  thermometer 
could,  however,  be  well  dispensed  with  by  regulating  by  the  break  one  or  other  of  the 
lateral  thermometers  ; and  thus,  after  many  unsuccessful  attempts,  experiments  were 
made  on  copper  and  brass  conductors,  which,  although  still  unsatisfactory,  showed 
decidedly  the  looked-for  convective  effect.  In  each  case,  the  thermometer  which  was 
not  kept  to  one  point  by  the  regulator,  always  showed  an  increase  of  temperature, 
both  in  the  copper  and  in  the  brass  conductor,  when  the  current  was  reversed  so  as 
to  enter  by  the  end  remote  from  it,  and  showed  a diminution  of  temperature  when 
the  current  was  again  reversed  so  as  to  enter  by  the  end  next  it.  Hence  it  appeared 
that  the  Vitreous  Electricity  carried  heat  with  it  in  both  copper  and  brass. 

68.  The  lateral  metallic  tubes  branching  down  from  the  conductor  to  carry  the 
glass  tubes  of  the  air-thermometer,  constituted  a great  defect  in  the  plan  of  apparatus 
used  in  the  experiments  just  described  ; and  the  only  way  of  avoiding  it  appearing 
to  be  to  make  the  glass  tubes  pass  through  the  body  of  the  conductor  itself,  so  as  to 
admit  of  their  being  cemented  air-tight  at  its  cool  ends,  I again  had  recourse  to  the 
tubular  form  of  conductor  which  had  been  tried  unsuccessfully  before. 

69.  A tube  made  of  very  thin  sheet  platinum,  soldered  with  gold,  was  arranged  in 
the  following  manner : — A glass  rod,  inehes  long,  wrapped  closely  round  with  thin 

4 Y 2 


694  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

cotton-thread,  was  pushed  into  the  central  part  of  the  tube,  in  which  it  fitted  closely, 
and  was  carefully  luted  with  red  lead.  After  keeping  it  for  several  days  heated  by  a 
stove,  gutta-percha  coolers.  A,  A,  were  fitted  on  it,  leaving  a length  of  6 inches  of 
tube  between  them.  Wooden  troughs,  B,  B,  were  then  fitted  on  outside  the  coolers, 
and  fastened  to  the  ends  of  a piece  of  wood,  C,  C ; straps  of  thick  copper,  about  an 
inch  broad,  were  bent  to  form  conducting  linings  for  the  troughs,  their  ends  turned 
round,  firmly  fastened  to  C,  C,  and  brought  together  at  D,  D,  thus  forming  con- 


Fig.  8. 


nexions  with  the  electrodes  of  the  commutator  (for  this  part  of  the  arrangement 
see  also  fig.  9).  Two  pieces  of  thermometer-tube,  bent  to  right  angles,  had  their 
short  arms  rolled  with  thread,  and  were  pushed  into  the  tube  from  its  ends,  as  far  as 
b,  h,  leaving  spaces  ah,  ah,  each  two-thirds  of  an  inch,  between  them  and  the  stopper 
aa  in  the  middle  of  the  tube,  and  made  air-tight  by  cement  applied  at  E,  E.  The 
dotted  line  represents  the  space  round  the  tube  and  its  wooden  stand  C,  C,  filled 
with  cotton-wool.  A conducting  communication  was  established  between  the  pla- 
tinum tube  and  D,  D,  by  pouring  mercury  into  the  troughs  (see  also  fig.  9). 


Fig.  9. 


70.  The  system  of  regulating  the  temperature  in  one  part  of  the  conductor  by 
breaking  and  making  the  circuit,  had  been  adopted  only  as  a temporary  expedient  in 
the  experiment  on  the  iron  conductor  (§  65),  in  consequence  of  the  failure  of  a conti- 
nuous regulator  which  had  been  fitted  up  for  that  experiment.  It  had  the  advantage 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  695 

of  requiring  no  other  apparatus  than  the  commutator,  in  regular  use  in  all  applications 
of  the  battery,  and  it  had  been  found  to  answer  the  purpose  tolerably  well  in  the  first 
trial.  It  proved,  however,  very  inconvenient  with  the  finer  conductors,  from  the  too 
great  abruptness  of  its  action.  Besides,  it  was  open  to  this  very  serious  objection, 
that  it  kept  up  the  required  heating  effect  by  an  intermittent  current,  and  therefore 
by  the  passage  of  a much  less  quantity  of  electricity  than  would  be  required  to 
produce  the  same  heating  effect  if  flowing  in  a nearly  constant  current  (the  rate  of 
generation  of  heat  being  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  strength  of  the  current  at 
each  instant,  while  the  looked-for  convective  effect  is  proportional  simply  to  the 
strength  of  the  current  at  each  instant,  and  is  therefore,  on  the  whole,  proportional 
to  the  whole  quantity  of  electricity  that  passes). 

In  order,  therefore,  that  the  current  might  be  kept  as  nearly  as  possible  constant 
at  the  particular  strength  required  to  maintain  the  heating  effect  used,  I had  the 
following  regulator  constructed. 

71.  Two  iron  tubes,  AB,  CD,  20  inches  long  and  fths  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  open 

at  the  top  but  closed  at  the  bottom,  are  bound  firmly  together  with  insulating  blocks 
of  wood,  AC  and  BD,  so  as  to  be  parallel  to  one  another.  Pieces  of  thin  sheet  copper 

are  bent  into  cylinders  ; to  their  tops  pieces  of  thick  copper,  E,  E,  are  soldered,  and 

the  copper  cylinders  are  put  into  the  iron  tubes.  To  each  end  of  a piece  of  thick 
copper  wire,  shown  separately  at  F,  two  pieces  of  No.  18  iron 
wire  are  fixed,  one  of  the  same  length  as  the  iron  tubes,  and 
the  other  less  than  half  that  length,  and  the  two  branches  are 
parallel,  and  at  such  a distance  that  when  their  ends  are  in- 
troduced into  the  two  tubes,  they  move  along  their  axes.  To  use 
the  regulator,  the  tubes  are  filled  with  mercury,  the  apparatus 
is  put  into  the  circuit  by  connecting  with  EE,  and  the  requisite 
amount  of  resistance  is  introduced  by  raising  G,  which  is  kept 
in  any  position  by  having  one  end  of  a cord  fixed  to  its  upper 
part,  carried  over  a pulley,  and  stretched  by  a counterpoise  hung 
at  its  other  end.  [Great  improvement  has  been  since  made  in 
the  regulator,  by  using,  instead  of  No.  18  iron  wire,  thick  copper 
wire  tapering  to  points  at  the  lower  ends ; and  by  attaching 
cups  of  gutta  percha  to  the  tops  of  the  iron  tubes  allowed  to 
communicate  with  the  interior  by  small  holes,  to  serve  as  over- 
flow cisterns  for  the  mercury.  By  this  arrangement  the  tubes  were  kept  always  full 
of  mercury,  and  irregular  contacts  between  the  connecting  conductor  and  the  interior 
of  empty  parts  of  the  tubes  were  prevented. — Nov.  1856.] 

72.  The  apparatus  was  set  up  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  view.  The  battery 
connexions  were  completed  with  the  regulating  break  partly  up,  so  as  to  check  the 
current  somewhat,  and  prevent  injury  from  sudden  overheating  in  any  part  of  the 
conductor. 


696  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

After  a few  minutes  the  break  was  raised  further  so  as  to  reduce  the  current  very 
much,  and  the  liquid  began  to  rise  in  the  stem  of  each  of  the  glass  tubes,  showing 
that  both  air-thermometers  at  first  acted  perfectly.  One  of  the  thermometers  was 
then  steadied  with  great  ease  to  a small  fraction  of  a scale-division  by  using  the 
regulator.  The  liquid  in  the  other  thermometer  was  observed,  and  its  position  occa- 
sionally noted.  The  direction  of  the  current  was  reversed  every  few  minutes,  as 
before,  by  means  of  the  ordinary  commutator. 


Fig.  11. 


73.  Slight  differences  were  observed  in  the  free  thermometer  after  the  reversals, 
but  as  yet  no  very  decisive  indications  of  the  looked-for  effect  appeared.  The  mercu- 
rial thermometer  beside  the  central  conductor  indicated  less  than  80°  Fahr.  (27° 
Cent.),  its  column  of  mercury  having  not  yet  become  visible,  after  the  experiment 
had  been  continued  in  this  way  for  several  reversals. 

74.  The  regulating  break  was  then  pushed  down  until  a somewhat  further  elevation 
in  the  temperature  of  the  platinum  was  indicated  by  a considerable  escape  of  air  in 
bubbles  from  the  open  ends  of  the  thermometer-tube.  The  break  was  again  drawn 
up  until  the  liquids  again  mounted  in  the  stems.  One  of  the  thermometers  was  again 
steadied  by  the  regulator,  and,  the  other  being  observed,  the  experiment  was  continued 
as  before.  A decided  effect  now  appeared  almost  immediately  after  each  reversal. 
The  free  thermometer  regularly  indicated  a higher  temperature  when  the  current 
nominally  entered  by  the  end  next  it,  and  a lower  temperature  when  the  current 
nominally  entered  by  the  remote  end.  After  four  reversals  this  part  of  the  experiment 
had  lasted  about  twenty  minutes,  and  the  mercury  thermometer  beside  its  middle 
showed  104°  Fahr.  (40°  Cent.). 

75.  The  break  was  again  pushed  down  for  some  time,  and  again  raised  till  the 
liquid  rose  in  each  thermometer-tube,  and  the  experiment  was  continued  as  before 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  697 

for  four  reversals,  the  central  mercury  thermometer  rising  to  about  150°  Fahr.  (66° 
Cent.).  The  free  thermometer  rose  and  fell  alternately  through  several  scale-divisions 
almost  immediately  after  each  reversal,  and  showed  the  same  convective  effect  as  had 
previously  been  observed  by  smaller  indications. 

76.  The  bridge  was  again  pushed  down  and  air  again  escaped  copiously  from  the 
thermometers,  but  very  soon  beads  of  liquid  began  to  appear  following  one  another 
rapidly  down  the  capillary  tubes  from  the  interior  of  the  conductor. 

As  the  spirits  of  wine  had  not  once  been  allowed  to  run  up  into  the  bulb  of  either 
thermometer,  these  beads  of  liquid  could  be  nothing  but  products  of  the  distillation 
of  the  oil  which  had  been  used  in  the  luting  of  the  central  plug  ; and  on  taking  away 
the  cups  of  spirits  of  wine  from  below  the  tubes,  the  smell  and  taste  of  the  small 
quantities  of  liquid  which  continued  to  descend  gave  unmistakeable  evidence  of  their 
origin.  After  this  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  get  any  satisfactory  indication  from 
either  of  the  air-thermometers ; but  the  experiment  was  continued,  and  one  or  other 
of  them,  when  by  any  means  the  beads  of  disturbing  liquid  could  be  sufficiently  got 
rid  of  for  a time,  was  steadied  to  a constant  temperature ; the  other  thermometer 
being  observed  when  possible,  and  the  reversals  repeated  as  before. 

The  same  result  was  still  obtained  ; and  on  the  whole,  notwithstanding  the  defect 
which  caused  so  much  inconvenience,  it  was  very  decidedly  established  by  the  expe- 
riment that  the  Resinous  Electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  'platinum. 

77-  \_Added  Dec.  1856.] — After  many  unsuccessful  trials  on  short  brass  tubes,  first 
with  air-thermometers  of  the  metal  itself  and  capillary  glass  tubes  arranged  as  in  the 
platinum  tube  (§  69),  and  latterly  with  glass  air-thermometers  (§  62)  having  very 
small  cylindrical  bulbs,  the  following  conclusive  experiment  was  made  a few  days 
ago.  Four  of  the  large  double  cells,  connected  to  form  a single  Daniell’s  element, 
exposing  10  square  feet  of  zinc  to  17  square  feet  of  copper,  were  used  to  send  a 
current  through  a piece  of  brass  telescope  tube  6 inches  long,  ^ of  an  inch  diameter, 
and  ground  as  thin  as  it  could  be  without  breaking  it  up  by  emery-paper,  over  the 
length  of  3^  inches  which  was  left  between  the  near  sides  of  gutta-percha  coolers, 
fitted  to  it  in  the  manner  represented  above  (see  fig.  11,  § 72).  Streams  of  water 
being,  as  in  other  experiments,  kept  running  through  the  coolers,  and  the  regulating 
break  (§71)  being  used  to  keep  the  liquids  within  range  in  the  tubes  of  the  air- 
thermometers,  a small  mercurial  thermometer  pressed  against  the  middle  of  the 
brass  tube,  with  its  stem  and  scale  projecting  out  through  the  cotton  wool,  indicated 
from  190°  to  195°  Fahr.  (90°*6  Cent.). 

The  regulator  was  not  used  so  much  as  it  might  have  been  with  advantage ; but, 
notwithstanding  great  unsteadiness  in  the  indications  of  the  two  air-thermometers, 
the  observations  showed  decidedly,  after  each  reversal  of  the  current,  a cooling  effect 
on  the  thermometer  next  the  entering  stream,  in  every  case  in  which  the  irregulari- 
ties were  not  so  great  as  to  make  a comparison  impossible.  This  effect  is  manifest 
from  the  following  four  cases,  selected  merely  as  being  those  in  which  one  of  the 


698  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

thermometers  was  most  nearly  steady  during  a few  minutes  of  flow  of  the  current, 
first  in  one  direction  and  then  in  the  other. 

Current  entering  Readings,  in  arbitrary  scale-divisions,  of 


by  end  next 

Thermometer  A. 

Thermometer  B. 

1.  (A 

43 

1b 

42 

441 

II.  (A 

41 

41 

Ib 

41 

341 

III.  { A 

31i 

261 

Ib 

291 

16i 

IV.  (A 

m 

22 

Ib 

201 

Hence  the  conclusion  (see  below,  §§  102  and  103),  that  the  Vitreous  Electricity 

carries  heat  with  it  in  brass,  which  I anticipated  three  years  ago  from  the  mechanical 
theory  *,  is  now  established  by  a direct  experimental  demonstration. 

PART  II.  ON  THERMO-ELECTRIC  INVERSIONS. 

78.  Cumming’s  discovery  of  thermo-electric  inversions  having  afforded  the  special 
foundation  of  that  part  of  the  theory  by  which  I ascertained  the  general  fact  of 
electric  convection  in  metals,  and  every  observation  of  a thermo-electric  inversion 
being  a perfect  test  as  to  the  relative  positions  of  the  two  metals  between  which  it  is 
observed  in  the  Table  of  Convections  (see  below,  § 103),  I was  induced  to  make  experi- 
ments with  a view  to  finding  new  instances  of  inversion,  and  to  determine  in  each  case, 
with  some  degree  of  precision,  the  temperature  at  which  the  two  metals  are  thermo- 
electrically  neutral  to  one  another. 

79.  In  the  experiments  on  thermo-electric  inversion  described  by  Gumming,  and 
by  Becquerel,  the  only  other  experimenter,  so  far  as  I am  aware,  who  has  published 
observations  on  the  subject,  one  junction  between  the  two  metals  is  generally  kept 
cool,  while  the  other  is  raised  until  the  current  indicated  by  the  galvanometer, 
instead  of  going  on  increasing,  begins  to  diminish,  comes  to  a stop,  and  then  sets  in 
the  reverse  direction-j'. 

80.  In  this  way  Gumming  found  that  “ if  gold,  silver,  copper,  brass,  or  zinc  wires 
be  heated  in  connexion  with  iron,  the  deviation  [indicating  the  current],  which  is  at 
first  positive,  becomes  negative  at  a red  heat]:.”  Many  other  experimenters  have 
professed  themselves  unable  to  verify  these  extraordinary  results,  and  have  attempted 

* See  “ Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,”  § 132. 

t Cumming’s  ‘Electro-Dynamics,’  section  104,  p.  193.  Cambridge,  1827. 

I Cambridge  Philosophical  Transactions,  1823,  addition  to  p.  61. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  699 

to  explain  them  away  by  attributing  them  to  coatings  of  oxide  formed  on  the  metals, 
or  to  other  causes  supposed  with  equally  little  reason  to  exercise  sensible  disturbing 
influences  ; but  the  descriptions,  given  by  the  original  observers,  of  their  experiments 
leave  no  room  for  such  doubts.  It  is  certainly  not  easy  to  get  the  inversion  between 
copper  and  iron  (with  such  specimens  as  I have  tried)  by  the  heat  of  a spirit-lamp, 
applied  as  described  by  Becquerel  to  one  junction  while  the  other  is  left  cool ; but 
I readily  obtained  it  by  raising  the  other  junction  somewhat  in  temperature,  with  the 
first  still  kept  at  a red  heat.  Probably  if  the  atmospheric  temperature  had  been 
higher,  or  if  a somewhat  more  intense  red  heat  had  been  obtained  from  the  spirit- 
lamp,  I should  at  once  have  obtained  the  result  simply  in  the  manner  described  by 
the  previous  observers. 

81.  The  easiest  way  to  verify  the  thermo-electric  inversion  of  iron  and  copper  is  to 
take  a piece  of  iron  wire  a foot  or  two  long,  and  twist  firmly  round  its  ends  two 
copper  wires  connected  with  the  electrodes  of  any  ordinary  astatic  needle-galvano- 
meter. Then  first  heat  one  of  the  junctions  with  the  hand,  or  by  holding  it  at  some 
height  over  a flame ; and  note  the  deflection,  which  will  be  found  such  as  to  indicate 
a current  from  copper  to  iron  through  the  hot  junction.  Again,  heat  both  junctions 
in  flame,  or  in  sand  at  any  temperature  above  300°  Cent.,  and  withdraw  one  a little 
from  the  hottest  place,  so  that  while  both  junctions  are  at  temperatures  above  300° 
Cent.,  that  which  was  heated  in  the  first  experiment  may  be  still  decidedly  hotter  than 
the  other.  The  deflection  will  now  be  found  to  be  the  reverse  of  what  it  was  before, 
and  will  be  such  as  to  indicate  a current  from  iron  to  copper  through  hot.  The 
reversal  of  the  current  may  be  very  strikingly  exhibited  by  allowing  the  two  junctions 
gradually  to  cool,  while  ensuring  that  the  same  one  remains  always  somewhat  above 
the  other  in  temperature.  When  the  mean  of  the  temperatures  of  the  two  junctions 
falls  below  280°  Cent,  or  thereabouts,  the  primitive  deflection  will  be  again  observed. 
All  these  phenomena  are  observed  indifferently  whether  the  copper  wires  be  simply 
twisted  on  the  ends  of  the  iron  wire,  or  brazed  to  them,  or  tied  to  them  by  thin 
platinum  or  iron  wire. 

82.  Similar  phenomena  may  be  observed  without  the  necessity  of  going  to  so  high 
temperatures,  by  soldering  galvanometer  electrodes  of  copper  to  the  ends  of  a double 
platinum  and  iron  wire,  and  treating  this  compound  circuit  in  the  pig.  12. 
manner  just  described,  only  with  a more  moderate  application  of 
heat.  If  the  platinum  wire  be  very  thin  in  comparison  with  the 
iron  one  connected  along  with  it,  the  circumstances  will  be  but 
little  altered  from  those  observed  when  iron  simply  is  used.  By 
taking  a thicker  platinum  wire,  or  several  thin  ones  together,  in 
connexion  with  the  same  iron  wire,  or  by  using  a thinner  iron  wire 
and  the  same  platinum,  the  neutralization  and  reversal  may  be 
shown  with  temperatures  below  the  boiling-point.  Most  specimens  of  platinum  wire 
thus  applied  reduce  the  neutral  point  of  copper  and  the  compound  platinum  and  iron 

MDCCCLVI.  4 z 


700  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

wire  much  below  the  temperature  of  melting  ice,  when  the  proportion  of  platinum  to 
iron  in  the  bundle  is  sufficiently  increased  (the  limit,  of  course,  being  the  neutral 
point  of  copper  to  the  platinum  itself.  See  below,  §§  83,  84). 

83.  A certain  specimen  of  platinum  wire  in  my  possession,  when  tested  by  such 
elevations  of  temperature  as  could  be  produced  by  the  hand,  was  found  to  lie  in  the 
thermo-electric  series,  on  the  other  side  of  copper  from  the  position  in  which  platinum 
is  placed  in  all  statements  of  the  thermo-electric  qualities  of  metals  previously 
published.  That  is  to  say,  when  connected  by  copper  electrodes  with  the  circuit  of 
a galvanometer,  and  when  heated  at  one  junction  up  to  ten  or  twenty  degrees  above 
the  atmospheric  temperature,  a current  set  from  copper  to  platinum  through  hot.  On 
raising  the  temperature  of  the  hot  junction  towards  the  boiling-point  of  water,  the 
strength  of  the  current  began  to  diminish  ; came  to  a stop  when  a temperature  I suppose 
little  above  that  of  boiling  water  was  reached ; and  set  in  the  reverse  direction  with 
increasing  strength  when  the  temperature  of  the  hot  junction  was  further  raised,  the 
other  junction  being  kept  all  the  time  at  the  atmospheric  temperature.  I afterwards 
found  that  this  specimen  of  platinum  wire  (referred  to  under  the  designation  P,  in 
what  follows)  became  neutral  to  ordinary  copper  wire  at  the  temperature  64°  Cent. 

84.  Of  two  other  specimens  of  platinum  wire  which  I tried  with  copper,  one 
(marked  P2)  gave  indications  of  a neutral  point  about  the  zero  of  Fahrenheit’s  scale, 
but  the  other  (P3)  remained,  for  the  lowest  temperatures  I reached,  always  on  the  same 
side  of  copper  as  that  on  which  platinum  appears,  at  ordinary  and  at  high  tempera- 
tures, generally  to  lie.  When  these  three  platinum  wires  were  tried  with  one  another 
thermo-electrically,  they  gave,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the  mutual  thermo-electric 
indications  of  different  metals  lying  in  the  order  Bismuth,  P3,  Pg,  Pi,  Iron,  Antimony. 
They  retained  all  the  same  qualities  after  being  heated  to  redness ; and  in  a great 
many  experiments  performed  upon  them,  in  which  I have  found  them  extremely  con- 
venient as  thermo-electric  standards,  have  exhibited  perfect  constancy  in  their 
thermo-electric  bearings. 

I have  not  yet  discovered  on  what  their  differences  depend,  but  in  all  probability 
it  is  on  the  degrees  to  which  they  are  alloyed  with  other  metals. 

85.  The  fact  of  copper  changing  in  the  thermo-electric  series  from  below  the 
position  of  the  platinum  specimen  Pg  to  above  that  of  iron,  when  the  temperature  is 
raised  from  —30°  or  —20°  Cent,  to  300°,  proves  that  every  metal  which  lies  between 
P2  and  iron  for  any  intermediate  temperature,  must  become  neutral  to  either  P2  or 
copper,  or  iron  at  some  temperature  between  these  limits.  Now  nearly  all  the 
common  metals,  for  instance,  lead,  tin,  brass,  zinc,  silver,  cadmium,  gold,  lie  between 
platinum  and  iron  in  the  thermo-electric  series  at  ordinary  temperatures,  and  no 
doubt  many  of  the  rarer  metals  (I  have  found  aluminium  to  lie  between  P3  and  P2) 
are  to  be  ranked  within  the  same  limits.  Hence  at  temperatures  easily  reached  and 
tested,  neutral  points  may  be  looked  for  with  the  certainty  of  finding  them,  between 
each  of  those  metals  and  one  or  other,  if  not  several,  of  the  metals  and  metallic 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  701 


specimens  (Pg,  Pj,  Copper,  Iron)  referred  to  above.  Taking  then  the  platinum 
specimens  Pj,  Pg,  P3  as  standards,  and  using  besides  ordinary  copper  and  iron  wires, 
I commenced  investigating  their  thermo-electric  relations  to  as  many  other  metals  as 
I could  obtain. 

86.  In  experiments  to  determine  temperatures  of  neutrality,  the  first  apparatus 
which  I employed  for  regulating  the  temperatures  of  the  two  junctions,  consisted  of 
copper  vessels  placed  side  by  side  in  which  oil  could  be  raised  by  gas-burners  as 
high  in  temperature  as  the  mercurial  thermometer  can  be  used,  that  is  to  340°  or 
350°  Cent.,  or  somewhat  above  the  boiling-point  of  mercury.  To  do  away  with 
irregularities  from  the  flame  and  cold  air  playing  unequally  on  the  sides  of  these 
vessels,  smaller  ones  were  placed  on  wire  stands  within  them,  and  were  completely 
filled  and  surrounded  with  oil.  In  each  experiment  a wire  or  slip,  about  18  inches 
long,  of  one  of  the  metals  to  be  tested,  had  somewhat  longer  wires  or  slips  of  the 
other  soldered  to  its  ends.  The  compound  conductor  thus  constituted  was  bent  into 
such  a shape  that  the  two  junctions  of  the  metals  could  be  placed  near  the  centres  of 
the  oil-baths  ; it  was  supported  in  this  position,  carefully  insulated  from  touching  the 


Fig.  13. 


copper  vessels  and  from  all  other  metallic  contacts;  and  thermometers  were  put 
with  their  bulbs  in  the  oil  as  close  to  the  junctions  as  possible.  The  gas-furnaces 
were  applied  below  and  round  the  sides  of  the  large  copper  vessels,  so  that  they 
could  be  regulated  to  any  desired  temperatures. 

87.  After  this  apparatus  had  been  used  in  several  experiments,  and  neutral  points 
between  copper  and  iron,  copper  and  Pj,  lead  wires  and  Pj,  and  brass  and  Pj  had  been 
determined,  I saw  reason  to  alter  the  arrangements  in  various  respects,  and  had 
another  apparatus  constructed,  according  to  the  following  description. 

88.  Two  small  oil-baths  were  made,  each  of  an  outside  partly  cylindrical  and 
partly  plane  sheet  of  copper,  and  a concentric  copper  tube  5 inches  long  and  i^oths  of 

4 z 2 


702  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

an  inch  diameter  brazed  to  it  by  ends  of  sheet  copper,  shaped  as  shown  in  the 
diagram.  The  space  round  the  inner  tube  and  within  pig.  14. 

the  outer  sheet  and  ends  was  filled  with  oil  completely 
covering  the  inner  tube,  and,  when  heated,  rising  into 
the  space  between  the  upper  parallel  plane  parts  of  the 
outer  sheet.  A narrow  ring  of  sheet  metal  with  a long 
slip  projecting  from  one  side  for  holding  it  by,  was  put 
in  the  inner  tube  before  the  other  parts  were  brazed  on,  and  during  an  experiment 
was  kept  as  constantly  moving  from  one  end  of  the  bath  to  the  other  and  back  as 
was  required  to  keep  the  whole  mass  of  oil  at  one  temperature. 

The  second  drawing  represents,  on  the  actual  scale,  a section  of 
either  bath  through  the  position  occupied  by  its  stirrer.  This 
diagram  also  shows  a section  of  an  external  case  of  sheet  metal 
which  supports  the  bath,  and  serves  as  a flue  to  carry  the  flame 
and  products  of  combustion  round  its  sides.  The  rows  of  gas- 
burners  for  the  two  baths  were  fixed  in  a line,  and  each  burner 
regulated  by  a separate  stopcock.  The  outer  cases  are  screwed 
to  the  same  stand,  and  the  copper  vessels  holding  the  oil  are 
pushed  into  them  and  rest  with  their  axes  in  a line  over  the  burners. 

The  ends  of  the  baths  and  of  the  outer  cases  are  kept  about  one-fourth  of  an  inch 
apart,  and  their  supports  are  also  made  quite  separate,  whieh  was  found  to  be  neces- 
sary to  allow  one  of  the  baths  to  be  kept  cool,  while  the  other  is  raised  to  a high 
temperature.  (In  the  third  drawing,  the  stems  by  which  the  stirrers  are  held  are 
accidentally  omitted.) 

89.  When  the  baths  and  their  furnaces  are  all  fixed  in  their  proper  positions,  a 
tube  of  thin  glass,  about  10^  inches  long,  just  small  enough  to  enter  easily,  is  pushed 


Fig.  16. 


into  the  inner  tubes  of  the  baths,  and  is  left  resting  there,  with  its  ends  projecting  a 
little  outside  their  remote  ends.  In  recent  experiments  I have  substituted  a simple 
roll  of  paper  for  the  glass  tube,  and  have  found  it  answer  quite  as  well. 

90.  A compound  conductor,  to  be  tested  thermo-electrically  in  this  apparatus,  con- 


Fig.  15. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  703 

sists  of  a wire  or  a thin  bar  of  one  metal,  or  a bundle  of  wires  of  two  different  metals 
5^  inches  long,  with  wires  of  from  18  to  30  inches  long  of  another  metal  soldered  to 
its  ends.  To  avoid  circumlocution  I shall  call  the  former  the  mean  conductor,  and 
the  wires  soldered  to  it  the  electrodes,  of  the  thermo-electric  arrangement.  The 
connexions  between  the  mean  and  the  electrodes  are  generally  made  by  brazing,  or 
by  hard  silver  solder,  when  temperatures  much  above  the  boiling-point  of  water  are 
to  be  used. 

91.  A conductor  thus  prepared  of  two  metals  to  be  tested  is  drawn  through  the 
glass  tube  till  the  mean  occupies  a position,  lying  on  the  glass  or  paper  tube,  with  its 
centre  under  the  centre  of  the  tube,  and  consequently  with  its  ends  about  the  middle 
of  the  hollow  spaces  surrounded  by  the  oil-baths. 

92.  The  electrodes  are  carried  from  the  ends  of  the  insulating  tube  to  the  con- 
nexions required  for  completing  the  circuit  through  the  coil  of  a galvanometer.  These 
must  essentially  be  maintained  at  the  same  temperature,  unless  the  electrodes  of  the 
thermo-electric  arrangement  be  copper,  the  same  as  those  of  the  galvanometer.  After 
trying  several  obvious,  more  or  less  troublesome  plans  to  secure  the  fulfilment  of 
this  condition,  I found  a perfectly  effective  way  simply  to  tie  the  connexions  firmly 
together  as  close  to  one  another  as  possible,  only  separated  from  contact  by  a fold 
or  two  of  paper  wrapped  round  each,  and  to  tie  a quantity  of  paper,  or  to  make 
up  a bundle  of  cotton  wool,  or  some  other  bad  conductor,  round  the  two,  for  two 
or  three  inches  on  each  side  of  the  junctions.  The  junctions  themselves,  except 
when  they  are  between  homogeneous  metals,  are  not  made  by  binding-screws,  but 
either  by  soldering,  or  by  cleaning  the  surfaces  and  then  tying  the  metal  firmly 
together  by  fine  twine.  To  avoid  mistakes  and  prevent  the  necessity  of  disturbing 
the  bundle  round  the  junctions,  in  tracing  the  courses  of  the  conductor  on  the  two 
sides  of  it,  a thread  or  mark  of  some  kind  is  attached  to  one  galvanometer  electrode, 
and  a corresponding  mark  on  the  electrode  of  the  thermo-electric  apparatus  to  which 
it  is  joined.  This  system  of  electric  insulation  and  thermal  connexion  between 
junctions  of  dissimilar  metals,  I have  found  very  convenient  in  a great  variety  of 
thermo-electric  and  other  electro-dynamic  experiments,  and  when  it  was  used  I have 
never  observed  the  slightest  trace  of  a current  attributable  to  any  difference  of  tem- 
peratures in  the  parts  of  the  circuit  to  which  it  is  applied. 

93.  The  conductor  being  thus  arranged,  two  thermometers  are  pushed  into  the 
glass  or  paper  tube  from  its  ends  and  placed  with  the  centres  of  their  bulbs  as  close 
as  possible  to  the  metallic  junctions,  and  with  their  graduated  tubes  extending  nearly 
horizontally  outside  the  apparatus,  but  inclined  upwards  as  much  as  the  inner  dia- 
meter of  the  insulating  tube  and  their  dimensions  permit,  so  as  to  check  as  much  as 
possible  the  tendency  (in  some  of  the  thermometers  found  very  inconvenient)  of  the 
column  of  mercury  to  divide  when  sinking  rapidly.  All  the  space  inside  the  glass  or 
paper  tube  left  vacant  by  the  thermometers  and  the  conductor  is  filled  with  cotton 
wool,  well  pressed  in  to  prevent  currents  of  air. 

94.  This  apparatus  has  many  advantages  over  that  first  used  and  described  in 


704  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


(§  86)  above:  the  temperatures  of  the  baths  can  be  changed  with  great  rapidity,  in 
consequence  of  the  smallness  of  the  quantities  of  oil  which  they  contain ; and  by 
watching  the  thermometers  and  adjusting  the  gas-burners,  can  be  regulated  as  desired 
with  great  ease.  I have  found  it  not  a small  practical  advantage  to  be  freed  from 
the  necessity  of  bending  the  mean  part  of  the  conductor  to  be  tested,  and  of  making 
the  arrangements  to  prevent  irregular  contacts  and  to  keep  the  junctions  and  the 
thermometers  in  their  proper  positions  immersed  in  the  oil.  When  a rare  metal  is 
to  be  tested,  or  one,  such  as  sodium  or  potassium,  which  cannot  be  kept  in  air,  it  will 
be  of  great  consequence  to  be  able  to  apply  the  tests  to  a little  straight  bar  or  slip 
only  a few  inches  long,  or  to  a small  column  filling  a glass  tube. 

95.  For  experimenting  at  low  temperatures  a modified  apparatus  was  made,  con- 
sisting of  a double  wooden  box,  each  compartment,  nearly  a cube  of  4 inches  side, 
fixed  to  a common  base  with  a space  of  about  ^ inch  between  their  sides,  and  a glass 
tube  running  through  them  and  cemented  at  the  apertures  in  the  sides  so  as  to  hold 
water-tight  and  resist  the  action  of  acids  which 
might  be  employed  in  freezing  mixtures.  The 
conductor  to  be  tested  and  the  thermometers 
are  arranged  in  this  glass  tube,  as  in  that  of 
the  other  apparatus  (§  89  to  93) ; and  while  a 
freezing  mixture  is  kept  in  one  compartment, 
the  other  is  either  allowed  to  take  the  atmospheric  temperature,  or  is  heated  by  hot 
water  or  steam. 

96.  The  way  of  experimenting  which  I followed,  was  to  raise  the  temperature  of 
one  bath  until  a deflection  of  the  galvanometer-needle  became  sensible ; then  to  go 
on  raising  it,  and  letting  that  of  the  other  follow,  so  that  the  two  thermometers  may 
indicate  as  nearly  as  may  be  a constant  difference  of  temperatures ; and  to  watch 
the  needle  until  a reversal  is  observed,  or  until  the  limit  of  temperature  which  the 
arrangement  admits  of  is  reached. 

As  soon  as  a reversal  is  obtained,  the  two  thermometers  are  allowed  to  sink  until 
the  needle  begins  to  return  from  its  reverse  deflection.  When  it  approaches  zero 
the  thermometers  are  kept  from  any  rapid  changes,  but  allowed  to  sink  very  slowly, 
with  always  the  same  difference,  or  at  least  with  a quite  decided  difference  of  the 
same  kind  as  that  raised  between  them  at  the  beginning.  The  last  readings  of  the 
sinking  thermometers  which  give  a sensible  deflection  before  the  original  deflection 
is  recovered,  several  readings  when  the  needle  appears  perfectly  at  zero,  and  the  first 
readings  when  the  needle  is  discovered  to  deviate  again  in  the  original  direction,  are 
carefully  noted.  The  arithmetical  mean  of  the  temperatures  of  the  two  thermome- 
ters for  each  of  these  simultaneous  or  nearly  simultaneous  readings  is  taken;  and  it 
is  generally  found  that  the  means  derived  from  the  readings  taken  when  no  deflec- 
tion can  be  discerned,  lie  within  a fraction  of  a degree  of  the  mean  of  the  last  sink- 
ing mean  temperature  of  the  junctions  which  show  one  deviation,  and  the  first  which 
shows  the  deviation  in  the  other  direction.  The  mean  of  either  the  readings  which 


Fig.  17. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  705 


give  no  deviation,  or  of  the  last  and  first  which  give  the  contrary  deviations,  or  of  all 
these  readings  together,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  memoranda  made  by  the 
observer,  is  taken  as  a determination  of  the  neutral  point  of  the  two  metals,  that  is, 
the  temperature  at  which  they  are  thermo-electrically  like  one  metal,  or  thermo- 
electrically  neutral  to  one  another.  In  the  course  of  one  experiment  several  such 
determinations,  both  with  descending  and  with  ascending  mean  temperature,  are 
made,  and  if  possible  also,  with  first  one  and  then  the  other  junction  higher. 

97.  Either  in  one  experiment,  or  with  the  same  apparatus  on  successive  days, 
determinations  are  sometimes  made  with  as  considerable  a variety  of  differences  of 
temperature  between  the  two  junctions  as  is  attainable.  Sometimes  the  difference  of 
temperatures  used  is  so  small  as  to  give  very  slight  indications  of  electro-motive 
force,  even  when  the  mean  of  the  temperatures  of  the  junctions  differs  widely  from 
the  neutral  point,  in  which  cases,  of  course,  the  test  is  deficient  in  sensibility.  The 
best  determinations  are  generally  those  derived  from  observations  showing  the 
galvanometer  at  zero,  with  the  widest  difference  between  the  temperatures  of  the 
junctions,  to  which  the  thermometers  are  applicable  with  trustworthy  indications; 
as,  for  instance,  100°  or  150°  Cent.,  which  are  attainable  in  the  most  favourable  cases, 
being  those  in  which  the  neutral  point  is  at  about  midway  between  the  temperatures 
of  freezing  and  boiling  water.  The  differences  between  these  determinations  some- 
times amount  to  a degree  or  two,  and  even  to  several  degrees  when  zinc  was  one  of 
the  metals  ; but  generally  the  final  mean  for  the  neutral  point  does  not  differ  by  more 
than  a degree  from  any  single  determination  considered  as  satisfactory  at  the  time  it 
was  made. 


98.  The  mutual  interchanges  of  thermo-electric  order  observed  in  various  specimens 
of  zinc,  gold  and  silver,  occasioned  considerable  perplexity,  which  has  only  been  cleared 
up  by  observations  made  subsequently  to  the  communication  of  this  paper.  The  follow- 
ing determinations  were  made  at  different  times  and  by  different  observers,  as  noted : — 


Observer. 

Mr.  C.  A.  Smith 

Mr.  C.  A.  Smith 

Mr.  C.  A.  Smith 

Mr.  C.  A.  Smith 

Mr.  G.  Chapman  and  1 
Mr.  J.  Cranston  ...  J 
Mr.  G.  Chapman  and  \ 
Mr.  J.  Cranston  ...  j 
Mr.  G.  Chapman  andl 
Mr.  J.  Cranston  ...  J 

Mr.  J.  Murray 

Mr.  G.  Chapman  and  1 
Mr.  J.  Cranston  ...  j 
Mr.  G.  Chapman  and  1 
Mr.  J.  Cranston  ...  j 
Mr.  G.  Chapman  and! 
Mr.  J.  Cranston  ...  j 

Mr.  J.  Murray 


Date. 

Sept.  27,  1854 I 

Aug.  18,  1854 I 

Sept.  8,  1854  | 

Sept.  20,  1854 | 

Jan.  29,  1856,  and  Feb.  5. 

Feb.  1856  

Feb. 1856  | 

Aug.  1856  

Feb.  1856  I 

Feb. 1856  | 

Feb.  27,  1856  | 

Aug.  21,  1856 I 


Metals.  Neutral  points. 

Pi  mean 1 

Gold  electrodes  J 

Pj  mean 1 _ 

Silver  electrodes / 

Pf  mean  1 , g.g 

Zinc  electrodes  / 

Silver  mean  1 

Zinc  specimen  (l)  electrodes  / 

Silver  electrodes 1 

Zinc  specimen  (2)  mean  ...  J 

Silver  mean  1 

Zinc  (1)  electrodes  / 

Silver  mean  ......1  58-18 

Zinc  (2)  electrodes  J 

Silver  mean  1 cf-.qr 

Zinc  electrodes  / 

Gold  mean \ 

Zinc  electrodes  / 

Gold  mean 1 69*76 

Zinc  electrodes  / 

Silver  electrodes  1 ^Q.g 

Silver  mean  T _ 

Gold  electrodes  J 


706  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Of  the  two  results  for  the  neutral  point  between  silver  and  gold,  only  the  last  can 
be  reconciled  with  the  indications  derived  from  the  previous  results  as  to  the  relative 
positions  of  these  and  the  other  metals  tried  along  with  them  ; and  accordingly  — 5°7 
has  been  taken  as  the  neutral  point  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  thermo-electric  diagram 
given  below  (§  101).  The  first  result,  70°*8,  was  found  as  the  mean  of  several  deter- 
minations, from  none  of  which  it  differed  by  more  than  0°7,  and  the  discrepance  can 
scarcely  be  attributed  to  errors  of  observation,  but  is  probably  due  to  slight  differ- 
ences in  the  specimens  of  gold  and  silver  used  in  the  different  experiments.  That 
very  slight  chemical  differences  in  specimens  of  gold  and  silver  wire  may  make  great 
alterations  in  the  temperature  at  which  they  become  thermo-electrically  neutral 
to  one  another,  is  readily  understood  by  glancing  at  the  diagram  given  below  101), 
and  observing  how  close  together  the  lines  for  gold  and  silver  lie. 

99.  The  question.  Does  the  difference  between  the  specific  heat  of  electricity  in  two 
metals  vary  with  the  temperature  maybe  answered  by  experiments  showing  the 
law  according  to  which  the  means  of  widely  different  temperatures  of  the  junctions 
giving  no  electro-motive  force  deviate  from  the  true  neutral  point,  which  is  the  mean 
of  any  infinitely  small  difference  of  temperature  giving  no  electro-motive  force. 

I have  not  yet  obtained  indications  of  such  a deviation  in  any  case,  having  been 
prevented  from  prosecuting  the  inquiry  by  delays  in  the  construction  of  a suitable 
air-thermometer.  The  examination  I have  been  able  to  give  the  subject  is  only  suffi- 
cient to  show  that  the  arithmetical  mean  of  the  temperatures  of  the  two  junctions 
giving  no  current,  is  probably  in  general  within  a degree  of  the  true  neutral  point, 
when  the  difference  between  those  temperatures  does  not  exceed  100°  Cent. 

The  following  summary  of  a series  of  experiments  made  on  two  consecutive  days 
may  serve  as  an  example  of  the  degree  of  consistence  of  the  results  obtained  by 
the  method  which  has  been  explained,  in  a case  in  which  the  two  metals  deviate 
rapidly  from  one  another  above  and  below  their  neutral  point. 


Sheet-lead  Electrodes  ; Pi  mean. 

Determinations  by  Mr.  C.  A.  Smith,  May  17  & 18,  1854. 


Difference 

Half  sum  of  mercurial  thermometer  temperatures 

of  temperatures. 

giving  no  current. 

m 

12f 

71 

7li 

7ii 

1211 

121f 

121f 

Mean 

^121°-5 

70 

122 

1851 

120f1 

1581 

143 

133 

121|- 

1211 

1211 

Mean 

^121°-4 

1251 

121L 

681 

122  ] 

Mean 

50 

123  J 

122°-5 

Mean  of  temperatures  by  mercm'ial  thermometer 

giving  no  current. 

Differences  from  50°  to  77° 

122°*  15 

Differences  from  125°  to  185°... 

121°-4 

* See  “Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,”  § 115,  equations  (15)  and  (17). 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  707 


These  results  seem  on  the  whole  to  show  that  the  mean  of  apparent  temperatures 
giving  no  current  is  rather  less  for  the  wide  than  for  the  narrow  ranges,  in  the  case  of 
the  two  metals  concerned ; that  is,  that  the  mean  of  the  apparent  temperatures  giving 
no  current  is  somewhat  below  the  true  neutral  point.  I need  scarcely  remark,  however, 
that  even  if  this  indication  could  be  relied  on,  it  would  be  necessary  to  compare  the 
actual  mercurial  thermometers  which  were  used,  with  an  air-thermometer,  before  any 
conclusions  of  value  could  be  drawn  from  it  regarding  the  constancy  of  the  difference 
of  specific  heats  of  electricity  in  lead  and  platinum. 

100.  The  following  Table  shows  the  results  of  observations  leading  to  actual  deter- 
minations of  neutral  points  between  various  pairs  of  metals  — 


-14°  C. 

-12°*2. 

-5°*7. 

-3°-06. 

- 1°-5. 

8°*2. 

33°. 

36°. 

38°. 

44°. 

1 

0 

0 * 

0 

P3 

Brass. 

Pi 

Cadmium. 

Silver. 

Gold. 

Pi 

Gold. 

Pi 

Silver. 

Pi 

Zinc. 

Tin. 

Brass. 

P2 

Lead. 

P2 

Brass. 

P2 

Tin. 

Lead. 

Brass. 

Different  specimens  of  Silver. 
Different  specimens  of  Zinc. 

53°. 


57°*. 


64°. 


71°. 


99°. 


121°. 


130° 


162°'5. 


Some  tempera- 
ture between 
223°  & 253°-5, 


237°. 


280°. 


Double  wire  of  1 
Palladium  11*31  grs.,  ^ 
and  Copper  19*41  grs.J 


Hard  steel. 
Cadmium. 


Copper. 


Gold. 

Zinc. 


Brass, 


Pi 

Lead. 


^ 1 
Tin. 


Iron. 

Cadmium. 


Iron. 

Gold. 


Iron. 

Silver. 


Iron. 

Copper. 


The  number  at  the  head  of  each  column  expresses  the  temperature  Centigrade  by 
mercurial  thermometers,  at  which  the  two  metals  written  below  it  are  thermo-elec- 
trically  neutral  to  one  another ; and  the  lower  metal  in  each  column  is  that  which 
passes  the  other  from  bismuth  towards  antimony  as  the  temperature  rises. 

It  was  also  found  that  Aluminium  must  be  neutral  to  either  Pg  or  Brass,  or  Pg,  at 
some  temperature  between  — 14°  C.  and  38°  C.;  that  Brass  becomes  neutral  to  Copper 
at  some  high  temperature,  probably  between  800°  and  1400°;  Copper  to  Silver,  a little 
below  the  melting-point  of  silver;  Nickel  to  Palladium,  at  some  high  temperature, 
perhaps  about  a low  red  heat ; and  Pg  to  impure  mercury  (that  had  been  used  for 
amalgamating  zinc  plates),  at  a temperature  between  —10°  and  0°.  Pg  appears  to 
become  neutral  to  pure  mercury  at  some  temperature  below  —25°  Cent. 

101.  The  following  Diagram  exhibits  graphically  the  relative  thermo-electric  bear- 
ings of  the  different  metals,  and  may  in  fact  be  regarded  as  a series  of  tables  of  the 
thermo-electric  order  of  metals  at  different  temperatures  from  —30°  to  300°  Cent. 

* This  determination  has  been  added  in  consequence  of  information  given  by  Mr.  Joule  (December  1856), 
that  hardened  steel  at  ordinary  temperatures  differs  thermo-electrically  from  copper  by  about  one-tenth  of  the 
thermo-electric  difference  of  iron  from  copper. 


5 A 


MDCCCLVI. 


708  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAxMlC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Explanation  of  Thermo-electric  Diagram. 

The  orders  of  the  metals  in  the  thermo-electric  series,  at  different  temperatures,  are  shown  by  the  points  in 
which  the  vertical  lines  marked  with  the  temperatures  Centigrade,  are  cut  by  the  horizontal  and  inclined  lines 
named  for  the  different  metallic  specimens. 


Fig.  18. 


The  object  to  be  aimed  at  in  perfecting  a thermo-electric  diagram,  is  to  make  the 
ordinates  of  the  lines  (which  will  in  general  be  curves)  corresponding  to  the  different 
metallic  specimens  be  exactly  proportional  to  their  thermo-electric  differences  * from 
a standard  metal  (P3  in  the  actual  diagram). 

§§  102,  103.  Theoretical  inferences  regarding  Electrical  Convections  of  Heat,  from 

facts  of  Thermo-electric  Inversion. 

102.  The  thermo-dynamic  reasoning  adduced  above  (§§  10  to  15)  leads  to  the 
conclusion  14,  15),  that  the  convective  power  of  the  vitreous  electricity  is  greater, 
or  (which  is  the  same  thing)  the  convective  power  of  the  resinous  electricity  is  less,  in 
each  metal  for  which  the  line  in  the  diagram  cuts  the  line  for  another  metal  from  helow 
it  on  the  left  to  above  it  on  the  right,  than  in  this  other  metal.  Now  it  was  established 

* See  “Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,”  § 140. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS,  709 


in  Part  1.,  that  the  vitreous  electricity  carries  heat  with  it  in  copper  54),  or,  as  it 
may  be  expressed,  the  electric  convection  of  heat  is  positive  in  copper.  From  the  dia- 
gram we  infer  that  it  is  greater,  and  consequently  positive,  in  Brass.  That  it  is 
positive  in  brass  has  been  proved  also  by  direct  experiment  (§§  67  and  77)»  We 
infer  also  with  certainty  from  the  diagram,  that  the  electric  convection  of  heat 
(whether  positive  or  negative)  is  greater  in  Zinc  than  in  Gold,  and  greater  in  Gold 
than  in  Silver ; that  it  is  greater  in  Brass,  Tin,  Lead,  Copper,  Zinc,  Gold,  Silver,  and 
Cadmium  than  in  Platinum  ; that  it  is  greater  in  Brass,  Copper,  Gold,  Silver,  and 
Cadmium  than  in  Iron ; that  it  is  greater  (that  is  to  say,  since  it  has  been  proved, 
§ 76,  to  be  negative,  less  negative)  in  Platinum  than  in  Mercury ; and  that  it  is 
greater  in  Nickel  than  in  Palladium.  In  Cadmium,  as  we  may  judge  by  the  eye 
from  the  diagram,  the  convection  is  probably  greater  than  in  Copper;  and  in  Palla- 
dium probably  less  (that  is,  greater  negatively)  than  in  Platinum. 

103.  These  conclusions,  certain  and  probable,  are  collected  in  the  following  Table 
of  Convections,  in  which  the  different  metals  are  arranged  in  order  of  the  amounts  of 
the  electric  convection  of  heat  which  they  experience,  or  in  the  order  of  the  values  of 
“ the  specific  heat  of  electricity  in  them.” 


Electrical  Convection  of  Heat 


Order  doubtful. 


In  Cadmium 
Brass  . 
Copper 
Lead 
Tin  . .j 
Zinc  . 


* \ equal  . 


Order  doubtful. - 

Probably  nearly! 
equal.  1 


Gold  . . 

Silver  . , 

Iron 

Platinum 
Nickel 
C Palladium 
[ Mercury 


Positive. 

Positive. 

Positive. 

Positive. 

Positive,  Zero,  or  Negative. 
Positive,  Zero,  or  Negative. 
Positive,  Zero,  or  Negative. 
Negative. 

Negative. 

Probably  Negative. 
Probably  Negative. 
Negative. 


PART  III.  EFFECTS  OF  MECHANICAL  STRAIN  AND  OF  MAGNETIZATION  ON  THE 
THERMO-ELECTRIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  ^ 

104.  Physical  agencies  having  directional  attributes  and  depending  (as  all  physical 
agencies  we  know  of  except  gravitation  appear  to  do)  on  particular  qualities  of  the 
substance  occupying  the  space  across  or  in  which  they  are  exerted,  are  transmitted 
or  permitted  with  different  degrees  of  facility  in  different  directions  if  the  substance 
is  crystalline.  The  phenomenon  of  crystallization,  exhibiting  different  chemical 

5 A 2 


710  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

affinities  on  different  bounding  planes,  between  a growing  crystal  and  the  fluid  from 
which  it  is  being  formed,  and  the  cleavage  properties  (different  specific  capacities 
for  resisting  stress  in  different  directions)  afford  the  primary  illustrations  of  this 
statement.  It  is  probable  that  the  proposition  asserted  is  a universal  proposition  in 
the  sense,  that  there  is  no  kind  of  physical  agency  falling  under  the  category  referred 
to,  which  does  not  meet  with  different  capacities  for  receiving  it  in  different  direc- 
tions in  some  crystals.  There  certainly  may  be,  and  probably  are,  crystals  which 
transmit  certain  physical  agencies  equally  in  all  directions.  Crystals  of  the  cubical 
system,  for  instance  (unless  possessing  the  conceivable  dipolar  rotatory  property* * * §, 
from  which  some,  if  not  all,  are  certainly  exempt),  conduct  heat  and  electrieity 
equally  in  all  directions,  and  have  equal  magnetic  inductive  capacities  and  equal 
thermo-electric  powers.  But  thermal  and  electric  conductivity,  magnetic  inductive 
capacity,  and  “thermo-electric  power-f"”  are  undoubtedly  different  in  different  direc- 
tions in  many,  if  not  in  all,  crystals  not  of  the  cubical  system.  Many  crystals  have 
not  shown  any  marked  difference  in  their  absorption  of  light  according  to  the  direc- 
tion of  its  propagation  through  them  ; but  some  undoubtedly  do  show  a difference  of 
this  kind,  to  such  a degree  as  to  give  sensibly  different  colour  to  light  passing 
short  distances  through  them  in  different  directions^:.  Faraday  had  good  reason, 
after  making  the  discovery  of  the  induction  of  electro-polarization  in  non-conducting 
substances^,  to  try  the  specific  directional  qualities  of  crystals  used  as  dielectrics ; 
and  although  he  found  no  sensible  differences  in  the  inductive  capacities  of  the 
crystals  (rock  crystals  and  Iceland  spar)  which  he  tried  for  this  kind  of  action,  in 
different  directions,  it  appears  highly  probable  that  induced  electro-polarization  will 
sooner  or  later  be  ascertained  to  be  no  exception  to  the  general  rule. 

105,  Another  very  general  principle  is,  that  any  directional  agency  applied  to  a 
substance  may  give  it  different  capacities  in  different  directions  for  all  others. 
Whether  or  not  this  is  true  as  a universal  proposition,  events  have  proved  that  the 
probability  of  its  being  true  in  any  particular  case  is  quite  sufficient  to  warrant  an 
experimental  inquiry.  Brewster  discovered  that  mechanical  stress  induces  in  glass 
directional  properties  with  reference  to  polarized  light,  which  are  lost  as  soon  as  the 
stress  originating  them  is  removed.  These  properties  were  shown  by  Fresnel  to  be 
of  the  same  kind  as  the  property  of  double  refraction  possessed  by  a natural  crystal. 
Experiments  made  by  Sir  David  Brewster  and  Mr.  Clerk  Maxwell  prove  that 
isinglass  and  other  gelatinous  substances  dried  under  stress,  thin  sheet  gutta-percha 

* See  “Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,”  § 168;  also  §§  163,  166,  167,  169  to  171,  Transactions  of  the  Royal 
Society  of  Edinburgh,  May  1854.  See  also  Professor  Stokes  “ On  the  Conduction  of  Heat  in  Crystals,”  Cam- 
bridge and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal,  Nov.  1851. 

■f  Or  thermo-electric  difference  from  a standard  metal.  See  “ Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,”  § 140. 

t Most  crystals  not  of  the  cubic  system,  even  when  nearly  colourless,  exhibit  difference.  See  Haidingee’s 
‘ Researches.’ 

§ Experimental  Researches  in  Electricity,  Series  XIV.  §§  1688,  1689,  1692  to  1698.  June  1838. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  711 


permanently  strained  by  traction,  and  probably  all  non-brittle  (or  plastic)  transpa- 
rent solids  when  permanently  strained  otherwise  than  by  uniform  condensation  or 
dilatation  in  all  directions,  possess  double  refraction  as  a property  of  the  molecular 
alteration  which  they  acquire  under  the  stress  and  retain  after  the  stress  is  removed. 
Again,  magnetization,  as  Joule  discovered,  causes  an  elongation  of  iron  in  one  direc- 
tion (that  of  the  magnetization)  and  a contraction  in  all  directions  perpendicular  to  it, 
with  no  sensible  change  of  volume.  Faraday  discovered  the  wonderful  dipolar  optical 
property  of  transparent  bodies  in  a magnetic  field  (the  first  and  only  case  known  of 
any  dipolar  qualities,  other  than  those  of  magnetic  and  electric  reactive  forces,  called 
into  existence  by  induction):  Maggi  discovered  that  magnetized  iron  conducts  heat 
with  a greater  facility  across  than  along  the  lines  of  magnetization*. 

106.  In  applying  the  dynamical  theory  of  heat  to  thermo-electric  currents  in  con- 
ducting crystals,  I was  led  to  consider  the  probable  effects  of  mechanical  strain,  and 
of  magnetization  on  the  thermo-electric  properties  of  non-crystalline  metals,  and  in 
consequence  entered  on  the  investigation,  of  which  the  results,  so  far  as  I have  yet 
advanced  in  it,  are  now  laid  before  the  Royal  Society. 

107.  To  find  the  effect  of  longitudinal  tension  on  the  thermo-electric  quality  of  a 
metal,  I first  took  eight  thin  copper  wires  each  capable  of  bearing  about  10  lbs.,  and, 
attaching  their  upper  ends  to  a horizontal  wooden  arm  at  distances  of  about  ^ of 
an  inch  from  one  another,  allowed  them  to  hang  down,  each  kept  stretched  by  a 
weight  of  about  |^lb.  They  were  connected  with  one  another  in  order,  and  the  first 
and  last  with  the  electrodes  of  a galvanometer, 
by  nine  wires  soldered  to  them,  as  shown  in 
the  diagram ; the  junctions  between  the  suc- 
cessive wires  being  alternately  in  the  upper 
and  lower  of  two  horizontal  lines  4 inches 
apart.  Every  alternate  wire  was  then  stretched 
with  a weight  of  about  3 lbs.,  and  a slip  of  hot 
plate  glass  was  applied,  sometimes  to  the  upper 
and  sometimes  to  the  lower  row  of  junctions. 

A deflection  of  the  galvanometer  needle  was  observed  in  one  direction  or  the  other, 
according  as  the  glass  heater  was  applied  to  one  set  of  junctions  or  the  other.  The 
deflection  was  also  reversed  when  the  weights  were  changed  to  the  alternate  set  of 
wires,  and  the  heater  kept  applied  to  the  same  set  of  junctions.  In  every  case  the 
deflection  was  such  as  to  indicate  a current  from  stretched  to  unstretched  through 
hot  junctions.  The  uniform  and  consistent  nature  of  the  indications  was  such  as 
could  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  result ; and  I concluded  that  copper  wire  stretched 

* Doubts  have  been  thrown  on  this  result,  I believe,  by  other  experimenters,  who  have  not  succeeded  in 
verifying  it  by  their  own  observation,  but  its  close  correspondence  with  a result  I have  recently  discovered  by 
experiments  on  the  electric  conductivity  of  magnetized  iron,  have  diminished  the  impression  such  doubts  pro- 
duced on  my  own  mind ; and  I look  with  much  interest  to  a repetition  of  Maggi’s  experiment. 


712  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


by  a longitudinal  force  bears  to  copper  wire  of  the  same  substance  unstretched,  the 
same  thermo-electric  relation  as  that  of  bismuth  to  antimony. 

108.  I next  made  a similar  experiment  on  iron  wire,  varying  the  arrangement  so  that 
the  weights  could  be  rapidly  shifted ; and  again  so  that  equal  sets  of  forces  could  be 
applied  to  one  or  to  the  other  of  the  two  sets  of  wires,  merely  by  pressing  with  the  foot 
upon  one  or  anothei-  of  two  levers.  A perfectly  decided  result  was  at  once  obtained  ; 
and  I ascertained  that  the  thermo-electric  effect  was  induced  and  lost  quite  suddenly 
on  the  pressure  being  applied  and  removed.  In  this  case  the  nature  of  the  effect  was 
the  reverse  of  that  found  in  the  experiment  on  copper,  the  deflections  being  always 
such  as  to  indicate  a current  in  the  iron  wires  from  unstretched  to  stretched  through 
the  hot  junctions. 

109.  The  thermo-electric  effect  which  these  experiments  demonstrated  to  accom- 
pany temporary  strain  produced  by  a longitudinal  force,  was,  in  each  of  the  metals, 
the  reverse  of  that  which  Magnus  * had  previously  discovered  in  the  same  metal 
hardened  by  the  process  of  wire-drawing,  and  which  I ascertained  for  myself  to  be 
produced  in  each  case  when  the  metal  is  hardened  by  simple  longitudinal  stress 
without  any  of  the  lateral  action  inseparable  from  the  use  of  the  draw  plate.  I thus 
arrived  at  the  remarkable  conclusion,  that  when  a permanent  elongation  is  left  after 
the  withdrawal  of  a longitudinal  force  which  has  been  applied  to  an  iron  or  copper 
wire,  the  residual  thermo-electric  effect  is  the  reverse  of  the  thermo-electric  effect 
which  is  induced  by  the  force,  and  which  subsists  as  long  as  the  force  acts. 

110.  I have  made  a single  experiment  demonstrating  this  conclusion  for  iron  by 
means  of  a multiple  tension  apparatus,  similar  in  principle  to  that  described  above 
(§  105).  But  with  a somewhat  more  sensitive  galvanometer  than  the  one  I used,  the 
result  may  be  shown  in  a perfectly  decided  manner  (for  iron  at  least)  without  any 
multiplication  of  the  thermo-electric  elements  ; and  a very  striking  experiment  may  be 
made  on  the  following  plan: — A thin  iron  wire  is  wrapped  three  or  four  times  round 
a wooden  peg  held  firmly  in  a horizontal  position,  and  again  two  or  three  times 
round  another  parallel  peg,  about  4 inches  lower.  A 
frame  is  rigidly  connected  to  this  second  peg,  so  that 
it  may  remain  stably  in  a horizontal  position ; hang- 
ing from  the  wire  and  pulled  down  by  the  frame  with 
either  a light  or  a heavy  weight  attached  to  its  lowest 
point.  To  keep  the  wire  from  slipping,  the  parts  of  it 
running  from  the  pegs  towards  the  ends  are  kept 
stretched  by  light  weights  tied  to  them  ; and  the  slack 
parts  below  these  weights  are  carried  away  to  the 
galvanometer  electrodes,  with  which  they  are  connected  in  the  manner  described 
above  (§  92).  Any  convenient  source  of  heat  is  applied  to  the  part  of  the  wire  bent 
round  either  peg,  so  as  to  keep  it  at  some  temperature,  perhaps  about  as  high  as  that 

* Poggendorff’s  ‘Annalen,’  Aug.  1851. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  713 

of  boiling  water.  If  the  wire  be  well  annealed  at  the  commencement  of  the  experi- 
mentj  and  if  weights  be  gradually  added  to  the  lower  side  of  the  frame,  the  galva- 
nometer needle  gradually  moves  to  one  side,  indicating  a current  from  the  unstretched 
to  the  stretched  round  the  hot  peg ; and  the  deflection  goes  on  increasing  as  long 
as  weights  are  added,  up  to  the  breaking  of  the  wire.  If,  however,  before  the  wire 
breaks,  the  weights  are  gradually  removed,  the  needle  comes  back  towards  its  zero- 
point,  reaches  zero,  and  remains  there  when  a certain  part  of  the  weight  is  kept 
suspended.  If  this  is  removed  the  needle  immediately  goes  to  the  other  side  of  zero, 
and  remains,  indicating  a current  from  the  strained  part  into  the  unstrained  part  of 
the  iron  wire  round  the  part  wrapped  on  the  hot  peg ; that  is,  from  strained  to 
unstrained  through  hot,  or  as  Magnus  found,  “from  hard  to  soft  through  hot.” 

111.  If  weights  be  added  again,  as  at  first,  this  deflection  is  done  away  with,  and 
the  deflection  that  first  appeared  is  regained,  when  the  weight  which  previously 
allowed  the  needle  to  return  to  zero  is  exceeded.  We  thus  conclude  that  iron  wire 
hardened  by  longitudinal  tension,  may,  by  the  application  of  a certain  longitudinal 
force,  have  its  thermo-electric  quality  reduced  to  that  of  unstrained  soft  iron,  and  by 
a greater  force  may  be  made  to  deviate  in  the  other  direction ; or  that  hardened  iron 
under  a heavy  stress,  of  the  hind  by  whieh  it  has  been  hardened,  and  hardened  iron  left 
free  from  stress,  are  on  different  sides  of  unstrained  soft  iron  in  the  thermo-electrie  series. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  same  property  holds  for  copper  wire,  being  in 
fact  demonstrated  by  the  experimental  results  described  above  in  §§  IO7  and  109. 

112.  I have  not  yet  investigated  the  thermo-electric  effects  of  stress  (that  is,  the 
effects  accompanying  temporary  strain)  in  other  metals  than  iron  and  copper ; but 
it  appears  probable  that  the  same  law  of  relation  to  the  thermo-electric  effects  of 
permanent  strain  without  stress  will  be  found  to  hold  in  each  case,  since  it  has  been 
established  for  two  metals  in  which  the  absolute  thermo-electric  effects  are  of  con- 
trary kinds.  I hope,  however,  before  long  to  be  able  to  adduce  experimental  evidence 
which  will  supersede  conjectures  on  the  subject.  [Since  this  paper  was  read  I have 
verified  the  same  law  for  platinum  wire.] 

113.  The  object  which  was  proposed  in  entering  on  the  investigation,  being  to  test 
the  thermo-electric  properties  of  a strained  metal,  in  different  directions  with  reference 
to  the  direction  of  the  strain,  was  not  attained  by  comparing  the  thermo-electric  pro- 
perties of  a longitudinally  strained  metal  with  those  of  the  same  metal  in  its  natural 
state;  but  it  would  certainly  be  promoted  by  discovering  the  effect  of  lateral  pressure 
on  a wire  in  modifying  its  longitudinal  thermo-electric  action.  I therefore  made  the 
following  experiments  on  the  thermo-electric  effects  experienced  during  the  applica- 
tion of  a moderate  lateral  pressure,  and  of  permanent  strain  after  the  cessation  of 
excessive  lateral  pressure,  in  various  wires. 

114.  Experiment  to  discover  the  temporary  effect  of  lateral  pressure  on  the  thermo- 
electric quality  of  iron  wire: — A rectangular  bar  of  iron  (If  inch  square),  with  pieces 
of  thin  hard  wood  placed  on  two  opposite  sides,  had  fine  iron  wire  laid  in  a coil  of  about 
twenty  turns  round  it.  The  wood  perfectly  insulated  the  wire  from  the  iron  bar,  and 


714  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


the  different  turns  of  the  wire  were  kept  from  touching  one  another,  by  little  notches 
cut  in  the  edges  of  the  pieces  of  wood.  The  whole  coil  was  made  firm,  and  its  extreme 
turns  tied  down  to  the  wood  to  prevent  slipping.  The  ends  of  the  wire,  extending  a foot 
or  two  on  each  side  of  the  coil,  were  connected  in  the  usual  way  (§  92)  with  a galva- 
nometer. The  bar  bearing  the  coil  was  laid  with  its  two  wooden  faces  horizontal, 
and  one  of  them  supported  on  a thin  piece  of  hard  wood  lying  on  the  stage  of  a 
Bramah’s  press.  Another  thin  piece  of  hard  wood  was  laid  upon  the  top  of  the  coil, 
to  prevent  the  upper  part  of  it  (when,  in 
the  course  of  the  experiment,  it  is  forced 
upwards,)  from  touching  the  roof  of  the 
press.  Blocks  of  iron  were  placed  on  the 
ends  of  the  bar,  so  that  when  the  stage  is 
pushed  up  they  may  be  resisted  by  the 
roof,  cause  a heavy  stress  to  act  on  the 
bar,  and  press  the  lower  horizontal  parts 
of  the  wire  coil  between  the  two  pieces  of 
hard  wood  touching  them  above  and  be- 
low. The  same  blocks  are  afterwards 
shifted  to  rest  on  the  stage  and  bear  the 
ends  of  the  bar  upon  them,  so  that,  when 
the  stage  is  forced  up,  the  upper  parts  of 
the  wire  coil  may  be  pressed  against  the  piece  of  hard  wood  above  them,  which  will 
then  be  resisted  by  the  roof  of  the  press. 

Pieces  of  plate  glass  highly  heated  were  applied  to  the  vertical  parts  of  the  wire  on 
one  side  of  the  bar,  those  on  the  other  side  being  left  cool,  and  the  galvanometer 
was  observed.  Some  slight  deviation  of  the  needle  was  generally  noticed.  7’hen  the 
press  was  worked,  and  immediately  a strong  deflection  took  place,  indicating  a current 
in  the  iron  coil,  from  the  uncompressed  portions  through  the  heated  vertical  portions, 


Fig.  22. 


into  the  compressed  portions.  The  pressure  was 
relieved,  and  the  galvanometer  needle  returned 
nearly  to  zero.  It  was  reapplied,  and  the  same 
powerful  deflection  was  observed.  The  glass 
heaters  were  shifted  to  the  other  side,  and,  the 
pressure  being  continued,  the  deflection  of  the 
needle  became  reversed.  The  pressure  was  removed,  and  by  shifting  the  iron 
blocks,  and  working  the  press  again,  was  applied  on  the  other  horizontal  side  of  the 
coil.  The  heating  being  kept  unchanged,  a reverse  deflection  was  observed,  powerful 
as  at  first.  The  current  indicated  w'as  in  every  case  from  free  iron  wire  to  pressed 
iron  wire  through  hot,  as  is  illustrated  in  the  diagram,  for  a case  in  which  the  upper 
parts  of  the  wire  are  compressed. 

115.  From  this,  in  conjunction  with  the  result  regarding  the  effect  of  longitudinal 
stress  previously  obtained,  we  may  nearly  conclude  that  a longitudinal  strain  in  iron 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAJHIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  715 


Fisr.  23. 


developes  reverse  thermo-electric  qualities  in  the  axial  direction  and  in  directions 
perpendicular  to  it ; for  there  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  a lateral  traction  would 
produce  the  reverse  effect  of  a lateral  pressure,  or  that  a portion  of  a linear  con- 
ductor of  iron  pulled  out  on  two  opposite  sides  in  a direction  at  right  angles  to  its 
length,  would  acquire  such  a thermo-electric  quality  as  to  give  rise  to  currents  from 
stretched  to  free  through  hot.  But  in  the  former  experiment  (§  108)  it  was  demon- 
strated, that  when  part  of  an  iron  conductor  is  pulled  out  longitudinally,  the  thermo- 
electric effect  gives  currents  from  free  to  stretched  through  hot.  The  crystalline  cha- 
racteristic is  therefore  established  for  the  thermo-electric  effect  of  mechanical  stress 
applied  to  iron,  if  it  be  true  that  traction  produces  the  reverse  temporary  effect  to  that 
of  pressure  in  the  same  direction.  There  seems  so  strong  a probability  in  favour  of 
this  supposition,  that  it  may  almost  be  accepted  without  experimental  proof ; but  I 
intend,  notwithstanding,  to  make  experiments,  for  the  purpose  of  explicitly  testing  it, 
as  soon  as  some  preparations  at  present  in  progress  enable  me  to  do  so.  In  the 
mean  time  I have  made  the  following  decisive  experiment  on  the  difference  of  thermo- 
electric quality  in  different  directions  in  iron  subjected  to  stress. 

116.  A piece  of  sheet-iron  36  inches  long  and  16  inches  broad, 
was  rolled  round  two  thick  iron  wires  (|^-inch  diam.),  along  its  1° 
breadth  at  its  two  ends,  and  soldered  to  them.  It  was  cut  into  | 
narrow  slips,  each  about  \ of  an  inch  broad  and  of  different  | 
lengths,  as  shown  in  the  diagram,  so  as  to  prevent  electric  con-  | 
duction,  except  along  a band  about  half  an  inch  broad  running  | 
across  the  sheet  at  an  angle  of  45°  through  its  centre.  The  ends  j 
of  the  slips  on  each  side  of  this  band  were  clamped  (as  shown  in  | 
the  annexed  sketch)  between  two  flat  iron  bars,  but  insulated  ^ 
from  them  by  thin  pieces  of  hard  wood  and  from  one  another,  where  necessary,  by 
pieces  of  cotton  cloth.  These  bars  were  each  \ an  inch  thick,  3 inches  broad,  and 
30  inches  long ; and  the  two  at  each  side  clamped  together  upon  the  pio-.  24. 
pieces  of  hard  wood,  with  the  iron  slips  between  them,  formed  a firm 
beam,  by  means  of  which  a considerable  stress  would  be  brought  to 
bear  on  the  sheet  iron  to  stretch  it  in  the  direction  of  the  slips.  The 
upper  of  these  beams  was  laid  resting  with  its  two  ends  on  the  tops  of 
stout  wooden  pillars,  supported  below  on  a very  strong  wooden  bar 
laid  on  the  stage  of  a Bramah’s  press.  The  lower  double  iron  beam 
hanging  down  and  straightening  the  sheet  iron  by  its  weight  had  strong 
iron  links  put  over  its  ends,  and  an  iron  bar  of  about  If-inch  square 
section  slipped  through  them  below,  so  as  to  hang  down  a small 
distance  below  the  roof  of  the  press.  Thus,  when  the  press  is  worked,  the  upper 
double  iron  beam  is  forced  up,  and  the  sheet  iron  is  stretched  between  it  and 

* The  thinner  the  better,  I believe,  as  a partial  failure  was  experienced  from  these  pieces  of  wood  breaking 
at  one  side  and  allowing  the  ends  of  the  iron  slips  to  get  drawn  in  between  the  iron  bars. 

MDCCCLVI.  5 B 


716  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

the  lower  double  iron  beam,  which  is  held  down  by  the  links  and  the  bar  under 
the  roof  of  the  press.  Before  working  the  press, 
the  rectangular  wooden  frame  with  its  iron  cross- 
head is  steadied  by  cords  from  hooks  in  the  ceil- 
ing, and  the  following  arrangements  are  made  : — 

Two  slips  of  sheet  iron,  each  about  18  inches  long, 
are  soldered  to  the  upper  and  lower  ends  of  the 
oblique  conducting  channel,  and  their  other  ends 
are  soldered  to  copper  wires  and  put  into  the 
circuit  of  a galvanometer,  with  the  usual  precau- 
tions (§  92)  to  ensure  equality  of  temperature  and 
electrical  insulation  between  the  two  junctions  of 
the  dissimilar  metals.  Four  tin-plate  tubes,  of 
semicircular  section,  each  about  f-inch  diameter, 
and  coated  with  a single  fold  of  paper  pasted 
round  it,  are  pressed  with  their  flat  sides  on  the 
two  sides  of  the  sheet  iron  against  the  upper  and 
lower  edges  of  the  oblique  conducting  band ; and 
are  connected  by  india-rubber  junctions,  so  that 
steam  may  be  blown  through  two  of  them  to  heat 
one  edge  of  the  conducting  band,  and  cold  water  sent  through  the  other  pair  to  keep 
the  other  edge  of  the  band  cold.  The  arrangements  being  thus  made,  a small  boiler, 
heated  by  a common  wire-gauze  gas-lamp,  is  used  to  send  steam  through  one  pair  of 
the  tubes,  and  the  town-supply  water-pipes  give  a continued  stream  of  cold  water 
through  the  other  pair.  When  the  galvanometer  was  observed,  there  was  at  first  no 
sensible  indication  of  a current.  The  press  was  then  worked,  and  the  galvanometer 
immediately  exhibited  a slight  deflection.  The  press  was  released,  and  a careful 
observation  gave  again  little  or  no  evidence  of  a current.  Then,  by  an  arrangement 
of  double-branched  stop-cocks,  the  steam  and  cold  water  were  quickly  reversed,  so 
that  the  edge  of  the  conducting  band  which  was  hot  became  cooled,  and  the  other 
one  became  heated.  Still  the  galvanometer  showed  no  sign  of  current  until  the 
press  was  worked,  when  a reverse  deflection  to  the  former  was  manifested.  While 
the  press  was  kept  up  the  steam  and  cold  water  were  again  sent  along  the  same 
edges  as  at  first.  After  a short  time  the  deflection  of  the  needle  was  reversed,  and 
the  same  current  as  at  first  was  indicated.  The  deflections  were  very  slight  in  each 
case,  but  were  unmistakeably  demonstrated  by  the  use  of  the  reversing  break  (com- 
mutator) connected  with  the  galvanometer.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  accident  noted 
above,  a much  more  powerful  stress  would  have  been  applied  to  the  iron,  and  I have 
no  doubt  but  that  conspicuous  deflections  of  the  needle  would  have  been  produced. 

117.  The  current  in  every  case  was  down  the  inclined  channel  of  sheet  iron  when  the 
upper  edge  was  heated,  and  up  the  incline  when  the  lower  edge  was  heated.  That  is,  if 


Fig.  25. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  717 

we  imagine  a rectangular  zigzag,  from  side  to  side  of  the  bar,  instead  of  the  true 
rectilinear  course  of  the  current,  the  current  would  be  from  transversely  stretched  to 
longitudinally  stretched  through  hot.  Hence  it  is  established  by  this  experiment,  that 
iron,  under  a simple  longitudinal  stress,  has  different  thermo-electric  qualities  in 
different  directions. 

Knowing,  as  we  do,  from  the  first  experiment  on  copper,  described  above  (§  107), 
that  iron  is  not  the  only  metal  thermo-electrically  affected  by  stress,  we  may  con- 
clude with  much  probability  that,  in  general,  metals  subjected  to  stresses  not  equal 
in  all  directions  will  acquire  the  crystalline  characteristic  of  having  different  quali- 
ties, as  regards  thermo-electricity,  in  different  directions. 

118.  The  qualitative  investigation  of  the  thermo-electric  effects  of  stress,  unaccom- 
panied by  permanent  strain,  that  is,  the  elastic  thermo-electric  effects  of  stress,  would 
be  complete  for  iron  if  the  thermo-electric  effect  of  a uniform  dilatation  or  condensa- 
tion in  all  directions  had  been  ascertained.  I hope  before  long  to  be  able  to  carry 
into  effect  various  plans  I have  formed  with  this  object  in  view ; but  in  the  mean  time 
it  would  be  the  merest  guessing  to  speculate  as  to  the  result. 

119.  The  establishment  of  the  crystalline  characteristic  for  the  thermo-electric 
effects  of  stress  not  equal  in  all  directions,  would  make  it  probable  that  any  thermo- 
electric effects  which  a metal  permanently  strained  by  such  a stress  can  retain  after 
the  stress  is  removed,  must  also  possess  the  crystalline  characteristic.  That  this  is 
really  the  case  I had  in  fact  proved,  before  performing  the  decisive  experiment,  just 
described,  regarding  the  nature  of  the  elastic  effect,  which  was  only  made  a few  weeks 
since.  The  following  experiments  on  the  thermo-electric  effects  of  permanent  strains 
in  metals  were  all  made  more  than  a year  ago. 

120.  Well-annealed  iron  wire  was  rolled  in  a coil  of  about  twenty  turns  on  a flat 
bar  of  iron  |^-inch  thick  and  2 inches  broad.  The  bar  was  laid  on  an  anvil,  with 
little  pieces  of  thicker  wire  laid  upon  it  to  support  the  iron  core  and  prevent  the 
lower  parts  of  the  coil  from  being  pressed.  The  upper  parts  of  the  coil  lying  on  the 
upper  flat  side  of  the  core  were  hammered  till  they  were  all  very  much  flattened. 
The  coil  was  then  a little  loosened  and  drawn  off  the  bar  of  iron,  and  a similar  wooden 
core  was  pushed  into  it.  The  ends  of  the  iron  wire  were  arranged,  with  the  usual 
precautions  (§  92),  in  connexion  with  the  electrodes  of  a galvanometer.  A piece  of 
hot  glass  (not  above  the  boiling-point  of  water)  was  laid  along  one  edge  of  the  coil, 
so  as  to  heat  the  iron  wire  at  one  set  of  the  points  separating  hammered  from 
unhammered  portions.  The  galvanometer  showed  by  a great  deflection  of  its  needle 
a current  through  the  iron  coil  from  hammered  to  unhammered  through  hot.  When 
the  heater  was  applied  at  the  other  edge  of  the  flat  coil,  the  deflection  soon  became 
reversed ; still,  and  always  in  subsequent  repetitions,  indicating  a current  from  the 
strained  to  the  soft  metal  through  the  hot  junctions. 

121.  The  coil  was  next  replaced  on  its  iron  core,  heated  to  redness  in  the  fire,  and 
cooled  slowly.  It  was  then  insulated  by  slipping  in  paper  between  it  and  the  iron 

5 B 2 


718  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


bar,  or  by  putting  it  once  more  on  its  wooden  core ; and  it  was  tested  in  the  galvano- 
meter circuit  with  the  application  of  glass  heaters  as  before.  Not  the  slightest  trace 
of  a current  was  now  found ; a result  verifying  the  conclusion  arrived  at  by  Magnus, 
that  it  is  not  peculiarities  of  form  in  different  parts  of  a circuit  of  one  uncrystallized 
metal,  but  variations  in  its  quality  as  to  mechanical  strain,  that  can  ever  give  it  con- 
tinuous thermo-electric  action. 

122.  It  has  thus  been  proved  that  a circuit  of  iron  permanently  strained  by  pressure 
across  the  lines  of  conduction  acquires  the  same  kind  of  thermo-electric  quality  as 
that  which  Magnus  first  discovered  to  be  produced  by  the  lateral  pressure  com- 
pounded with  longitudinal  traction,  which  the  process  of  wire-drawing  calls  into 
play,  or  as  that  which  I had  myself  found  to  result  from  a simple  traction,  leaving  a 
permanent  elongation  after  the  force  is  removed.  In  all  these  cases  the  iron  is  found 
to  be  harder  than  it  was  before  acquiring  the  strain,  or  than  it  becomes  again  after 
being  annealed.  Hence  the  nature  of  the  thermo-electric  effect  in  each  of  the  three 
cases  falls  under  the  designation  “ current  from  hard  to  soft  through  hot,'"  by  which 
Magnus  stated  his  result  as  regards  iron.  This  is  just  as  is  to  be  expected  from  the 
crystalline  theory;  since  longitudinal  extension  has  a common  characteristic  with 
lateral  condensation  in  the  theory  of  strains,  and  only  differs  from  condensation 
uniform  in  all  transverse  directions,  by  a certain  degree  of  absolute  dilatation  which 
accompanies  it,  instead  of  the  slight  absolute  condensation  accompanying  the  lateral 
condensation  as  an  effect  of  pressure  all  round  the  sides.  In  fact  the  agreement 
between  the  charaeters  of  the  thermo-electric  effects  due  to  longitudinal  traction 
and  lateral  pressure,  and  again  between  the  reverse  characters  of  the  effects  of  per- 
manent longitudinal  extension  and  those  of  permanent  lateral  compression  established 
by  the  experiments  which  have  been  described,  proves  that  these  effects  are  due  to 
distorting  stress,  and  to  permanent  distortion,  in  the  main,  and  leaves  it  quite  an 
open  question,  only  to  be  decided  by  further  experimental  investigation,  what  may 
be  the  effects  of  uniform  pressure  and  of  permanent  uniform  condensations  or  dila- 
tations. 

123.  The  crystalline  theory  is  really  unavoidable  when  it  is  thus  established  that 
the  effect  discovered  is  due  to  distortion;  but  still,  as  the  one  designation  “current 
from  hard  to  soft  through  hot”  applies  to  all  the  cases  of  permanent  strain  in  iron  as 
yet  experimented  on,  I thought  it  necessary,  for  removing  the  possibility  of  objec- 
tions, that  an  iron  conductor  giving  a current  from  soft  to  hard  through  hot,  should 
be  constructed.  I therefore  took  twenty-four  small  soft  iron  bars  turned  in  a lathe 
to  a cylindrical  form  Jth  of  an  inch  diameter,  and  each  an  inch  long,  with  flat  ends ; 
and  compressed  twelve  of  them  longitudinally  in  a Bramah’s  press,  so  as  to  perma- 
nently shorten  each  by  about  ^th  of  an  inch.  They  were  then  set  in  a wooden  board 
cut  to  hold  them  firmly  lengthwise  in  two  rows,  those  hardened  by  compression  and 
those  left  soft,  being  placed  alternately  with  their  ends  in  contact.  The  end  pieces 
towards  one  side  were  connected  with  one  another  by  a little  slip  of  iron  touching 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  719 


each,  and  the  other  ends  of  the  rows  were  connected  with  the  electrodes  of  a galva- 
nometer by  slips  of  iron  touching  them.  Each  row  was  firmly  wedged  up  between 
its  terminal  iron  slips  to  ensure  metallic  Fig.  26. 

contact;  but  after  several  attempts,  and 
with  all  care  in  cleaning  the  surfaces  meant  — 
to  touch,  no  sufficient  completeness  of  -- 
contact  throughout  the  circuit  could  be 
obtained  until  mercury  was  introduced  as  a liquid  solder  to  connect  the  pieces  of 
iron.  This  was  done  simply  by  pressing  them  together  as  at  first,  pasting  paper 
round  the  junctions,  and  pushing  little  drops  of  liquid  mercury  or  small  quantities 
of  soft  mercurial  amalgam  into  apertures  in  the  tops  of  these  paper  coverings. 
Twelve  hollows  were  cut  in  the  board  under  and  round  the  junction  of  the  iron  bars, 
each  except  the  last  including  a pair  of  ends  of  the  bars  in  contact  in  each  row,  and  the 
last  including  the  ends  of  the  extreme  bars  on  that  side  and  the  slip  of  iron  by  which 
they  are  connected.  These  hollows  were  filled  alternately  with  hot  sand  and  cold 
sand,  which  was  everywhere  piled  over  the  junctions ; and  the  galvanometer  gave 
slight  indications  of  a current,  the  direction  of  which  through  the  iron  appeared  to 
be  generally  from  uncompressed  to  compressed  through  hot. 

124.  The  result,  however,  was  not  satisfactory;  and  it  was  obvious  that  the  plan 
which  had  been  adopted  for  heating  and  cooling  was  quite  insufficient  to  sustain  the 
required  differences  of  temperature  through  so  considerable  masses  of  iron  ; I there- 
fore had  an  apparatus  constructed  for  the  purpose,  consisting  of  two 
main  pipes  of  tin-plate,  each  carrying  six  smaller  pipes  and  leading 
to  small  cells,  also  of  tin-plate,  with  cylindrical  passages  through 
them  to  admit  the  iron  bars,  and  with  short  discharge  pipes  attached 
to  them  on  the  other  side  from  that  by  which  the  former  enters. 

These  cells  were  fitted  into  the  hollows  cut  for  the  sand  in  the  board 
formerly  used,  the  main  pipes  occupying  parallel  positions  above 
them  on  each  side  several  inches  from  one  another.  The  iron  bars, 
each  coated  with  paper  and  united  as  before  one  to  another  with 
mercury  solder,  were  pushed  through  the  hollows  of  the  cells,  and  were  fixed  in  two 
rows,  with  a junction  in  the  centre  of  each  of  these  hollows,  and  with  the  terminals 
adj  usted  as  before.  Cold  water  from 
the  town  supply-pipes  was  then  run 
into  one  of  the  main  pipes,  so  as  to 
flow  through  the  branch  pipes  and 
cells  connected  with  it ; and  steam 
from  a boiler  heated  by  an  ordi- 
nary wire-gauze  gas-burner  was  sent 
through  the  other  system,  so  as  to 
cool  and  heat  alternately  in  their 


-<-s-\rjnr  x n a h s b j,  h .s  ir^ 


S) 


720  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

order  of  position  the  twelve  cells  with  the  junctions  which  they  surround.  A deflection 
of  the  galvanometer  needle,  amounting  to  about  4°,  was  now  observed ; and  when  the 
cold  water  and  steam  supplies  were  interchanged  in  the  two  sets  of  tubes,  an  equal 
reverse  deflection  almost  immediately  took  place.  The  current  indicated  was  always 
in  many  trials  from  uncompressed  to  compressed  through  hot  in  the  iron  of  the  circuit. 

125.  Here  then  we  have  a case  of  thermo-electric  action  in  iron  giving  a current 
fr'om  soft  to  hard  through  hot ; not  as  found  before,  “ from  hard  to  soft  through  hot.” 
Hence  it  is  not  pieces  of  hardened  iron  in  general,  but  the  direction  of  extension  or 
directions  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  compression,  in  iron  hardened  by  extension 
or  by  compression,  that  have  the  thermo-electric  quality  of  deviating  from  soft  iron 
towards  bismuth  ; and  a line  of  compression,  or  (as  we  may  now  safely  conclude) 
lines  perpendicular  to  a line  of  extension,  have  the  reverse  deviation,  that  is  deviate 
from  soft  iron  towards  antimony,  in  the  thermo-electric  series.  [^Addition,  Dec. 
1856. — Subsequently  to  the  reading  of  the  paper,  I have,  in  verification  of  this  con- 
clusion, found,  by  a direct  experiment,  that  a conductor  of  sheet  iron,  hardened  by 
lateral  extension  and  softened  in  parts,  has  the  thermo-electric  property  of  giving  a 
current  from  soft  to  hard  through  hoti]  The  crystalline  theory  being  thus  fully 
established  for  the  thermo-electric  effects  of  mechanical  strain  in  iron,  whether  tem- 
porarily induced  during  the  application  of  stress,  or  remaining  with  molecular  dis- 
placement after  the  stress  is  removed,  we  may  readily  suppose  it  will  be  found  to 
hold  equally  for  all  thermo-electric  effects  any  metal  can  experience  from  mechanical 
action,  except  the  hitherto  undiscovered  effects  of  condensations  or  dilatations  equal 
in  all  directions.  The  experiments  I have  already  made  on  other  metals  than  iron, 
do  not  go  further  in  verifying  the  crystalline  theory  than  to  show  for  copper  and  tin 
wires  what  I had  previously  shown  for  iron,  that  the  same  thermo-electric  effect  in  a 
linear  conductor  is  produced  by  permanent  longitudinal  extension  and  permanent 
lateral  compression. 

126.  The  process  of  raising  to  a high  temperature  and  then  cooling  very  suddenly, 
produces  a marked  effect  on  the  mechanical  qualities  of  most  metals,  especially  on 
their  hardness ; and  generally  all  that  is  neeessary  to  do  away  with  this  effect  and 
restore  the  metal  to  its  primitive  condition,  is  to  keep  it  for  some  time  at  a high 
temperature  and  let  it  cool  slowly.  This  process  being  called  annealing,  I shall  for 
brevity  designate  as  unannealed,  any  substance  which  has  been  subjected  to  the  former 
process  (sudden  cooling)  and  which  has  not  been  subsequently  annealed.  It  is  not 
easy  to  judge  exactly  of  the  relation  of  the  strains  in  the  different  parts  of  an  unan- 
nealed piece  of  metal,  to  simple  mechanical  strains;  but  some  thermo-electric  effect, 
whatever  its  exact  nature  and  explanation  may  be,  is  to  be  anticipated,  with  so  great 
a change  of  other  qualities  as  many  metals  experience  in  the  process  of  sudden 
cooling ; and  it  may  be  readily  supposed  that  different  thermo-electric  qualities  will 
be  found  in  unannealed  pieces  of  different  shapes.  I have  therefore  made  experiments 
on  the  thermo-electric  differences  between  unannealed  and  annealed  linear  conductors 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  721 


consisting  of  round  wires,  of  wires  flattened  by  hammering,  and  of  flat  slips,  of  one 
metallic  substance. 

127.  Twisting  a wire  beyond  its  limits  of  elasticity  hardens  it  perhaps  as  much  as 
traction  or  hammering,  and  certainly  in  every  case,  when  continued  far  enough,  makes 
the  metal  very  brittle.  The  nature  of  the  mechanical  strain  here  operative  is  easily 
expressed  and  explained  in  the  theory  of  elasticity  in  terms  of  simple  strains  different 
in  magnitude  and  direetion  in  different  parts  of  the  wire ; but  it  is  not  very  easy  to 
judge  by  theory  from  the  effects  of  simple  strains  supposed  known,  what  kind  of 
thermo-electric  effect,  if  any,  is  to  be  expected  in  a metallie  wire,  with  strain  thus 
heterogeneously  distributed  through  it.  I have  therefore  made  experiments  to  deter- 
mine this  effect  in  various  metals. 

128.  For  experimenting  on  the  thermo-electric  differences  between  annealed  and 
unannealed  metallic  conductors,  a wire,  round  or  flattened,  or  a slip  of  the  metal  was 
wrapped  in  a coil  of  from  ten  to  thirty  turns  on  a wooden  core,  about  2 inches  broad 
and  ^ of  an  inch  thick,  or  sometimes  only  an  inch  broad,  with  a flat  slip  of  thin 
sheet-iron  laid  on  one  side  of  it.  The  wooden  core  was  then  drawn  away,  and  the 
coil,  held  in  form  by  the  thin  iron  core,  was  heated  to  redness  in  the  fire,  or  to  some 
temperature  short  of  its  melting-point,  in  hot  oil,  and  was  then  suddenly  plunged  in 
cold  water.  After  that,  one  side  of  the  iron  core  was  held  over  a flame,  so  as  to  heat 
the  parts  of  the  coil  next  it,  while  the  parts  of  the  coil  on  the  other  side  were  care- 
fully kept  cool,  by  the  constant  application  of  cold  water  with  a sponge.  The 
wooden  core  was  then  slipped  in  and  the  sheet-iron  removed ; and  the  coil  was  ready 
for  testing  by  the  galvanometer. 

129.  The  preparations  for  an  experiment  on  the  thermo-electric  effect  of  permanent 
torsion,  were  commenced  by  bending  a short  portion  at  each  end  of  a length  of  two 
or  three  yards  of  the  wire  to  be  examined,  holding  these  end  portions  so  as  to  keep 
the  wire  between  them  firmly  stretched,  and  twisting  it  till  it  became  brittle.  It  was 
then  wound  on  a flat  iron  core  (unless  it  was  too  brittle,  as  often  proved  to  be  the 
case,  and  then  another  wire  was  similarly  prepared  but  not  twisted  quite  so  much) ; 
the  parts  of  the  coil  on  one  side  were  carefully  annealed  by  flame  or  hot  oil,  while 
those  on  the  other  side  were  kept  cool  by  sponging  with  cold  water.  The  iron  core 
was  then  drawn  out  and  the  wooden  core  slipped  into  its  place ; and  the  coil  was 
ready  for  testing  by  the  galvanometer. 

130.  In  making  the  thermo-electric  experiments  on  the  Fig.  29. 

coils  prepared  in  these  various  ways,  glass  heaters  were 
first  used,  but  I afterwards  substituted  two  tubes  of  horse- 
shoe section  made  of  tin-plate  and  coated  with  paper,  which 
were  applied  with  their  concave  parts  touching  the  coil 
round  its  two  edges.  Steam  from  the  small  boiler  was  sent 
through  one  of  these,  and  cold  water  from  the  town  supply- 
pipes  through  the  other. 


722  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

131.  The  wires  used,  with  the  exception  of  the  iron,  steel  and  brass,  were  all  sup- 
plied by  Messrs.  Matthey  and  Johnson,  as  chemically  pure.  The  results  of  the 
experiments  (made  as  described  in  §§  120  and  121)  ontbe  effects  of  lateral  hammering 
were,  in  every  other  kind  of  wire  tried,  the  reverse  of  those  found  for  iron.  Thus  in 
steel,  copper,  tin,  brass,  lead,  cadmium,  platinum,  zinc,  the  current  was  always  found 
to  be  from  the  unhammered  to  the  hammered  portions  through  hot.  All  the  wires 
except  zinc  were  carefully  annealed  by  myself,  before  they  were  coiled  and  hammered 
(§  120);  but  the  process  of  annealing  by  heating  in  oil  and  cooling  slowly  made  the 
zinc  very  brittle  and  crystalline,  instead  of  softening  it  as  in  the  other  cases,  and  it 
was  therefore  taken  as  supplied  by  the  manufacturers,  and  coiled  on  the  core  and 
hammered  in  the  manner  described. 

132.  The  experiments  on  the  coils  differently  tempered  in  their  different  parts 
(§  126),  in  the  cases  of  tin  and  cadmium,  gave  only  doubtful  galvanometer  indica- 
tions ; zinc  wire  proved  so  brittle  in  the  annealed  parts  as  to  defeat  some  attempts  to 
test  the  thermo-electric  effects  of  temper.  I have  little  doubt  but  that  results  may 
be  obtained  in  all  these  cases  by  a careful  repetition  of  the  experiments,  with  perhaps 
some  modification  to  meet  the  peculiarity  of  zinc.  Slips  of  sheet  iron  and  of  sheet 
copper  were  tried  without  any  thermo-electric  indication  being  noticed.  [Addition, 
Dec.  1856. — I have  recently  found  in  slips  of  sheet  iron  the  same  thermo-electric 
effect  of  temper  as  in  round  and  flattened  iron  wires.]  All  the  other  conductors  tried 
gave  very  decided  results.  In  the  cases  of  round  iron  wires  of  very  different  dia- 
meters, of  iron  wire  flattened  through  its  whole  length  by  hammering,  of  round 
steel  wire,  and  of  steel  wire  flattened  through  its  whole  length  by  hammering,  and  of 
steel  watch-spring,  the  thermo-electric  effect  of  annealing  portions  of  the  coil  after 
the  whole  had  been  suddenly  cooled,  was  a current  from  unannealed  to  annealed 
through  hot.  In  round  wires  of  copper  and  brass,  the  thermo-electric  effect  of  the 
same  process  was  a current  from  annealed  to  unannealed  through  hot. 

133.  The  effects  of  permanent  torsion  were  decisively  tested  only  for  iron  and 
copper  wires  ; and  they  proved  to  be  in  each  case  the  same  as  the  effects  of  hardening 
by  longitudinal  extension,  by  lateral  compression,  or  by  rapid  cooling,  being  quite 
decidedly yrom  brittle  to  soft  through  hot  in  the  iron,  and  from  soft  to  brittle  through 
hot  in  the  copper. 

134.  The  views  explained  above  (§  105),  by  which  I was  led  to  look  for  the  thermo- 
electric qualities  of  a crystal  in  a non-crystalline  metal  subjected  to  mechanical  strain, 
show  the  probability  of  finding  sucb  properties  also  developed  along  with  magnetism, 
by  external  magnetic  force,  especially  in  the  few  metals,  iron,  nickel  and  cobalt, 
which  have  high  capacities  for  magnetic  induction.  Towards  verifying  this  idea  I 
tried  first  the  following  simple  experiment,  analogous  to  the  first  experiment  (§  107) 
which  I had  made  on  the  thermo-electric  effects  of  tension.  A little  helix  about 
3 inches  long,  consisting  of  220  turns  of  thin  covered  copper  wire  laid  on  in  three 
strands  on  a cylindrical  coie  of  pasteboard,  about  \ of  an  inch  internal  diameter, 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  723 


was  slipped  upon  a piece  of  thick  straight  iron  wire  about  2 feet  long,  which  was 
supported  in  a horizontal  position  by  its  ends,  and  through  them  put  in  the  circuit 
of  a galvanometer.  A spirit-lamp  was  held  under  the  middle  of  the  wire  so  as  to 
raise  it  to  a high  temperature,  and  then  a current  from  a few  of  the  iron  cells  was 
sent  through  the  helix,  which  was  kept  a little  on  one  side  of  the  middle  of  the  wire. 
Immediately  the  galvanometer  needle,  which  was  not  at  first  disturbed  by  the  appli- 
cation of  the  spirit-lamp,  experienced  Fig.  30. 

a deflection.  The  little  helix  was 
slipped  rapidly  through  the  flame  of 
the  spirit-lamp  to  the  other  side  of  the 
hot  part  of  the  wire,  and  a reverse 
deflection  was  immediately  produced. 

It  was  easy,  by  moving  the  helix  alternately  to  the  two  sides  of  the  hot  middle  of 
the  wire,  to  make  the  needle  of  the  galvanometer  to  swing  through  an  arc  of  10°  or 
more.  When  the  needle  was  brought  to  rest  there  was  always  a most  sensible  per- 
manent deflection,  on  one  side  or  the  other,  according  as  the  helix  was  left  on  one 
side  or  other  of  the  heated  parts.  When  the  circuit  of  the  galvanometer  was  broken, 
none  of  these  effects  followed  from  the  motions  of  the  helix.  They  were  therefore 
not  due  to  the  direct  force  of  the  magnetism  in  the  helix  and  iron  wire,  but  to  that 
of  a current  through  the  galvanometer  coil.  This  always  took  place  in  such  directions 
as  to  indicate  a current  from  unmagnetized  to  magnetized  through  hot. 

135.  The  decided  character  of  the  result  of  this  experiment  established  it  beyond 
doubt,  that  the  thermo-electric  quality  of  iron  is  altered  by  magnetization.  Imme- 
diately the  question  arose  (from  the  general  considerations  referred  to  above,  §§  104 
and  105),  are  the  thermo-electric  qualities  equally  or  even  similarly  ciffected  in  all  direc- 
tions ? and  the  crystalline  hypothesis  suggested  the  answer  : — no ; probably  even  the 
reverse  thermo-electric  effect  may  be  found  across  their  lines  of  magnetization.  As 
theory  could  give  no  more  than  a conjectural  answer,  I tried  to  find  the  truth  by 
experiment ; and,  after  various  fruitless  operations,  obtained  a very  decided  result, 
in  the  following  way. 

136.  A piece  of  thin  sheet  iron  was  cut  into  the  shape  shown  in  the  diagram,  the 
breadth  everywhere  being  about  ^ of  an  inch,  the  length  of  the  longer  branch 
45  inches,  and  that  of  the  shorter  6 inches.  The  longer 
branch  was  rolled  into  a plane  spiral,  on  a cylindrical  core 
^ an  inch  diameter,  the  different  successive  turns  being 
prevented  from  touching  one  another  by  a piece  of  narrow 
tape  wound  on  along  with  the  iron  slip.  The  shorter 
branch,  which  stood  out  from  the  inner  end  of  the  coil  at 
right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  spiral,  was  bent  round  into  this  plane,  and  carried 
out  along  one  side  of  the  spiral  several  inches  beyond  its  circumference. 

5 c 


Fig.  31. 


I' 

I 


Along 


MDCCCLVI. 


724  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


with  it,  a portion  of  the  slip  next  the  other  end  which  was  left  uncoiled,  was 
carried  out  from  the  outer  part  of  the  spiral,  and  cut  to  such  a length  as  to  let  the 
two  ends  be  brought  close  together.  Copper  wires,  to  lead  to  the  galvanometer 
electrodes,  were  soldered  to  these  ends,  and  the  junctions  of  dissimilar  metals  thus 
formed  were  arranged  with  the  usual  precautions  (§  92)  to  ensure  equality  of  tem- 
perature and  electrical  insulation.  Contrary  poles  of  two  steel  bars,  each  about  3 
feet  long  and  of  rectangular  section,  4 inches  by  i inch,  were  placed  pressing  on  each 
side  of  the  spiral,  as  shown  by  the  dark  shading  pjg.,  32. 

in  the  diagram,  but  insulated  from  it  of  course. 

Four  rectangular  pieces  of  thick  plate  glass,  two 
of  them  very  hot  (perhaps  about  300°  Cent.)  and 
two  cold,  were  applied,  touching  the  coil  on  each 
side,  and  symmetrically  arranged  on  the  two 
sides  of  the  steel  magnets. 

The  galvanometer  showed  a current  in  the  direction  indicated  by  the  arrow-heads. 
The  pieces  of  hot  and  cold  plate  glass  were  interchanged,  and  the  current  became 
reversed.  The  magnets  were  removed,  and  their  effects  became  scarcely  perceptible, 
or  altogether  ceased.  On  repeated  trials  a current  was  found  always  in  the  direc- 
tion, from  parts  of  the  coil  between  the  magnets  towards  parts  touched  by  the  hot 
glasses.  The  experiment  was  repeated  with  a powerful  electro-magnet,  and  gave 
the  same  result,  but  not  with  the  same  ease,  because  of  difficulties  in  applying  the 
heaters,  &c. 

137.  The  very  strong  tendency  iron  has  to  assume  longitudinal  rather  than  trans- 
verse magnetization,  when  of  any  form  extended  in  one  direction  more  than  in  others, 
was  partially  done  away  with  by  the  mutual  influence  of  the  different  turns  of  the 
spiral  used  in  the  experiment  which  has  been  described ; and  the  symmetrical 
arrangement  of  the  heaters  was  such  as  to  nearly  exclude  all  thermo-electric  action, 
except  what  is  due  to  the  thermo-electric  difference  between  that  part  of  the  coil 
touched  on  each  side  by  the  steel  magnets,  and  the  part  diametrically  opposite.  Any 
thermo-electric  effect  there  may  have  been  from  longitudinal  magnetization  in  the 
parts  of  the  iron  ribbon  on  each  side  of  the  steel  magnets,  must,  so  far  as  I could 
judge,  have  been  contrary  to  the  effect  observed.  The  result  obtained,  therefore, 
demonstrates  an  electro-motive  force  urging  a current  from  transversely  magnetized 
parts  of  the  iron  conductor,  through  hot  parts,  to  comparatively  unmagnetized  parts. 
Hence  a transversely  magnetized  iron  conductor  deviates  from  unmagnetized  iron 
towards  bismuth,  or  in  the  reverse  direction  to  that  of  the  deviation  discovered  in 
wire  longitudinally  magnetized,  in  the  first  experiment  on  the  thermo-electric  effects 
of  magnetism.  It  may  be  concluded,  d fortiori,  that  in  uniformly  magnetized  iron, 
directions  transverse  to  the  lines  of  magnetization  differ  thermo-electrically  from  direc- 
tions along  the  lines  of  magnetization and  differ  in  such  a way,  that  if  we  could  get 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  725 


Fig.  33. 


Fig.  34. 


an  iron  conductor  of  the  shape  indicated  in  the  diagram  magnetized,  with  perfect 
uniformity  everywhere,  in  the  direction  shown  by  the  lines  of 
shading,  and  if,  when  the  two  ends  kept  at  the  same  temperature 
are  put  into  the  circuit  of  a galvanometer,  the  corner  is  heated, 
a current  would  be  found  to  set  in  the  direction  shown  by  the 
arrow-heads,  that  is,  from  transversely  magnetized  to  longitudi- 
nally magnetized  through  hot. 

138.  To  test  and  illustrate  this  conclusion,  I took  a piece  of 
sheet  iron,  cut  to  the  shape  shown  in  the  diagram,  and  wound  it 
spirally  on  a wooden  cylinder,  prepared  with  spiral  grooves  and 
pipes  for  steam  and  cold  water,  as  described  below.  The  oblique 
edge  of  the  iron,  shown  on  the  left  boundary  in  the  diagram, 
being  cut  at  angles  of  45°  and  135°  to  the  long  edges  conterminous 
with  it,  was  bent  in  a plane  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  cylinder,  and  thus  the 
long  edges  of  the  iron,  and  the  cut  separating  it  into  two  branches,  formed  spirals, 
each  at  an  angle  of  45°  to  the  axis  of  the  cylinder. 

The  two  long  edges  themselves  came  very  nearly  to 
coincide,  the  circumference  of  the  cylinder  being  a 
little  greater  in  length  than  the  oblique  edge  of  the 
iron  which  thus  nearly  met  round  it.  These  two 
edges,  as  well  as  the  two  edges  on  each  side  of  the 
cut  between  the  branches,  were  prevented  from  touch- 
ing one  another  by  being,  one  at  least  in  each  of  the 
contiguous  pairs,  bound  with  cotton  tape.  The  pro- 
jecting slips  (shown  on  the  right  in  the  diagram) 
came  to  positions  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  cylinder,  through  two  diametrically 
opposite  parts  of  its  circumference.  Their 
ends  had  copper  wires  soldered  to  them,  and 
were  arranged  with  the  usual  precautions 

92)  to  ensure  electric  insulation  and  equality 
of  temperature  between  them.  The  wooden  cylinder  had  two  diametrically  opposite 
spiral  grooves,  each  at  the  same  inclination  of  45°  to  the  axis,  and  spiral  sheet  copper 
tubes,  prepared  of  the  proper  shape,  were  slipped  into  these  grooves,  and  nearly  filled 
up  the  spaces  to  the  surface  of  the  cylinder.  The  outsides  of  these  tubes  were  coated 
with  paper,  so  as  to  maintain  electric  insulation  between  them,  and  the  sheet  iron 
wound  on  outside. 

The  wooden  cylinder  bearing  the  spiral  tubes,  and  the  sheet  iron  arranged  in  the 
manner  described,  was  slipped  into  the  hollow  of  an  electro-dynamic  helix,  steam 
was  sent  through  one  of  the  spiral  tubes  and  water  through  the  other,  and  the 
copper  wires  soldered  to  the  ends  of  the  iron  slips  were  connected  with  the  electrodes 
of  a galvanometer.  No  current  was  at  first  indicated.  The  galvanometer  circuit 

5 c 2 


Fig.  35. 


726  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


was  broken  by  its  own  commutator,  and  a current  was  sent  through  the  magnetizing 
helix.  The  galvanometer  circuit  was  completed  again,  and  immediately  a strong 
indication  of  a current  through  it  was  manifested.  The  galvanometer  circuit  was 
broken,  the  magnetizing  current  reversed,  and  the  galvanometer  circuit  again  com- 
pleted ; again  the  same  current  as  before  was  observed.  The  steam  and  cold  water 
were  interchanged  in  the  spiral  pipes,  and  the  galvanometer  current  soon  set  in  the 
reverse  direction,  with  about  the  same  force  as  before.  The  magnetizing  current  was 
stopped  (the  galvanometer  circuit  being  broken  for  the  time  and  closed  again),  and 
only  slight  traces  of  the  current  that  had  been  so  powerfully  indicated  could  now  be 
observed. 

139.  In  this  experiment  the  action  of  the  electro-dynamic  helix  caused  the  double 

slip  of  iron  to  receive  magnetization  in  lines  nearly  parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  cylin- 
der (only  a little  disturbed  in  consequence  of  the  gaps  between  the  adjacent  edges), 
that  is  to  say,  magnetization  as  nearly  as  may  be  in  directions  at  an  angle  of  45°  to 
its  length.  The  sources  of  heat  and  cold  applied  along  the  two  spirals,  gave  either 
heat  along  each  of  the  outer  edges  of  the  double  slip,  and  cold  along  the  inner  edges 
between  the  two  branches,  or  cold  along  the  outer  edges  and  heat  along  the  inner 
edges.  When  the  ends  were  connected  with  the  electrodes  of  the  galvanometer,  in 
the  case  illustrated  in  the  diagram,  the  current  was  in  the  direction  indicated  by  the 
arrow-heads ; and  it  was  always  in  such  Fig.  36. 

a direction,  that  if  a zigzag  line  be  traced 
through  the  two  slips  from  side  to  side  of 
each,  on  the  whole  in  the  same  direction 
as  the  current,  the  changes  of  direction  at 
the  sides  of  the  slips  are  from  transversely  to  longitudmally  magnetized  through  hot, 
and  from  longitudinally  to  transversely  magnetized  through  cold;  which  is  the  con- 
clusion that  was  anticipated. 

140.  I also  experimented  on  the  thermo-electric  effects  of  retained  magnetism 
in  steel  after  the  magnetizing  force  is  removed,  and  obtained  very  decided  results, 
showing  that  at  least  in  the  case  of  magnetization  along  the  lines  of  current,  the 
effect  is  of  the  same  quality  as  in  soft  iron  or  in  the  steel  itself  while  under  a mag- 
netic force  which  induces  such  a state  of  magnetization. 

141.  In  one  of  these  experiments,  thirty-nine  pieces  of  steel  wire,  each  about  i\th 
of  an  inch  diameter  and  2 inches  long,  soft  tempered,  were  connected  by  thirty-eight 
pieces  of  copper  wire,  each  an  inch  long,  placed  between  each  two  of  the  pieces  of 
steel,  and  hard  soldered  to  their  ends.  Pieces  of  copper  wire  of  the  same  length  were 
soldered  to  the  outer  ends  of  the  first  and  last  pieces  of  steel,  and  several  feet  of  steel 
wire  to  the  ends  of  each  of  these.  A little  electro-dynamic  helix  was  made,  2 inches 
long  and  wide  enough  internally  to  slide  freely  over  this  compound  steel  and  copper 
conductor;  and  by  means  of  it  every  second  piece  of  the  2-inch  steel  wires,  com- 
mencing with  the  first  and  ending  with  the  thirty-ninth,  were  magnetized  alternately 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  727 

with  their  poles  in  dissimilar  directions,  while  the  other  short  wires,  and  the  longer 
steel  terminals,  were  left  as  free  from  magnetism  as  possible.  The  magnetizing  helix 
was  then  remov^ed,  and  the  compound  conductor  was  made  into  a flat  coil  on  a 
wooden  core  (2  inches  broad  and  |^-inch  thick),  by  bending  the  short  copper  wires, 
and  arranging  the  2-inch  steel  wires  alternately  on  the  two  sides  of  the  wood.  The 
terminals  were  joined,  with  the  usual  precautions  (§  92),  to  the  galvanometer  elec- 
trodes, and  one  edge  of  the  coil  was  immersed  nearly  an  inch  below  the  surface  of  a 
vessel  of  oil  at  the  temperature  of  about  100°  Cent.  Immediately  a strong  deflection 
of  the  needle  showed  a current,  of  which  the  direction  in  the  coil  from  unmag- 
netized to  magnetized  through  hot.  When  the  other  edge  of  the  coil  was  similarly 
heated,  a contrary  deflection  of  the  needle  as  decidedly  showed  the  same  thermo- 
electric difference  of  quality  between  the  magnetized  and  the  unmagnetized  steel 
wires. 

142.  The  object  of  the  peculiar  arrangement  just  described,  was  to  prevent  the 
magnetism  from  spreading  to  those  of  the  steel  portions  of  the  circuit  which  were 
to  be  kept  as  free  from  magnetism  as  possible  in  order  to  be  compared  with  those 
which  were  magnetized.  The  introduction  of  the  connecting  pieces  of  a different 
metal  from  steel  into  the  circuit  cannot  give  rise  to  any  thermo-electric  disturb- 
ances *,  provided  the  two  ends  of  each  are  at  the  same  temperature,  a condition 
which  was  nearly  enough  fulfilled  in  the  way  the  experiment  was  made,  and  which 
was  very  much  favoured  by  the  shortness  and  the  high  thermal  conductivity  of  the 
little  copper  arcs. 

The  same  result  was  demonstrated  in  an  experiment  made  with  a homogeneous 
coil  of  steel  wire,  of  which  parts  had  been  magnetized,  by  ordinary  steel  magnets, 
before  it  was  bent  on  the  core. 

[§  143.  Received  May  10,  1856.] 

§ 143.  Experiment. — On  the  Effect  of  Magnetization  on  the  Thermo-electric  Quality 

of  Nickel. 

Through  the  kindness  of  Dr.  George  Wilson,  I have  been  able  to  experiment  on 
a bar  of  nickel,  about  ^ an  inch  in  diameter  and  about  8 inches  long,  in  the  form  of 
a horse-shoe  magnet,  belonging  to  the  Industrial  Museum  of  Edinburgh.  The  accom- 
panying sketch  and  description  show  the  plan  of  the  experiment. 

Description  of  Sketch. 

N,  nickel  horse-shoe. 

B B,  double  tubes  of  sheet  copper,,  electrically  connected  with  one  another  by  a 
copper  band,  and  insulated  from  the  nickel  by  silk  paper,  laid  on  with  shell- 
lac  varnish  ; serving  to  drain  all  electrical  leakage  from  the  magnetizing 

* Dynamical  Theory  of  Heat,  § 138,  Cor.  1. 


728  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


coil,  without  causing  the  slightest  sensible  current  through  the  nickel,  and 
serving  also  to  convey  a stream  of  cold  water  to  maintain  the  lower  parts  of 
the  two  branches  of  the  horse-shoe  at  as  nearly  as  possible  equal  tempera- 
tures. 


AAA,  india-rubber  pipes  to  lead  a stream  of  cold  water  through  the  coolers. 

C,  magnetizing  coil,  wrapped  on  one  of  the  copper  coolers. 

E E,  electrodes  of  magnetizing  battery  of  twenty  iron  cells,  charged  with  nitric 
acid,  &c. 

F,  commutator  for  interrupting  and  reversing  the  connexion  between  the  mag- 
netizing battery  and  coil,  or  reversing  the  current. 

M M,  mercury  cups,  in  which  the  extremities  of  the  nickel  were  immersed  (mercury 
being  both  very  convenient  for  the  purpose,  and  the  metal  least  thermo- 
electrically  removed  from  nickel  of  all  that  have  been  tried  by  any  experi- 
menter). 

m m,  mercury  electrodes  joining  copper  galvanometer  electrodes  D D,  at  G G. 

K,  commutator  for  interrupting  and  reversing  the  connexions  of  the  galvanometer 
electrodes. 

Heat  was  applied  at  H H by  means  of  a gas-lamp  and  blowpipe.  A current  from 
magnetized  to  unmagnetized  through  hot,  was  indicated  by  a considerable  galva- 
nometer effect,  which,  by  management  of  the  galvanometer  break,  K,  was  readily 
directed  to  give  oscillations  of  the  needle  through  three  or  four  degrees. 

The  same  conclusion  had  been  indicated  in  several  previous  attempts,  with  various 
defects  of  arrangement  remedied  in  the  experiment  just  described.  In  this  last  expe- 
riment the  result  was  made  most  manifest;  and,  being  completely  separated  from  all 
effects  of  induced  currents  (which  were  quite  insensible),  of  electrical  leakage,  and 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  729 

of  unequal  heating  of  the  junctions  of  mercury  and  nickel,  and  of  the  junctions  of 
mercury  and  copper,  was  set  beyond  all  doubt.  I therefore  conclude,  that  longitudi- 
nally magnetized  nichel  in  a thermo-electric  circuit  deviates  from  niehel  not  under  mag- 
netizing force,  in  the  same  direction  as  bismuth.  This  is  the  reverse  of  the  deviation 
which  I formerly  found  to  be  produced  in  iron  by  longitudinal  magnetization. 

144.  The  results  of  the  various  experiments  which  have  been  described  in  Part  III. 
are  collected  in  the  following  Tables. 


Table  I. — Effects  of  Stresses  and  Strains  on  the  Thermo-electric  Qualities  of  Metals. 


Description  of 
Conductor. 

Thermo-electric  Order  reckoned  from  Bismuth  towards  Antimony. 

Iron  

Under  longitudinal  traction. 

1 

Iron  

Under  transverse  compression. 

Tinder  transverse  traetion  

Under  longitudinal  traction. 

Iron  

Permanently  strained  by  longitudinal 
traction,  and  left  free  from  stress. 

Soft 

Permanently  strained  by  longitudinal 
compression,  or  by  lateral  extension, 
and  left  free  from  stress. 

Iron  

Hardened  by  transverse  hammering  ... 

Soft 

Hardened  by  longitudinal  hammering. 

Round  iron  wires  of 
different  diameters. 

Made  brittle  by  twisting  

Annealed  after  being  made 
brittle  by  twisting. 

Round  and  flattened 
iron  wires. 

Suddenly  cooled 

Annealed. 

Steel  wire 

Some  specimens  flattened  by  trans- 
verse hammering. 

Soft 

Other  specimens  flattened  by  trans- 
verse hammering. 

Round  and  flattened 
steel  wires. 

Hardened  by  sudden  cooling 

Annealed. 

Steel  watch-spring  .. 

Hardened  by  sudden  cooling 

Annealed. 

Copper  

Under  longitudinal  traction  

Free. 

Soft 

Permanently  elongated  by  longitudinal 
traction,  and  left  free  from  stress. 

Hammered  transversely. 

Round  copper  wire  .. 

Annealed  after  being  made 
brittle  by  twisting. 

Made  brittle  by  twisting. 

Round  copper  wire  .. 

Annealed  

Suddenly  cooled. 

Platinum 

Under  longitudinal  traction  

Free. 

Platinum  

Soft 

Hammered  transversely. 

Tin 

Permanently  elongated  by  longitudinal 
traction,  and  left  free  from  stress. 

Tin 

Hammered  transversely. 

Brass 

Hammered  transversely. 

Round  brass  wire 

Suddenly  cooled. 

Cadmium  

Hammered  transversely. 

Lead 

Soft  

Hammered  transversely.  | 

Zinc 

Hammered  transversely. 

730  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 
Table  II. — Effects  of  Magnetism  on  the  Thermo-electric  Qualities  of  Iron  and  Nickel. 


Description  of 
Conductor. 

Thermo-electric  Order  reckoned  from  Bismuth  towards  Antimony. 

Iron  

Under  transverse  magnetizing  force  ... 

Free 

Under  longitudinal  magnetizing  force. 

Unmagnetized  

Retaining  longitudinal  magnetization. 

Nickel 

Under  longitudinal  magnetizing  force. 

Free. 

PART  IV.  METHODS  FOR  COMPARING  AND  DETERMINING  GALVANIC  RESISTANCES. 
ILLUSTRATED  BY  PRELIMINARY  EXPERIMENTS  ON  THE  EFFECTS  OF  TENSION  AND 
OF  MAGNETIZATION  ON  THE  ELECTRIC  CONDUCTIVITY  OF  METALS. 

145.  In  endeavouring  to  discover  the  effects  of  magnetization  and  of  mechanical 
strain  on  the  electric  conductivity  of  iron  and  other  metals,  I was  led,  from  trying 
various  more  or  less  obvious  methods  for  testing  resistances,  to  use  a differential  galva- 
nometer of  a very  simple  kind,  which  I constructed  for  the  purpose.  I shall  give  no 
description  of  this  instrument,  as  I now  (Nov.  1856)  find  it  in  one  important  quality 
inferior  to  the  differential  galvanometer  first  constructed  and  used  by  M.  Becquerel*, 
and  I do  not  know  that  its  peculiarity  has  compensating  advantages.  I mention  it 
only  because  it  was  with  it  that  I made  nearly  the  first  of  my  trials  to  find  the  effects 
of  magnetism  on  the  electric  conductivity  of  iron,  and  the  very  first  by  which  I 
obtained  a decided  result. 

146.  In  these  experiments  I used  two  covered  iron  wires,  each  several  yards  long, 
coiled  into  circles  about  4 inches  diameter,  as  the  two  resistance  branches  in  the 
divided  channel  through  the  two  conductors  of  the  galvanometer.  Magnetizing  one 
of  them  tangentially  by  means  of  a coil  of  covered  copper  wire  wound  on  a copper 
sheath  soldered  round  it  as  an  electric  drain,  I ascertained,  on  the  23rd  of  April, 
1855,  that  the  electric  conductivity  of  iron  wire  is  diminished  by  longitudinal  mag- 
netization. The  arrangement  however  proved,  as  I anticipated,  to  be  of  a very 
unsatisfactory  kind ; and  the  needle  kept  moving  across  the  field  in  one  direction 
almost  steadily,  during  the  whole  time  the  current  was  sustained  through  the  tested 
conductors,  which  was  for  several  hours.  Continually  more  and  more  resistance 
had  to  be  added  to  the  conducting  channel  containing  the  iron  wire  round  which 
there  was  no  magnetizing  coil,  to  keep  the  needle  within  range.  After  the  magneti- 
zing current  had  passed  for  somq  time,  this  variation  of  the  needle  went  on  more 
rapidly,  and  called  for  more  frequent  adjustment  by  the  additions  to  the  other  branch. 
All  this  was  just  as  must  be  expected;  and  my  reason  for  not  introducing  currents 
of  cold  water  round  the  two  iron  coils,  to  maintain  them  in  precisely  similar  thermal 
circumstances,  was  that  the  tubular  systems  required  for  the  purpose  could  not  be 
easily  made,  and  that  I thought  I might  find  out  the  nature  of  the  result  in  the  first 

* Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  tome  xvii.  1846. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  731 

instance,  notwithstanding  the  imperfection  of  the  arrangements.  In  this  hope  I was 
not  disappointed.  The  glass  needle  (carried  by  the  little  suspended  magnet,  whieh 
was  only  about  ^ an  inch  long),  while  moving  steadily  across  its  field,  would  receive 
an  impulse  forward  and  make  two  or  three  very  rapidly  diminishing  oscillations,  when 
the  current  was  started  through  the  magnetizing  coil : when  the  current  was  sud- 
denly reversed,  the  needle  would  show  little  or  no  indication  of  any  effect:  when  the 
current  was  broken,  it  would  make  a start  backwards,  and  after  two  or  three  oscilla- 
tions would  continue  advancing  as  before,  perhaps  rather  more  rapidly.  Traces  of 
induced  currents  in  the  iron  coil  under  the  influence  of  the  magnetizing  helix  were 
exhibited  by  scarcely  perceptible  differences  in  the  bearing  of  the  needle,  according 
as  the  current  was  made  in  one  direction  or  the  other,  and  by  slight  impulses  it 
received  wlien  the  magnetizing  current  was  suddenly  reversed.  After  the  current 
had  been  kept  up  for  some  hours  through  the  iron  wires,  and  when,  partly  by  the 
heat  developed  by  the  magnetizing  current  during  the  periods  of  its  flow,  and  partly 
by  heat  conducted  from  the  iron  wire  within,  the  outside  of  the  magnetizing  coil  had 
become  very  sensibly  hot  to  the  touch,  the  variation  of  the  needle  in  the  galvano- 
meter became  much  less  rapid  than  at  first ; and  tolerably  satisfactory  indications, 
amounting  to  a fraction  of  a degree  of  permanent  deflection,  showed  with  perfect 
consistence  an  increase  of  resistance  in  the  iron  wire  under  magnetic  force  when 
the  magnetic  current  was  sustained  in  either  direction,  and  a diminution  of  resist- 
ance in  the  same  iron  wire  following  immediately  a cessation  of  the  magnetizing 
current. 

147.  I followed  the  same  method  in  a first  attempt  to  find  the  effect  of  transverse 
magnetization  on  the  electric  conductivity  of  iron ; two  spirals  made  on  the  plan 
described  above  (§  136)  being  used  as  the  resistance  branches  in  the  two  channels 
conveying  the  divided  current,  and  one  of  them  placed  between  convex  poles  of  a 
Ruhmkorff  electro-magnet.  The  induced  currents  in  making,  reversing,  and  break- 
ing the  magnetizing  current  were  of  course  most  conspicuously  indicated  by  the 
galvanometer  needle,  but  the  needle  came  to  rest  after  a few  oscillations ; and  then 
it  did  not  exhibit  any  deviations  of  a sufiiciently  marked  character,  when  the  direct 
effect  of  the  electro-magnet  (which  by  a very  troublesome  process  of  shifting  the 
position  of  the  magnet,  was  reduced  as  much  as  possible  in  preliminary  arrange- 
ments,) was  eliminated  by  reversals,  to  allow  me  to  draw  any  decided  conclusion  as 
to  the  effect  of  the  magnetic  force  on  the  conductivity  of  the  iron  spiral  across  which 
it  acted. 

148.  Before  carrying  into  execution  various  obvious  improvements  in  the  experi- 
mental arrangements  just  described,  or  applying  the  system  with  the  differential 
galvanometer  to  other  investigations,  I began  to  think  of  Maggi’s  experiment on 
the  relative  thermal  conductivities  of  a magnetized  iron  disc  in  directions  across 
and  along  the  lines  of  magnetization.  As  the  electrical  analogue,  the  method  which 

* De  la  Rive,  ‘ Electricity,’  vol.  i.  part  3.  chap.  iii.  (p.  316,  English  edition,  1853). 

MDCCCLVI.  5 D 


732  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


Matteucci,  and  I believe  Kirchhofp  and  others,  have  used  in  tracing  equipotential 
lines  on  the  surface  of  a conductor  traversed  by  an  electric  current,  occurred  to  rne. 
Six  months  later,  I thought  of  the  multiplying  branch  (first  used  in  the  experiment 
described  in  § 161  below)  to  render  available  the  sensibility  which  a powerful  current 
through  the  body  to  be  tested,  with  the  use  of  a moderately  sensitive  galvanometer, 
must  obviously  give  to  that  method  when  applied  to  the  investigation  of  differential 
effects  on  the  electric  conductivity  of  a body  in  different  directions ; and  I succeeded 
with  great  ease  in  making  very  satisfactory  experiments  161  to  165  below)  by 
means  of  it,  which  first  decided  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the  effects  of  mag- 
netization give  different  electric  conductivity  in  different  directions  to  a mass  of  iron. 
At  first,  however,  I did  not  see  this  or  any  other  way  to  render  the  method  practicable 
with  galvanometer  electrodes,  either  moveable  upon  the  sheet  of  metal  to  be  tested 
(in  which  case  a motion  of  of  inch  would  drive  the  needle  from  an  extreme 

deflection  on  one  side  to  an  extreme  reverse  deflection),  or  by  electrodes  soldered  to 
points  on  an  equipotential  line  (in  which  case  a slight  alteration  in  temperature  in 
different  parts  of  the  plate  might  drive  the  needle  irrecoverably  to  an  extreme  deflec- 
tion on  one  side  or  the  other) ; but  the  experiments  which  1 knew  as  having  been  made 
by  Matteucci  suggested  to  me  the  following  very  simple  plan,  which  I immediately 
commenced  trying,  and  which  I have  since  found  applicable  with  the  greatest  ease  to 
a variety  (I  believe  now  to  every  variety)  of  experiments  on  electric  conductivities  *. 

149.  Let  AB  be  the  conductor  to  be  tested,  and  let  CD  be  another  of  nearly  equal 
resistance,  either  a piece  of  the  same  wire  continuous  with  the  other  through  an  arc 
BC,  or  connected  with  it  by  a thicker  arc  of  copper,  or  of  another  metal,  as  may 
appear  convenient  for  the  particular  case  treated.  Sometimes  the  experiment  is 
arranged  to  test  differential  effects  experienced  alternately  or  simultaneously  by  AB 
and  CD.  But  when  one  of  them,  AB,  alone  is  acted  upon,  with  a view  to  varying  its 
resistance,  it  alone  maybe  regarded  as  the  conductor  which  is  tested;  and  the  other, 
CD,  will  then  be  called  the  reference  conductor.  Let  a wire,  AOPD,  which  will  be 

* [Note  added  Nov.  1856.]  An  hour  before  the  meeting  of  the  Royal  Society  at  which  this  paper  was  read, 
I learned  that  a method  of  testing  resistances  had  been  given  by  Mr.  Wheatstone  which  would  probably  be 
found  to  be  the  same  in  principle  as  that  to  which  I had  been  led  in  the  manner  described  in  the  text.  I have 
since  ascertained  that  Mr.  Wheatstone’s  “ Differential  Resistance  Measurer”  (described  in  § 15  of  the  Bake- 
rian  Lecture  for  1843,  see  Transactions,  June  15,  1843)  is  an  instrument  founded  on  precisely  the  same  prin- 
ciple as  all  the  various  arrangements  by  which,  with  great  and  necessary  alterations  of  detail,  I have  continued 
the  investigation  of  effects  of  magnetism  and  of  other  influences,  on  the  electric  conductivity  of  metals,  to  the 
present  time,  and  of  which  some  are  fully  described  in  Parts  IV,  and  V.  of  the  text.  Mr.  Wheatstone  refers 
to  “ Experimental  Determinations  of  the  Laws  of  Magneto-electric  Induction,”  printed  in  the  Philosophical 
Transactions  for  1833,  “as  containing  the  description  of  a differential  arrangement  of  which  the  principle  is 
the  same  as  that  on  which”  his  own  instrument  has  been  devised,  and  adds,  “ To  Mr.  Christie  must  therefore 
be  attributed  the  first  idea  of  this  useful  and  accurate  method  of  measuring  resistances.” 

It  is  worth  remarking,  that  the  experiments  of  Matteucci  and  Kirchhoff,  alluded  to  in  the  text,  are  stated 
to  have  been  first  suggested  from  Wheatstone  idea  of  applying  the  two  electrodes  of  a galvanometer  to 
jioints  in  separate  channels  through  which  two  parts  of  the  whole  current  from  one  battery  are  conducted. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAxMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  733 


Fig.  38. 


called  the  testing  conductor,  be  soldered  by  its  ends  to  the  ends  A and  D of  the  con- 
ductor to  be  tested  and  of  the  reference  conductor,  or  to  strong  pieces  of  metal  to 
which  those  ends  are  firmly  attached.  Let  one  electrode  of  a galvanometer  be 
soldered  to  the  connecting  arc  BC,  at  its  middle,  or  at  any  other  point  of  it,  Q;  and 
let  the  other  galvanometer  electrode  be  ready  to  be  applied  by  the  hand  to  any  posi- 
tion on  the  testing  conductor.  A current  is  then  sent  from 
one  or  more  cells  of  Daniell’s  battery  through  electrodes 
connected  with  A and  D.  This  current  flows  through 
the  divided  channel  ABCD  and  AP'OPD,  in  quantities  in- 
versely proportional  to  the  resistances  of  the  two  parts. 

The  moveable  galvanometer  electrode  is  then  applied,  first 
to  one  point  and  then  to  another  of  the  testing  conductor 
(care  being  taken  not  to  reverse,  nor  even  to  diminish, 
the  magnetism  of  the  lower  needle  in  the  astatic  system  of 
the  galvanometer*),  until  by  trial  the  point  O that  may 
be  touched  without  producing  any  deflection  in  the  needle,  is  found.  The  influence 
to  be  tested,  whether  it  be  magnetization,  or  tension,  or  elevation  of  temperature, 
is  then  applied  to  AB,  or  the  influences  to  be  tested  against  one  another  are  applied 
to  AB  and  CD,  and  the  moveable  galvanometer  electrode  is  (if  it  has  been  removed) 
again  applied  at  O.  If  the  needle  remains  undisturbed,  no  effect  is  indicated ; that  is, 
no  alteration  in  the  resistance  of  ABQ,  or  only  an  alteration  in  the  same  proportion 
as  an  alteration  experienced  by  QCD,  has  been  indicated.  If,  however,  a deffection 
is  observed,  in  such  a direction  that  the  moveable  electrode  must  be  moved  to  some 
point  P in  the  part  OD,  it  is  inferred  that  the  ratio  of  the  resistance  of  ABQ  to  that 
of  QCD  has  been  increased ; or  on  the  other  hand,  if  such  a deflection  as  requires  a 
motion  of  the  moveable  electrode  to  a point  P'  in  OA,  the  resistance  of  AB  has  been 
diminished  relatively  to  that  of  CD.  Fig.  39. 

150.  As  an  example,  I shall  describe  an  experi- 
ment on  the  relative  effects  of  tension  on  electric 
conductivity  in  copper  and  iron  wires.  Two  pieces 
of  stout  copper  wire.  A,  D,  were  each  twisted  into 
a loop  which  was  made  fast  by  solder  ; a couple  of 
inches  towards  one  end  of  each  wire  being  left  free 
from  the  twisted  part.  These  loops  were  put  upon 
a strong  hard  wood  peg  about  | of  an  inch  dia- 
meter, at  a distance  of  about  J of  an  inch  from  one 
another;  and  to  their  lower  ends  were  firmly 
soldered  fine  iron  and  copper  wires  (strong  enough 

* In  the  galvanometers  which  I have  used,  the  two  needles  of  the  astatic  combination  are  of  similar  material 
(pieces  of  the  same  steel  wire,  tempered  brittle),  and  the  lower  one  is  a little  longer  (perhaps  by  about 
than  the  upper.  Both  are  magnetized  to  saturation,  and  consequently  the  lower  preponderates  and  gives  its 

5 n 2 


734  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


to  bear  weights  of  about  8 lbs.  and  5 lbs.  respectively).  These  wires  were  cut  to  the 
same  length  of  4^  feet,  and  their  lower  ends  were  put  into  slits  about  ^ of  an  inch 
deep,  cut  in  the  top  of  a piece  of  stout  copper  slip  of  the  form  and  dimen-  Fig.  40. 
sions  shown  in  the  diagram,  and  the  copper  pressed  upon  them  to  hold 
them  fast  by  a pair  of  pincers.  Solder  was  then  applied,  to  make  a com- 
plete and  compact  metallic  connexion  between  the  wires  and  the  copper 
piece.  A testing  conductor,  consisting  of  seven  yards  of  No.  1 8 copper  wire, 
was  soldered  by  its  ends  to  the  upper  copper  pieces  A,  D ; and  a current 
from  six  small  cells  of  Daniell’s  was  sent  through  the  double  channel  by 
electrodes  soldered  a little  higher  up  to  the  same  copper  pieces.  A,  D.  One 
galvanometer  electrode  was  soldered  to  the  lower  copper  piece,  and  the 
other  was  applied  to  the  testing  conductor  till  the  point  O,  equipotential 
with  the  point  of  attachment  of  the  former,  was  found.  As  from  previous 
experiments  I knew  that  an  accidental  variation  of  of  an  inch  in  the 

position  of  the  moveable  electrode  on  the  testing  conductor  might  lose  or 
overbalance  the  effect  looked  for,  I added  a multi'plying  branch,  TFO'EU, 
consisting  of  a yard  of  No.  18  copper  wire,  with  its  ends  soldered  about 
half  an  inch  on  each  side  of  O.  This,  of  course,  when  touched  by  the 
moveable  electrode,  gave  about  thirty-six  times  the  motion  that  would  be 
required  to  produce  or  to  correct  any  effect  on  the  galvanometer  if  the 
simple  testing  conductor  were  used.  The  point  O',  on  the  multiplying 
branch,  that  could  be  touched  without  giving  any  deflection  was  then  found ; and 
weights  were  hung  from  the  lower  end  of  the  lower  copper  piece,  so  as  to  stretch  the 
copper  and  iron  wire  equally.  Immediately  a deflection  of  the  needle  in  the  galva- 
nometer showed  a current.  This  was  corrected  by  sliding  the  moveable  electrode 
on  the  multiplying  branch  towards  U,  that  is,  towards  the  parts  conterminous  with 
the  copper  wire.  When  the  weights  were  removed,  immediately  a reverse  deflection 
was  observed.  The  conclusion  is,  that  iron  and  copper  wire  equally  extended  have 
their  resistances  altered  differently  when  under  the  stress  ; that  of  the  iron  wire  being 
more  increased,  should  the  absolute  effect  in  each  wire  be  an  augmentation  of  resist- 
ance, as  other  experiments  I have  made  give  me  reason  to  suppose  it  is,  or  less 
diminished  should  it  turn  out  that  the  absolute  effect  in  each  wire  is  a diminution 
of  resistance. 

151.  Again,  a heavier  weight  was  applied  so  as  permanently  to  elongate  the  wires. 


direction  to  the  system.  The  strongest  current  through  the  coil  only  confirms  the  required  state  of  magneti- 
zation, provided  when  it  is  started  the  index  is  either  at  zero,  or  on  the  side  of  zero  towards  which  the  deflec- 
tion is  to  he.  If  by  accident  a powerful  current  is  admitted  through  the  coil  when  the  index  is  on  the  wrong 
side  of  zero,  the  lower  needle  has  its  magnetism  instantaneously  reversed ; but  it  may  be  as  instantaneously 
put  right  again  by  suddenly  reversing  the  current.  If  at  any  time,  from  the  lower  needle  having  either  lost 
magnetic  moment,  or  acquired  a reverse  magnetization,  the  astatic  system  is  found  reversed,  it  may  be  put  in 
order  with  ease  either  by  simply  sending  a powerful  current  through  its  coil,  or  by  doing  so  and  then  suddenly 
reversing  the  current. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  735 

The  deflection,  which  was  in  the  same  direction  as  at  first,  was  noted,  but  not  cor- 
rected by  any  motion  of  the  moveable  electrode,  and  the  weight  was  again  removed. 
The  needle  returned  towards  zero,  but  remained  deviating  in  the  same  direction  as 
it  had  done  to  a greater  degree  with  the  weight  on.  By  applying  the  hand  instead 
of  weights  and  gradually  pulling  down  the  lower  copper  piece,  at  first  slowly,  and 
afterwards  rather  faster,  the  needle  could  be  made  to  deviate  to  7°  and  kept  steadily 
there.  After  the  wires  had  been  stretched  by  rather  more  than  an  inch,  the  hand  was 
removed  with  a gradual  diminution  of  stress,  which  could  easily  be  regulated  to  let 
the  needle  down  without  oscillation  to  whatever  position  it  would  rest  in,  with  the 
stress  entirely  off.  This  in  several  repetitions  of  the  experiment  on  the  same  wires 
was  found  to  be  somewhere  about  3°  or  4°  in  the  same  direction  as  the  deviation  which 
was  kept  at  7°  for  a few  seconds  during  the  stress.  Hence  it  was  further  concluded, 
that,  as  regards  electric  conductivity  of  the  substance,  the  effect  of  permanent  elonga- 
tion, remaining  after  the  stress  is  removed,  differed  between  iron  and  copper  in  the 
same  way  as  the  effect  of  longitudinal  stress  during  its  action ; that  is,  that  the  gal- 
vanic resistance  of  iron  is  more  increased  by  permanent  elongation  than  that  of  copper. 
Irregular  variations  to  a considerable  extent,  obviously  due  to  thermo-electric  effects 
from  the  copper  and  iron  in  the  compound  conducting  circuit,  made  me  not  attempt 
to  measure  with  much  care,  the  distance  the  moveable  electrode  had  to  be  shifted  to 
counteract  the  effects  of  tension;  but  I intend  repeating  the  experiment  and  making 
it  for  other  pairs  of  metals,  with  this  source  of  irregularity  removed  by  a modification 
of  the  testing  conductor. 

152.  In  the  kind  of  experiment  which  has  been  described,  the  channels  through 
the  two  metals  experienced  exactly  the  same  elongation,  and,  it  may  be  said  without 
committing  any  sensible  error,  the  same  narrowing,  by  the  longitudinal  extension. 
The  effect  observed,  therefore,  depends  truly  on  variations  in  the  conductivities  of 
their  substance.  I had  made  previously  various  experiments  on  copper  wire  alone, 
and  on  iron  wire  alone,  in  which  I attempted  to  eliminate  the  effects  of  elongation 
and  narrowing,  and  had  very  nearly  established,  for  the  case  of  iron  wire  at  least, 
that  the  augmented  resistance  due  to  tension,  either  temporary  or  permanent,  is  a very 
little  more  than  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  change  of  form.  As,  however,  I have 
other  experiments  in  progress,  by  which  I hope  to  be  able  to  show  for  a single  metal 
the  absolute  effect  on  its  specific  conductivity  separated  perfectly  from  any  influence 
on  the  resistance  of  the  conductor  occasioned  by  a change  of  its  form,  I defer  in  the 
meantime  giving  more  details  of  investigation  on  this  subject. 

153.  The  method  which  has  now  been  described  has  many  great  advantages  over 
that  by  the  differential  galvanometer,  or  any  other  that  I know  of  for  testing  or 
measuring  galvanic  resistances.  In  the  first  place,  the  irregularities,  dependent  on  the 
electrodes,  connexions,  and  circular  conductors,  of  the  differential  galvanometer,  are 
entirely  done  away  with,  and  only  the  tested  and  the  testing  conductors,  all  con- 
nected by  compact  solderings,  can  influence  the  indication  from  which  the  results  are 


736  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


to  be  drawn.  In  the  second  place,  the  galvanometer  circuit  may  be  broken  and  com- 
pleted, and  reversed,  as  often  as  is  desired,  by  its  own  commutator,  without  affecting 
to  the  slightest  sensible  degree,  the  strength  of  the  current  through  the  tested  and 
testing  branches ; while  in  the  former  mode  of  experimenting  the  indicating  needle 
was  always  under  the  action  of  the  divided  current,  unless  the  current  in  one  or  the 
other  of  the  branches  was  broken,  which  introduced  irregularities  lasting  for  a con- 
siderable time,  by  the  consequent  changes  of  temperature  through  the  conductors. 
This  was  an  immense  convenience  in  every  experiment,  and  allowed  small  deflections, 
amounting  to  the  tenth  of  a degree,  to  be  tested  with  ease  by  using  the  commutator 
of  the  galvanometer,  and  getting  oscillations.  But  it  was  of  especial  advantage  in 
the  experiments  on  the  effects  of  transverse  magnetization,  since  the  galvanometer 
circuit  had  only  to  be  kept  broken  for  a few  seconds  during  the  making,  breaking, 
or  reversing  of  the  magnetizing  current,  to  get  entirely  rid  of  all  disturbances  of  the 
needle  due  to  induced  currents  ; and  in  all  experiments  in  which  the  Ruhmkorff 
magnet  was  used,  since  by  breaking  the  galvanometer  circuit  and  using  a little  steel 
magnet  in  the  hand,  the  galvanometer  needle  could  be  let  down  in  a few  seconds 
into  its  position  as  affected  by  the  direct  action  of  the  large  magnet,  before  proceed- 
ing to  test  the  current  due  to  the  change  of  resistance  under  investigation.  In  the 
third  place,  it  is  possessed  of  almost  unlimited  capacity  for  increase  of  sensibility.  In 
some  of  the  experiments  on  the  influence  of  tension  on  electric  conductivity,  I have 
tested  with  the  greatest  ease  effects  amounting  to  only  of  the  whole  resistance 

of  the  wire  under  examination,  and  I see  no  difficulty  in  testing  effects  amounting 
to  only  the  tenth  part  of  that,  or  even  hundreds  of  times  smaller  effects,  by  using 
more  powerful  currents,  and  applying  artificial  means  to  keep  the  wires  cool. 


PART  V.  ON  THE  EFFECTS  OF  MAGNETIZATION  ON  THE  ELECTRIC  CONDUCTIVITY  OF 

METALS. 

154.  The  remarkable  effects  which  I found  produced  in  the  thermo-electric  quality 
of  a metal  by  magnetization  and  by  mechanical  strain,  appeared  to  render  it  highly 
probable  that  the  same  agencies  would  also  influence  their  electric  conductivities. 
To  demonstrate  this  if  I could,  and  to  discover  the  nature  of  the  anticipated  effects, 
I commenced  an  experimental  investigation  of  the  subject,  and,  after  various  nuga- 
tory operations,  arrived  at  a variety  of  positive  results  by  the  following  processes, 

155.  Exp.  1.  On  the  longitudinal  electric  conductivity  of  longitudinally  magnetized 
iron  wire. — A length  of  seventy-two  yards  of  silk-covered  copper  wire  was  rolled  in 
six  strands,  or  altogether  in  about  860  turns  on  a core  made  up  of  two  concentric  brass 
tubes,  connected  at  their  ends  by  a ring  of  sheet  brass,  and  arranged  to  have  water  sent 
through  the  space  between  them  by  suitable  entrance  and  exit  pipes  soldered  to  aper- 
tures in  the  outer  one  ; the  external  diameter  of  the  brass  tube  was  about  inch,  and 
the  internal  diameter  of  the  inner  one  about  ^ inch  ; the  metal  of  both  outer  and  inner 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  737 

tubes  being  2,s  thin  and  as  well  smoothed  as  it  could  be  got.  The  piece  of  iron  wire 
to  be  tested  was  soldered  at  one  end  to  a piece  of  thick  copper  wire,  and  then  insu- 
lated by  a thin  coating  of  writing-paper,  wrapped  twice  round  it,  and  pushed  into 
the  inner  brass  tube,  which  was  just  large  enough  to  admit  it  easily.  A second  iron 
wire  of  equal  dimensions  was  similarly  prepared  and  inserted  in  a second  core,  in  all 
respects  like  the  other,  except  that  in  this  experiment  it  had  no  copper  wire  wrapped 
round  it.  The  two  cores  being  laid  side  by  side,  the  free  ends  of  the  iron  wires  were 
connected  as  shown  in  the  diagram,  by  an  arc  of  thick  copper  wire,  C,  soldered  to 
them.  A current  from  a single  large  cell  of  Daniell’s  was  admitted  and  carried  off  by 
the  electrodes  A and  B.  Cold  water  was  kept  constantly  flowing  through  the  spaces 
between  the  concentric  brass  tubes  round  the  iron  wires.  The  testing  conductor 
(§149)  used  in  this  experiment  consisted  principally  of  the  following  parts  : — (1)  Two 
pieces  of  No.  1 8 copper  wire,  each  sixteen  yards  long,  prevented  from  touching  one 
another  by  a piece  of  twine  between  them,  rolled  together  on  a thin  copper  cylinder, 
12  inches  long  and  3 inches  diameter,  from  which  they  were  insulated  by  a coating 
of  two  folds  of  silk  cloth  sewed  round  it.  (2)  Soldered  to  two  of  their  contiguous 
ends,  a connecting  arc  of  thick  copper  wire,  which  was  at  first  intended  to  be  gradu- 


Fig.  41. 


ated,  and  will  be  called  the  scale  of  the  testing  conductor.  (3)  Separate  short  thick 
wires  soldered  to  the  other  ends  of  the  wires  coiled  on  the  copper  cylinder,  to  bear 
binding  screws  for  making  connexions  with  the  electrodes  A and  B of  the  conductor 
to  be  tested.  One  electrode  of  the  galvanometer  was  soldered  to  the  middle  of  the 
connecting  arc  between  the  two  iron  wires,  and  the  other  was  held  in  the  hand,  and 
applied  about  the  middle  of  the  scale  of  the  testing  conductor.  A rather  troublesome 
process  was  then  required  to  bring  the  galvanometer  to  zero  by  adding  resistance  on 
one  side  or  the  other  between  the  ends  of  the  testing  conductor  and  A or  B.  When 
this  was  done,  it  was  found  that  great  deviations  of  the  galvanometer  needle  were 
produced  by  sliding  its  moveable  electrode  a few  inches  in  either  way  on  the  scale, 
and  a perfectly  sensible  deflection  by  sliding  it  as  much  as  |^th  of  an  inch.  The 
point  of  the  testing  scale  to  which  the  moveable  electrode  had  to  be  brought,  to  give 


738  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

no  deflection  of  the  galvanometer,  was  determined  : the  circuit  of  the  galvanometer 
was  broken,  and  a current  from  six  of  the  small  iron  cells  was  sent  through  the 
magnetizing  coil.  Immediately  on  completing  the  galvanometer  circuit  again,  with 
its  electrode  held  on  the  same  point  of  the  testing  scale  as  before,  a very  considerable 
deflection  was  observed.  On  breaking  the  galvanometer  circuit,  reversing  the  mag- 
netizing current,  and  completing  the  galvanometer  circuit  again,  the  same  deflec- 
tion was  observed ; and  when  the  magnetizing  current  was  stopped  the  galvano- 
meter again  gave  zero,  or  nearly  so.  On  repeating  the  process  as  regards  the  mag- 
netizing current,  without  breaking  the  galvanometer  circuit,  the  same  deflection  was 
always  observed,  in  whichever  direction  the  current  was  sent  through  the  magnetizing 
coil ; and  little  or  no  either  instantaneous  or  permanent  effect  was  produced  on  sud- 
denly reversing  this  current.  It  was  found  that  the  deflection  occasioned  by  the 
magnetization  was  diminished  by  sliding  the  moveable  electrode  along  the  scale  from 
its  end  communicating  with  B,  towards  its  end  communicating  with  A,  and  was  cor- 
rected by  such  a motion  through  a space  of  about  f ths  of  an  inch  ; equivalent  to  i^th 
of  an  inch  of  the  No.  18  wire,  constituting  the  chief  part  of  the  testing  conductor. 
It  was  concluded  that  the  iron  wire  had  its  electric  resistance  increased  by  magne- 
tization, and  that  this  augmentation  amounted,  in  the  particular  experiment,  to  about 
^0^00  of  the  whole  resistance  of  the  magnetized  piece. 

156.  Exp.  2.  On  the  effect  of  permanent  magnetization  on  the  electric  conductivity  of 
steel  wire. — The  same  apparatus  as  in  Experiment  1 was  used,  and  was  in  all  respects 
similarly  arranged,  except  that  hardened  steel  wires  as  free  from  magnetism  as  pos- 
sible were  substituted  in  place  of  the  soft  iron  cores  in  the  brass  tubes.  On  bringing 
the  galvanometer  to  zero  and  sending  a current  through  the  magnetizing  coil,  the 
same  deviation  as  before  was  observed,  and  a much  smaller  deviation  in  the  same 
direction  remained  after  the  magnetizing  current  ceased.  This  experiment  was 
repeated  several  times  on  fresh  unmagnetic  steel  cores,  and  always  with  the  same 
result.  I concluded  that  steel  when  subjected  to  magnetic  influence  has,  like  iron, 
its  electric  conductivity  diminished  in  the  direction  of  the  lines  of  force;  and  that  it 
retains  some  of  the  same  effect  with  the  permanent  magnetism  subsisting  after  the 
magnetizing  force  is  removed.  At  the  same  time  I was  not  quite  satisfied  with  the 
experiment,  as  the  galvanometer  needle  was  never  very  steady,  and,  to  keep  it  about 
zero,  the  moveable  electrode  had  to  be  shifted  largely  along  the  scale,  sometimes 
quite  to  one  end,  when,  to  get  it  on  the  scale  again,  additional  adjustment  wires  had 
to  be  added  to  the  other  branch  of  the  testing  conductor.  This  prevented  me  from 
using  more  powerful  currents  through  the  wires  to  be  tested  and  so  getting  larger 
indications  of  the  results;  but  I determined  if  possible  to  repeat  the  experiment 
afterwards  with  arrangements  better  adapted  to  do  away  with  all  variations  in  the 
conductivity  of  the  circuit  except  those  under  investigation.  I still  keep  it  in  view 
to  do  so,  and  I have  no  doubt  now  of  being  able  to  get  rid  of  all  the  unsteadiness 
which  I had  found  so  troublesome. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  739 

157.  Exp.  3.  Attempt  to  discover  the  effect  of  transverse  magnetization  on  the  longitu- 
dinal conductivity  of  a slip  of  sheet  iron, — Two  brass  cores  like  those  described  above, 
and  of  the  same  length  (10  inches),  but  of  larger  inner  and  outer  diameters,  were  pre- 
pared, and  a quantity  of  covered  copper  wire  rolled  on  one  of  them  in  four  strands,  or 
in  all  570  turns.  Two  slips  of  sheet  iron,  each  7 feet  long  and  ^ inch  broad,  were  wound 
upon  single  brass  tubes  coated  with  paper,  and  the  successive  spires  of  each  were  kept 
from  contact  by  a piece  of  twine  wound  on  between  them.  A length  of  9 inches  of 
each  brass  tube  had  84  inches  of  the  slip  iron  laid  upon  it,  and  therefore  the  inclination 
of  the  helix  to  a plane  perpendicular  to  its  axis  was  about  6°,  being  the  angle  whose  sine 
is  Each  of  these  iron  spirals  was  protected  outside  with  a coating  of  paper,  and 
pushed  into  the  interior  of  one  of  the  brass  cores.  A copper  arc,  C,  was  soldered  to 
each  of  them  so  as  to  connect  their  extremities  on  one  side,  and  powerful  copper 
electrodes,  A and  B,  were  soldered  to  their  other  extremities.  Then,  a stream  of  water 
being  kept  constantly  flowing  through  each  of  the  inner  tubes  and  through  the  spaces 
between  the  concentric  brass  tubes  outside,  a current  from  a large  cell  of  Daniell’s 
63)  (exposing  2'5  square  feet  of  zinc  to  4‘4  square  feet  of  copper)  was  sent  through 
the  irQn  spirals,  and  a testing  conductor  (the  same  one  as  before)  was  put  in  com- 

Fig.  42. 


munication  with  their  electrodes,  A and  B.  One  electrode  of  the  galvanometer  being, 
as  before,  soldered  to  the  middle  of  the  copper  arc  connecting  the  iron  spirals,  the 
other  was  applied  to  the  scale  of  the  testing  conductor.  The  galvanometer  being 
brought  to  zero  by  the  insertion  of  adjustment  wires  at  one  end  or  other  of  the  test- 
ing conductor,  it  was  found  to  be  rather  steadier  than  in  the  former  experiments, 
probably  because  of  the  diminution  of  thermal  effects  by  the  stream  of  water  through 
the  cores,  and  the  greater  surface  of  iron  exposed  outside  and  inside  to  refrigeration. 
When  a current  was  sent  and  maintained  through  the  magnetizing  helix,  a very 
decided  permanent  deffection  was  occasioned  in  the  galvanometer;  and  this  the 
same  with  each  direction  of  the  magnetizing  current.  If  the  galvanometer  circuit  was 
kept  complete,  its  needle  experienced  a powerful  impulse,  sending  it  through  a great 
many  degrees  in  one  direction  or  the  other  at  the  instant  of  starting,  or  of  reversing, 
or  of  stopping  the  magnetizing  current,  but  quickly  in  each  case  showed  the  nature 
of  the  permanent  deflection  by  oscillating  about  one  position,  when  the  current  was 
steadily  maintained,  in  either  direction.  These  impulsive  deflections  were  of  course 
due  to  induced  currents,  and  were  entirely  prevented  by  keeping  the  galvanometer 
MDCCCLVI.  5 E 


740  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

circuit  broken  during  the  starting,  the  reversal,  or  the  stoppage  of  the  current  through 
the  coil  of  the  electro-magnet. 

158.  The  deflection  due  to  the  effect  of  magnetic  force  on  the  substance  of  the  iron 
was  corrected  in  each  case  by  sliding  the  moveable  electrode  towards  the  part  of  the 
testing  scale  remote  from  the  end  connected  with  the  iron  spiral  which  experienced 
that  effect ; and  it  therefore  indicated  a diminution  of  conductivity  in  the  iron. 

159.  If  the  lines  of  magnetization  had  been  exactly  perpendicular  to  the  lines  of 
electric  current  through  the  iron,  we  should  now  conclude  that  transverse  magneti- 
zation diminishes  the  conductivity  of  an  iron  conductor ; that  is,  that  it  produces  the 
same  kind  of  effect  on  the  conductivity  as  longitudinal  magnetization.  But  the  lines 
of  current  formed  spirals  inclined  at  an  angle  of  84°  to  the  lines  of  the  magnetizing 
force  ; and  the  mutual  influence  of  the  consecutive  parts  of  the  magnetized  iron  spiral 
would  have  an  effect  (not  wholly  compensated  by  the  mutual  influences  between 
the  successive  spires  because  of  the  thickness  of  the  twine  between  them,)  contri- 
buting to  longitudinal  magnetization;  and  therefore  the  lines  of  magnetization  must 
have  been  inclined,  not  at  90°,  but  at  some  angle  less  than  84°,  to  the  direction  of  the 
lines  of  current.  Hence  all  we  can  conclude  is,  that  not  only  longitudinal  magneti- 
zation but  oblique  magnetization  up  to  some  angle  of  obliquity  less  than  84°  from  the 
lines  of  current,  diminishes  the  electric  conductivity  of  iron. 

160.  It  remains  to  be  determined  by  experiment  what  is  the  effect  of  magneti- 
zation right  across  the  lines  of  current:  if  a diminution  of  conductivity,  whether  a 
greater  or  a less  diminution  than  is  caused  by  an  equal  longitudinal  magnetization? 
or  if  it  is  an  increase  of  conductivity,  what  is  the  angle  of  obliquity  of  the  magneti- 
zation which  gives  neither  increase  nor  diminution  of  conductivity  ? 

161.  Exp.  4.  To  discover  the  differential  effect  of  magnetization  on  the  conductivity 

of  iron  in  different  directions. — A square  of  1^  inch  each  side  was  cut  from  thin 

sheet  metal,  and  powerful  electrodes  were  soldered  to  two  corners,  A and  B.  A 

« 

reference  electrode  (§  149)  of  No.  18  copper  wire  was  soldered  to  C,  one  of  the 
other  corners,  and  the  two  extremities  of  a yard  of  the  same  kind  of  wire,  to  be 
used  as  a multiplying  branch,  were  soldered  to  points  D,  E,  about  irth  of  an  inch 
from  one  another  on  each  side  of  the  remaining  corner.  A current  being  con- 
ducted through  the  square  by  the  principal  electrodes  A and  B,  the  reference 
electrode  was  used  to  connect  C permanently  with  the  commutator  belonging  to 
the  testing  galvanometer.  Another  wire  used  as  a testing  electrode,  was  applied  to 
connect  any  point  of  the  plate,  or  of  the  multiplying  branch,  with  the  other  galva- 
nometer electrode.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  found  that  a powerful  current  was 
raised  in  the  galvanometer  coil  if  the  testing  electrode  was  applied  to  any  point  of  the 
multiplying  branch  ; and  it  was  necessary  therefore,  as  was  anticipated,  to  adjust  the 
distribution  of  resistance  through  the  square  by  filing,  so  that  there  might  be  some 
point  on  the  testing  branch  which  would  give  no  current  when  touched  by  the  testing 
electrode.  (See  below,  § 176,  where  a less  troublesome  way  of  managing  this  part 
of  the  arrangement,  in  an  analogous  experiment,  is  described.)  For  this  purpose,  in 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  741 


the  first  place  the  testing  electrode  was  applied  at  different  places  along  the  edges 
BD,  EA  of  the  square  till  a point  was  found  which  gave  no  deflection  of  the  galvano- 


meter. If  this  was  in  BD,  the  plate  had  to  be  thinned  in  its  middle  parts  parallel  to 
CA  and  BD,  or  else  to  be  thinned  along  the  edges  CB,  AD,  so  as  to  increase  the 
resistance  to  conduction  parallel  to  the  last-mentioned  edges.  Or  if  the  neutral  point 
was  in  EA,  the  plate  had  to  be  thinned  in  its  middle  parts  parallel  to  CB  and  AD,  or 
along  its  edges  BD,  CA.  By  using  the  file  according  to  these  directions,  after  a few 
trials  the  neutral  point  was  brought  upon  the  testing  branch  ; that  is  to  say,  the  resist- 
ance was  so  adjusted  in  the  square  that  the  line  from  C cutting  right  across  the  lines 
of  conduction,  or  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  equi-  Fig.  44. 

potential  line  through  C,  passed  between  D and  E. 

A piece  of  sheet  copper  as  broad  as  the  iron  square, 
but  rather  longer,  was  bent  as  shown  in  the  diagram,  so  as  to  give  a depressed  space 
in  which  the  iron,  insulated  from  the  copper 
simply  by  a piece  of  writing-paper,  could  rest 
steadily.  This  copper  cradle  was  placed  resting 
on  the  flat  poles  of  a Ruhmkorff  electro-magnet, 
which  were  pushed  together  so  as  to  hold  it 
firmly.  Any  leakage  of  electric  currents  from 
the  coils  of  the  electro-magnet  was  thus  effectu- 
ally drained  by  the  copper,  so  that  a simple 
sheet  of  paper  was  quite  enough  to  do  away  with 
all  sensible  indications  of  currents  in  the  iron 
acquired  otherwise  than  through  the  electrodes  A and  B.  [This  electrical  drainage 
would  be  made  more  nearly  perfect  by  using  paper  or  some  other  non-conductor  to 
separate  the  cradle  from  the  poles  of  the  magnet.] 

162.  A large  single  element  of  Daniell’s  63),  consisting  of  seven  zinc  plates  in 

5 E 2 


742  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

seven  porous  cells,  contained  in  four  large  wooden  cells,  and  exposing  in  all  8'75 
square  feet  of  zinc  surface  to  15*3  square  feet  of  copper,  was  then  used  to  send  a 
current  through  the  iron  square,  insulated  between  the  poles  of  the  electro-magnet, 
in  the  manner  described. 

163.  The  neutral  point  on  the  testing  branch  Fig-  46. 

being  got  by  trial,  it  was  found  to  remain 
tolerably  steady,  although  no  doubt  during  the 
first  minutes  of  the  flow  of  the  current  it  may 
have  varied  much,  as  the  iron  got  heated,  which 
it  soon  did  to  a degree  very  sensible  to  the 
touch.  Moving  the  electrode  along  the  testing 
branch  through  a quarter  of  an  inch  on  either 
side  of  the  neutral  point,  gave  a very  marked 
deflection  of  the  galvanometer.  The  galvano- 
meter circuit  was  then  broken,  and  a current 
from  six  of  the  small  iron  cells  was  started 
through  the  coils  of  the  electro-magnet.  When 
the  galvanometer  circuit  was  again,  after  a few  seconds,  closed,  with  its  electrode  on 
the  same  point  of  the  multiplying  branch  as  before,  a very  considerable  deflection  was 
observed  in  the  needle.  To  correct  this  deflection  and  bring  the  needle  to  zero,  the 
testing  electrode  had  to  be  moved  to  a position  2 or  3 inches  nearer  D on  the  testing 
branch. 

164.  The  new  neutral  point  was  unchanged  when  the  electro-magnet  was  reversed, 
and  when  the  magnetizing  current  was  broken  there  was  a permanent  deflection  in 
the  galvanometer  the  reverse  of  that  observed  when  the  current  was  started  in  either 
direction.  If  the  galvanometer  circuit  was  completed  within  a second  or  two  of 
any  of  the  changes  in  the  magnetizing  current,  the  needle  experienced,  obviously 
from  induced  currents,  powerful  impulses  in  one  direction  or  the  other,  according  to 
the  direction  of  the  current  made  or  unmade  through  coils  of  the  electro-magnet. 
But  in  every  case,  although  from  various  disturbing  causes  the  neutral  points  gradu- 
ally shifted  largely  along  the  testing  branch,  the  permanent  effects  of  making  and  of 
unmaking  the  electro-magnet  were  most  marked,  and  were  uniformly  as  stated 
above. 

165.  Thus  it  appears  that  magnetization  shifts  the  equipotential  Fig.  47. 

line  through  C from  its  position  running  across  to  the  opposite 
corner,  to  a position  (dotted  in  the  diagram)  a little  nearer  CB ; so 
much  so  that  its  end  is  shifted  about  or  -^i^th  of  an  inch 

from  E towards  D.  This  shows  that  the  passage  of  electricity  in 
the  directions  AE  and  CB  has  become  less  resisted  than  it  was, 
relatively  to  the  passage  in  the  directions  AC,  DB ; and  it  therefore  follows  that  the 
electric  conductivity  of  magnetized  iron  is  greater  across  than  along  the  lines  of 
magnetization. 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  743 


166.  Still,  as  the  preceding  experiment  (Exp.  3)  had  appeared  (§  159)  to  show  that 
the  absolute  conductivity  is  diminished  in  all  directions  by  magnetization,  it  seemed 
possible  that  the  effect  now  observed  might  be  caused  by  inequalities  in  the  distri- 
bution of  magnetism  in  the  plate.  Thus  if  from  the  character  of  the  distribution  of 
the  magnetizing  force,  or  because  of  non-uniformity  in  the  plate,  the  parts  between 
C and  B and  between  A and  E were  less  intensely  magnetized,  and  those  between 
C and  A and  between  B and  D more  intensely  magnetized,  than  the  average,  the 
observed  effect  could  be  accounted  for  without  any  difference  in  the  electric  conduc- 
tivity of  the  substance  in  the  different  directions.  To  test  this  conceivable  explana- 
tion, pieces  of  soft  iron  (cubes  and  little  square  bars  nearly  double  cubes)  were  laid 
over  the  square  plate,  being  kept  insulated  from  electric  communication  with  it  by 
paper,  so  that  while  the  conducting  mass  remained  unchanged,  the  distribution  of 
the  magnetization  of  its  substance  might  be  altered.  Before  the  magnetic  force  was 
applied,  a great  effect  on  the  neutral  point  of  the  multiplying  branch  was  observed, 
taking  place  gradually  during  several  minutes,  and  obviously  due,  in  a great  measure, 
to  variation  of  the  distribution  of  temperature  in  the  conducting  square.  (See  below, 
§ 177,  for  an  illustration  of  this  effect.).  When  a new  neutral  point  was  found,  the 
magnet  was  made,  reversed,  unmade,  &c.,  and  always  with  the  same  effects  as 
before.  Different  arrangements  of  the  little  masses  of  soft  iron  produced  different 
absolute  effeets  on  the  neutral  point,  causing  it  to  shift  sometimes  as  much  as  fifteen 
inches  on  the  multiplying  branch,  but  the  effects  of  magnetism  were  invariably  found 
to  be  consistent  with  the  first-mentioned  result.  As  the  distribution  of  the  magnet- 
ism in  the  square  plate  must  have  varied  very  much  under  these  different  circum- 
stances, and  in  all  probability  must  have  been  in  some  of  the  cases  more  intense  in 
the  quarters  towards  AE  and  CB  than  in  those  towards  AC  and  DB,  the  conclusion 
could  scarcely  be  avoided,  that  the  conductivity  of  the  magnetized  substance  was 
greater  across  than  along  the  lines  of  magnetization.  For  the  purpose  of  further 
testing  and  illustrating  this  conclusion  I planned  the  following  experiment,  to  com- 
pare directly  the  resistances  of  two  equal  and  similar  squares  of  sheet  iron,  equally 
and  similarly  magnetized,  arranged  in  the  same  circuit  to  conduct  electricity  across 
the  lines  of  magnetization  of  one  and  along  those  of  the  other. 

167.  Exp.  5.  To  compare  the  conductivities  of  magnetized  iron  along  and  across 
the  lines  of  magnetization. — A piece  of  sheet  copper,  BCHK  (fig.  48),  3 inches  long, 
2 broad  and  ^ inch  thick,  was  bent  round  the  line  FH  into  the  form  shown  in  fig.  49. 


Fig.  48.  Fig.  49.  Fig.  50. 


A square  of  thin  sheet  iron,  2 inches  wide  (weighing  103  grains),  was  soldered  by 
one  side  to  the  edge  CH  of  the  copper  in  the  position  shown  in  fig.  50.  The  pro- 


744  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


jecting  part,  FBKL,  of  the  copper  slip  was  bent  round  its  middle  line  EG,  so  as  to 
bring  its  edge,  BK,  close  over  the  edge  of  the  iron  square  lying  over  FC  ; and  to  this 
edge,  BK,  in  its  new  position  (fig.  51),  a second  iron  square,  of  the  same  dimensions 
and  weight  as  the  other,  was  soldered  by  one  side,  with  its  area  lying  in  a position 
close  to  that  of  the  former.  The  relative  position  of  the  two  squares  and  the  con- 
necting piece  of  copper  will  be  understood  by  looking  at  fig.  52,  which  represents  the 


iron  squares  as  if  soldered  to  the  piece  of  copper  before  it  was  bent,  and  the  iron 
square  CDMH  turned  round  its  side  CH,  from  the  position  close  to  the  plane  of  the 
copper  adjoining  it,  into  a position  in  this  plane  continued  across  CH.  If,  now,  we  sup- 
pose the  iron  square  CDMH  to  be  turned  down  so  as  to  lie  below  a square,  FL'HC, 
of  the  copper ; this  square  of  the  copper  to  be  bent  sharp  round  its  diagonal,  FH,  till 
the  part  FL'H  lies  over  HCF;  and,  lastly,  the  part  FL'KB  projecting  beyond  FC  to 
be  bent  downwards  round  EG  with  a less  sharp  bend  ; the  iron  square,  ABKL,  will 
be  brought  close  under  the  other  one,  CDMH,  with  the  edges  of  the  two  which  are 
connected  to  the  edges  of  the  copper  perpendicular  to  one  another,  and  the  whole 
compound  conductor  will  have  exactly  the  position  shown  below  in  fig.  54. 

168.  A convenient  electrode  was  soldered  along  the  edge  of  each  iron  square  par- 
allel to  the  edge  of  the  same  square  soldered  to  the  connecting  piece  of  copper ; so 
that  a powerful  electric  current  entering  by  one  of  those  electrodes  and  carried  away 
by  the  other  would  pass  through  the  second-mentioned  square  of  iron  in  lines  exactly 
parallel  to  the  side  AB,  through  the  connecting  piece  of  copper  in  lines  which  were 
parallel  to  its  length,  BC,  before  it  was  bent ; and  through  the  first-mentioned  square 
in  lines  exactly  parallel  to  its  side  CD,  and  therefore  perpendicular  to  the  lines  along 
which  it  traverses  the  second  square.  The  course  of  the  current  will  be  understood 
by  looking  at  fig.  52,  where  the  two  squares  and  the  copper  connecting  them  are  sup- 
posed to  be  opened  out  so  as  to  throw  the  course  of  the  current  into  a straight  line. 
The  order  followed  in  constructing  the  compound  conductor  was  not  exactly  the 
order  of  the  description  given  above;  but  the  connecting  piece  of  copper  was  first 
cut  and  bent,  and  other  pieces,  to  serve  as  electrodes  (shown  in  the  accompanying 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  745 


views,  fig.  52),  were  prepared,  and  the  iron  squares,  put  in  their  proper  places,  were 
then  soldered  by  their  edges  to  the  edges  of  the  connecting  piece,  and  the  electrodes 

Fig.  53. 


were  soldered  to  their  opposite  edges.  A view  of  the  whole  thus  put  together,  with 
the  reference  and  testing  wires  described  below,  is  given  in  fig.  54.  A testing  con- 

Fig.  54. 


ductor  of  two  yards  of  No.  18  copper  wire  was  soldered,  with  its  two  extremities  to 
the  copper  electrodes,  close  to  the  middle  points  of  the  edges  AL,  DM  of  the  iron 
squares ; and  a fixed  galvanometer  electrode  was  soldered  to  the  middle  point,  N,  of 
the  copper  connecting  piece. 

169.  The  squares,  their  electrodes,  the  connecting  piece,  and  the  testing  conductor 


746  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 

being  then  guarded  against  irregular  contacts  by  a little  square  of  pasteboard  pressed 
between  the  iron  squares,  a half-square  of  pasteboard  between  the  first-mentioned 
iron  square  and  the  portion  FCH  of  the  connecting  copper  (see  fig.  49),  and  frag- 
ments of  paper  and  pasteboard  elsewhere,  the  whole  was  placed,  with  the  second- 
mentioned  square  lowest,  in  a copper  cradle  lined  with  paper,  and  resting  between 
the  horizontal  edges  of  the  flat  poles  of  the  Ruhmkorff  electro-magnet  used  in  the 
preceding  experiment. 

170.  The  positions  of  the  magnetic  poles  of  the  squares,  of  the  bent  connecting 
piece  of  copper,  of  the  testing  conductor,  and  of  the  galvanometer  electrodes  are 
indicated  in  fig.  55,  but,  to  avoid  confusion,  the  principal  electrodes  are  not  shown. 

Fig.  55. 


A current  from  the  four  large  double  cells,  connected  so  as  to  constitute  in  all  a 
single  element  of  Daniell’s,  exposing  10  square  feet  of  zinc  surface  to  17^^  square 
feet  of  copper,  was  then  introduced  by  the  principal  electrode  soldered  to  the  edge 
MD  of  the  upper  square,  and  drawn  off  by  the  other  principal  electrode,  namely,  that 
soldered  to  the  edge  of  the  lower  square  lying  exactly  below  the  edge  MH  of  the 
upper.  The  course  of  the  current  into  the  principal  channel  between  these  electrodes 
would  be  across  the  upper  square  from  MD  to  HC,  and  across  the  lower  square  from 
the  edge  below  CD  to  that  below  HM ; also,  in  the  secondary  channel  between  the 
same  electrodes,  from  T soldered  to  the  first  through  the  testing  conductor,  to  its  other 
end  U soldered  to  the  second. 

171.  A fixed  galvanometer  electrode  being  (§  168)  soldered  to  the  middle  point,  N, 
of  the  connecting-copper,  the  other  electrode  of  the  galvanometer  was  moved  along 
the  testing  conductor  till  a point,  O,  was  found  at  which  it  might  be  applied  without 
giving  any  deflection.  By  moving  it  -^th  of  an  inch  on  either  side  of  O very  sen- 
sible deflections  were  obtained,  and  therefore  a yard  of  copper  wire  was  soldered  by 
its  ends  to  points  S and  Q a quarter  of  an  inch  on  each  side  of  O,  and  was  used 
instead  of  the  “scale”  of  the  testing  conductor  described  as  used  in  the  first  three 
experiments.  The  neutral  point.  O',  on  this  multiplying  branch  having  been  found, 
the  galvanometer  circuit  was  broken,  and  the  electro-magnet  was  excited  by  six  of 
the  small  iron  cells.  On  closing  the  galvanometer  circuit  again  immediately,  a con- 
siderable deflection  was  observed,  to  correct  which  the  moveable  electrode  had  to  be 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  747 

moved  through  about  two  or  three  inches  from  O'  towards  Q.  On  unmaking  the 
electro-magnet  a reverse  deflection  in  the  galvanometer  was  observed,  and  was  cor- 
rected by  bringing  back  the  electrode  to  O'.  The  same  result  was  obtained  when 
the  magnet  was  made  in  the  reverse  way,  and  never  failed  to  appear,  to  an  unmis- 
takeable  extent  and  with  perfect  consistency,  after  the  operation  had  been  repeated 
many  times  and  varied  in  every  possible  way. 

172.  It  showed  that  the  effect  of  the  magnetization  was  to  increase  the  resistance 
relatively  in  the  upper  square  of  iron,  and  to  diminish  it  relatively  in  the  lower 
square.  I concluded  with  confidence  that  the  electric  conductivity  of  magnetized 
iron  is  greater  across  than  along  the  lines  of  magnetization. 

173.  Exp.  6.  A double  experiment,  to  test  the  absolute  nature  of  the  two  effects  of 
which  the  dfference  was  shown  in  the  preceding  experiment. — A divided  current  from 
the  battery  was  made  to  pass  through  the  two  squares  by  electrodes,  of  which  one 
was  soldered  to  the  middle  of  the  copper  band  connecting  them,  and  the  other 
clamped  to  the  now  united  extremities  of  the  bundles  of  copper  wire  which  had 
served  before  to  lead  in  and  out  the  whole  current  in  the  preceding  experiment.  As 
testing  conductor  was  used  the  same  piece  of  copper  wire  which  had  served  as  the 
fixed  galvanometer  electrode  in  the  preceding  experiment,  with  its  end  which  had 
been  connected  with  the  galvanometer  now  soldered  to  the  junction  of  the  two 
copper  branches  of  the  divided  channel  (the  resistance  of  each  of  which  was  found 
to  be  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  iron  square  with  which  it  is  connected).  The 
testing  wire  used  in  the  preceding  experiment  was  cut  in  two,  one  part  to  serve  as 
fixed  galvanometer  electrode  in  one,  and  the  other  in  the  other  of  the  two  experi- 
ments which  it  was  intended  next  to  make.  I first  attempted  to  test  the  effect  on 
the  conductivity  of  the  upper  of  the  two  squares  produced  by  the  magnetization 
which  in  it  is  along  the  lines  of  current.  I found,  however,  on  fixing  the  copper 
wire  proceeding  from  one  side  of  that  square  to  one  electrode  of  the  galvano- 
meter, and  applying  the  other  to  the  testing  conductor  in  the  usual  way,  that  the 
circumstances  were  constantly  varying,  and  that  the  point  to  be  touched  to  give  no 
deflection  shifted  rapidly  along  the  testing  conductor.  Hence  I gave  up  this  part 
of  the  experiment,  of  which  the  result  might  be  anticipated  with  certainty  from  the 
experiment  on  the  effect  of  magnetization  along  the  line  of  current  described  above 
(Exp.  1.  ^ 155),  and  I gave  the  whole  time  during  which  the  experiment  could  be 
continued,  to  an  examination  of  the  influence  of  the  electro-magnet  on  the  current 
in  the  branch  leading  through  the  lower  square  across  its  lines  of  magnetization. 
Accordingly,  the  galvanometer  electrode,  which  had  been  united  to  the  part  of  the 
old  testing  conductor  terminating  in  an  edge  of  the  upper  square,  was  transferred  to 
the  other  part  of  the  old  testing  conductor,  that  is,  to  the  part  terminating  in  a side 
of  the  lower  iron  square.  The  same  new  testing  conductor  was  still  used ; and  as 
soon  as  a point  could  be  found  on  it  which  gave  no  current  when  touched  by  the 
moveable  galvanometer  electrode,  points  about  ^ of  an  inch  on  each  side  of  it  were 

5 F 


MDCCCLVI. 


748  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


taken,  and  a multiplying  branch  of  one  yard  No.  18  copper  wire  was  soldered  by 
its  ends  to  them.  Before,  however,  the  effect  of  the  magnetism  could  be  decidedly 
tested,  the  zero-point  had  moved  off  the  multiplying  branch,  which  had  accordingly 
to  be  shifted  along  the  testing  conductor  to  get  into  range  again.  The  same  pro- 
cess had  to  be  gone  through  a great  many  times,  and  at  last,  after  the  current  had 
been  flowing  continuously  through  the  two  squares  and  the  divided  copper  channel 
for  about  five  hours,  the  zero-point  became  sufficiently  steady  to  remain  on  the  mul- 
tiplying branch  when  fixed  at  the  right  place  on  the  testing  conductor,  and  to  allow 
a decisive  experiment  to  be  made.  The  result  was  a very  slight  effect,  proving  a 
diminution  of  1'esistance  in  the  iron  square. 

1/4.  The  cause  of  the  long-continued  variation  in  the  conditions  of  electric  equi- 
librium between  the  testing  conductor  and  the  fixed  point  on  the  edge  of  the  lower 
square,  was  clearly  the  gradual  warming  of  the  long  copper  wires  extending  up 
from  this  point,  due  to  the  conduction  of  heat  generated  in  the  iron  squares  by  the 
electric  current ; and  it  would  obviously  be  much  diminished  by  using  a simple  form 
of  conductor  with  only  one  iron  square  at  a time,  and  with  the  reference  conductor 
kept  near  it,  so  as  to  acquire  quickly  whatever  temperature  it  would  rest  with  during 
the  flow  of  the  current.  I accordingly  made  the  following  experiment,  choosing 
first  the  effect  of  transverse  magnetization,  as  the  experiment  just  described  had 
not  been  of  a satisfactory  kind,  although  apparently  conclusive,  while  the  first  expe- 
riment of  the  series  (Exp.  1.  155)  had  been  less  unsatisfactory  in  point  of  steadi- 

ness, and  had  led  decisively  to  a conclusion  regarding  the  effect  of  longitudinal 
magnetization  on  the  resistance  of  a conductor. 

175.  Exp.  7.  A square  of  sheet  iron  like  those  used  in  the  last  experiment  (four 
square  inches,  weighing  103  grains,  and  consequently  about  ^th  of  an  inch  thick,) 
was  soldered  along  one  edge  to  a slip  of  lead  of  the  same  widtli,  about  twice  as  thick 
and  about  one-half  longer.  To  the  opposite  edge  of  the  iron  square  was  soldered  a 
stout  copper  slip  an  inch  broad  and  equal  in  length 
to  the  side.  The  piece  of  lead  was  bent  round,  so 
as  to  give  a straight  part  lying  about  ^ of  an  inch 
from  the  plane  of  the  iron,  and  to  extend  about  as 
far  as  the  copper  slip  soldered  to  the  other  edge  of 
the  square.  A current  from  an  arrangement  of  the 
cells  (§§  63  and  64)  constituting  a powerful  single 
element  of  Daniell’s  was  sent  through  the  iron 
square  and  the  lead  band,  by  electrodes  clamped  to 
one  end  of  the  lead  and  to  the  copper  slip  fixed  to  the  other  edge  of  the  iron.  A 
point  in  the  lead  slip  having  been  found,  such  that  the  galvanic  resistance  between 
it  and  the  edge  next  the  iron  was  nearly  equal  to  the  resistance  in  the  iron  square 
itself,  a testing  conductor  (two  yards  of  No.  18  copper)  was  soldered  by  one  end  to 
that  point  in  the  lead,  and  by  its  other  end  to  the  middle  of  the  edge  of  the  iron 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  EEECTRO-DVNAMIC  QUAIHTIES  OF  METALS.  749 


square  to  which  the  copper  slip  is  attached.  A copper  wire,  to  serve  as  fixed  galva- 
nometer electrode,  was  soldered  to  the  lead  band,  at  a point  in  the  middle  of  its 
breadth  close  to  its  edge  of  attachment  to  the  iron.  A copper  cradle  was  put  between 
the  flat  poles  of  the  electro-magnet,  as  before  (see  above,  § 161),  and  covered  with 
a piece  of  paper.  The  iron  square  was  supported  upon  it  in  a position  with  the 
line  joining  the  poles  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  the  current  through  it.  Then,  the 
current  being  kept  steadily  flowing  through  the  iron  and  lead  band,  a zero-point 
was  found  on  the  testing  conductor,  and  a multiplying  branch  (one  yard  of  No.  18 
copper)  was  soldered  with  its  ends  ^ of  an  inch  on  each  side  of  this  point,  in  the 
usual  way.  The  zero-point  on  this  multiplying  branch  was  almost  immediately 
found,  and  continued  on  the  whole  very  steady  from  the  first.  The  galvanometer 
circuit  being  broken,  a magnetizing  current  from  six  small  iron  cells  was  sent  through 
the  coils  of  the  electro-magnet,  and  the  needle  of  the  galvanometer  was  let  settle  (as 
it  could  be  in  a few  seconds  by  the  aid  of  a little  magnet  held  in  the  hand)  into  its 
position  of  equilibrium  as  affected  by  the  direct  force  of  the  magnet.  On  completing 
the  galvanometer  circuit  again,  with  its  moveable  electrode  on  the  same  point  of  the 
multiplying  branch  as  before,  a current  was  made  sensible  by  an  excessively  slight 
deflection.  The  galvanometer  circuit  being  broken,  and  the  electro-magnet  reversed, 
a similar  deflection  was  found  in  the  galvanometer  on  again  completing  its  circuit. 
It  ceased,  as  nearly  as  could  be  discovered,  when  the  electro-magnet  was  unmade, 
and  was  uniformly  observed  when  the  magnet  was  made  again  either  way,  in  a great 
many  repetitions.  The  current  indicated  by  the  galvanometer  when  the  magnet  was 
made  was  always  such  as  to  be  corrected  by  carrying  the  moveable  electrode  from 
its  previous  zero-point,  along  the  multiplying  branch,  towards  the  part  of  the  testing 
conductor  terminating  at  the  iron  square,  and  therefore  indicated  an  increase  of  con- 
ductivity in  the  iron.  The  effect  was  so  very  slight,  that  I could  scarcely  determine 
how  much  the  moveable  conductor  had  to  be  shifted  to  correct  it.  I intend  to  repeat 
the  experiment  with  similar  arrangements,  but  with  two  or  three  times  as  powerful  a 
current  through  the  electro-magnet,  which  ought  to  give  about  four  or  nine  times 
the  amount  of  effect.  In  the  mean  time,  however,  I am  quite  convinced  that  I have 
observed  the  true  result,  and  I conclude  that  the  electric  conductivity  of  iron  is 
increased  hy  magnetic  force  across  the  lines  of  current. 

176.  Exp.  8.  To  show  the  variation  of  a line  of  electric  equUihrium  in  a circular  disc 
of  iron  conducting  electricity  between  two  opposite  points  of  its  circumference,  when  sub- 
jected to  magnetic  force  in  a direction  at  an  angle  of  4ib°  to  the  line  joining  these  points. 
— A circle  2’3  inches  diameter  was  cut  from  a piece  of  sheet  iron,  and  ground  down 
to  a thickness  which  must  have  been  about  g-gth  of  an  inch,  as  the  prepared  disc  was 
found  to  weigh  114  grains.  Two  stout  copper  electrodes  were  soldered  to  its  circum- 
ference at  opposite  points.  A point  at  90°  on  the  circumference  from  one  of  these 
was  taken,  and  at  about  :^oth  of  an  inch  on  each  side  of  it  were  soldered  the  ends  of 
a piece  of  No.  18  copper  wire  two  yards  long,  to  serve  as  a multiplying  branch.  The 

5 F 2 


750  PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS. 


disc  was  put  on  a copper  cradle  covered  with  paper,  supported  between  the  flat  poles 
of  the  Ruhmkorff  electro-magnet,  with  the  line  joining  its  principal  electrodes  at  an 

Fig.  57. 


angle  of  45°  to  the  magnetic  axes  of  the  field,  and  a current  from  a large  single  element 
of  Daniell’s  was  sent  through  it  by  these  electrodes.  One  electrode  of  the  galvano- 
meter was  applied  to  the  middle  of  the  multiplying  branch,  and  the  other  was  moved 
about  on  the  opposite  parts  of  the  circumference  of  the  disc  till  a position  giving  no 
current  was  found,  where  it  was  then  soldered.  The  moveable  electrode  applied  to 
different  points  of  the  multiplying  branch  was  then  found  to  give  sensible  galvano- 
meter indications  with  a motion  of  a quarter  of  an  inch,  and  after  a very  short  time 
the  zero-point  became  tolerably  steady.  The  electro-magnet  was  then  made,  with 


Fig.  58. 


the  galvanometer  circuit  broken,  and  when  it  was  closed  again  a decided  indication 
of  a current  was  observed  in  the  galvanometer.  This  current  was  checked  by  sliding 
the  moveable  electrode  towards  the  end  of  the  multiplying  branch  next  the  equatoreal 


PROFESSOR  THOMSON  ON  THE  ELECTRO-DYNAMIC  QUALITIES  OF  METALS.  751 

part  of  the  magnetic  field  ; and  the  conclusion  was,  that  the  conducting  power  of  the 
plate,  when  magnetized,  became  greater  across  than  along  the  lines  of  magnetization, 
which  was  confirmed  by  every  repetition  and  variation  of  the  experiment.  Now  it 
is  obvious  that  the  intensity  of  magnetization  must  have  been  on  the  whole  greater 
in  the  parts  of  the  disc  next  the  poles : hence  a diminution  of  conductivity  across 
the  lines  of  magnetization,  to  the  same  extent  as  that  which  we  know  from  Experi- 
ment 1.  exists  along  them,  would  give  a contrary  effect  to  that  now  observed  ; and  it 
follows  that  the  electric  conductivity  is  in  reality  greater  across  than  along  the  lines 
of  magnetization  in  magnetized  iron. 

177.  This  experiment  was  witnessed  by  Mr.  Joule,  and  afforded  a full  confirma- 
tion of  the  conclusion  (§  172)  which  had  been  established  by  Experiment  5.  above, 
and  which  follows  from  Experiment  1.  and  Experiment  6.,  considered  together.  The 
effects  of  applying  pieces  of  hot  wood  equatoreally  or  axially  to  the  disc  were  very 
clearly  observed,  and  were  always  similar  to  those  described  above  (§  166),  indicating 
a greater  resistance  to  the  parts  of  the  current  crossing  the  hot  region  than  to  those 
passing  through  the  comparatively  cool  parts  of  the  iron. 


• t"  T *Vv'  • 


k 


i'l  ■■:; rrn ‘■■’■n*  :'’-7  :ru;'r  ^ 

V ,'’ ^^*| ’.■^’ i^ ■ '^1; f i •' ■ ^■ 

- /,•  ■ .'  f. .!  i ’♦.  ■ 'i ■ .15  < ij>'5 intf  >--!^-'  r - • ■•» 


3*11; 


.^:.- 

’V;  ,i; 


■■  ■■rr  ->,5,^ 
•'^  ' * 

■•u  -f/.tri  ' :T 


;:1  .;./ 

,ywr.  .,  •■■J  : * ? r ...  . r‘M] 

i /.  '.-:''..'iLij.J«  ! ..-L"*!,*.  - ■ •■  ' -.'.  ....  :■  • ? 'i  j'..  * , ;'''=-H 


•'  :;l'.''.  i''J‘--..'  ti  u ,■.— f’rt  ,f  ( *■!  i' ^ ^'•‘ 

'•■'  .1'  ■ .’b;i.?9^  ' by'lfd-  ,■>-  ..!  . . . -irr;  >1'.: 

. • » . s » '■.  1 \..t\ ■*  'I'-."!  .V  _,....  -•  ^vi»ty'i.  W ''ht*.  ■■^‘  - -•■ 


J i.../'-j.'.0  *.,,.,  ' . >»  5t  K 


•■.'  .'r  • .’bri'B''  . - ' ;b:>'Jfd-''  J'  irr^iXTr-;  >»'.:  ■ ^ .scfm 

:y,r\l  Kil-L.,.  ] '--  ■■fy.y''  M d ■:  ^ ^ lo  f'.Hy'l  'MV-  • M V.  . ^.v;:-...v'}. 

' .'-/'-if..  ' '■; 


.1 


■ , i ,',i,.> -l.i-, -n-W  ' ■ >''--  v,i 


ni; 

.'.'fi' 


I'M'.  ': '•  ' f f/i,.,  > ' y-' **'"■" ‘ii 

..  ,^'  i-  :y-'' 

. V%yM  . '?v : 

<''ii,';K'.V.,;)  iV .>:.*/■  .;.!i".fj  ■'■"'■  ■■■■.,'  " M,  V.v'r'.4''S: 


y ‘•iS'tSf: 


-:v: 


*■  '■  ■■''  ,8 

' ^i‘-  111*' t ' ^ 

.j.:. 


.':>-.;A  v'  ■ '&i"...v''ki 





^ . .'V^'  "• 


[ 753  ] 


XXXI 1.  On  the  Construction  of  the  New  Imperial  Standard  Pound,  and  its  Copies  of 
Platinum;  and  on  the  Comparison  of  the  Imperial  Standard  Pound  with  the 
Kilogramme  des  Archives.  By  W.  H.  Miller,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  Professor  of 
Mineralogy  in  the  University  of  Cambridge, 

Received  up  to  p.  895  April  16, — Read  April  24,  1856  ; from  p.  895  Received  June  7, — Read  June  12, 1856. 

History  of  the  Standards  of  English  JVeight. 

The  earliest  legal  standard  of  English  weight,  of  which  any  very  authentic  account 
is  preserved,  is  the  weight  called  the  pound  of  the  Tower  of  London.  According  to 
Folkes*,  it  was  the  old  pound  of  the  Saxon  Moneyers  before  the  Conquest.  This 
pound  was  lighter  than  the  troy  pound  by  three-quarters  of  an  ounce  troy,  and  did 
not  very  sensibly  differ  from  twelve  ounces  of  the  weight  still  used  in  the  money 
affairs  of  Germany,  and  there  known  by  the  name  of  the  Cologne  weight.  It  is  most 
probable  that  the  pound  of  the  Tower  of  standard  silver  was  then  cut  up  into  240 
pennies  ; whence  the  weight  of  the  penny  will  be  22  5 troy  grains.  The  silver 
pennies  of  the  first  two  kings  after  the  Conquest  agree,  as  near  as  can  be  judged,  in 
weight  and  goodness,  with  the  pennies  of  the  Saxon  kings  their  immediate  predeces- 
sors. It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  think  that  King  William  introduced  no  new  weight 
into  his  Mints.  Clarke,  in  his  Treatise  on  the  connexion  of  Roman,  Saxon  and 
English  Coins,  p.  97,  considers  this  evident  from  the  words  of  William  I. : ‘ Statuimus 
et  praecipirnus,  quod  habeant  per  universum  regnum  mensuras  fidelissimas,  et  signatas ; 
et  pondera  fidelissima,  et  signata,  sicut  boni  prsedecessores  nostri  statuerunt.’  And 
also  (p.  152)  from  one  of  the  Conqueror’s  laws,  where  it  is  said,  that  the  Saxon  shilling 
was  four  pence  (from  the  time  of  Athelstane),  the  preamble  of  which  informs  us, 
that  these  laws  were  in  force  during  the  Confessor’s  reign:  ‘Ice  les  meismes,  que  le 
Reis  Edward  sun  Cosin  tint  devant  lui.’ 

That  the  Tower  pound  was  lighter  than  the  troy  pound  by  three-quarters  of  an 
ounce  troy,  appears  by  a verdict  relating  to  the  coinage  dated  30th  October,  1527, 
18  Hen.  VIII.,  in  the  Exchequer,  in  which  are  the  following  words:  ‘And  whereas 
heretofore  the  merchaunte  paid  for  coynage  of  every  pounde  Towre  of  fyne  gold, 
weighing  xi  oz.  quarter  Troye,  ii  s.  vi  d.  Nowe  it  is  determyned  by  the  King’s 
highness,  and  his  said  councelle,  that  the  foresaid  pounde  Towre  shall  be  no  more 


* Table  of  English  Coins,  p.  1 . 


754  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


used  and  occupied,  but  al  maner  of  golde  and  sylver  shall  be  wayed  by  the  pounde 
Troye,  which  maketh  xii  oz.  Troye,  which  excedith  the  pounde  Towre  in  weight 
iii  quarters  of  the  oz.’  Hence  it  follows  that  the  weight  of  the  Tower  pound  was 
5400  troy  grains,  and  that  of  the  ounce  or  the  twelfth  part  thereof  450  like  grains. 
He  quotes  a passage  taken  from  the  Register  of  Accounts  in  Paris,  to  prove  that  the 
Tower  pound  was  also  known  in  France,  where  it  was  called  the  Rochelle  or  English 
weight.  The  difference  of  the  several  pounds  then  made  use  of  in  France  is  there 
computed,  and  the  proportion  between  the  troy  and  English  weights  is  thus  estimated  : 
‘ Ou  royaume  souloit  avoir  iv  marcs  : c’est  assavoir  le  marc  de  Troyes,  qui  poise 

xiv  sols,  ii  den.  Esterlins  de  poix le  marc  de  la  Rochelle,  dit  d’Angleterre,  qui 

poise  xiii  s.  iv  den.  Esterlins  de  poix.’  It  is  supposed  that  this  account  was  taken 
about  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Edward  III.,  not  long  after  1329*.  Since  the 
sol=12  esterlings,  the  ratio  of  the  standards  of  Troyes  and  Rochelle  is  as  17  to  16; 
whence,  supposing  the  weight  of  Troyes  to  be  the  same  as  the  English  troy  weight, 
the  Rochelle  ounce  =451’76  troy  grains.  Fie  refers  to  a statute  of  the  51st  of 
Henry  HI.,  called  ' Assisa  panis  et  cerevisise,’  to  show  that  the  weights  in  use  at  that 
time,  though  commonly  taken  to  have  been  troy  weights,  were  not  really  so,  but  the 
money  weights:  ‘By  consent  of  the  whole  realm  of  England  the  king’s  measure 
was  made,  that  is  to  say  that  an  English  pennie,  which  is  called  a sterling,  round 
without  clipping,  shall  weigh  xxxii  graines  of  wheat  dry  in  the  middest  of  the  eare ; 
and  XX  pence  make  an  ounce,  and  xii  ounces  make  a pound.’  For  otherwise  the 
pennyweight  here  described,  could  never  be,  as  the  statute  plainly  implies,  the  true 
weight  of  the  English  coined  penny. 

Folkes  determined  the  weights  of  a number  of  silver  coins  well  preserved,  or  but 
little  impaired,  in  troy  grains  (p.  159).  Five  pennies  of  Henry  III.  weighed  22’5 
grains  each,  and  one  22'25  grains.  Of  four  pennies  of  Edward  I.,  two  weighed  22’5 
grains  each,  and  two  others  22  grains  each.  Assuming  the  true  weight  of  the  penny 
at  this  time  to  be  22*5  grains,  which  was  also  that  of  the  Saxon  penny-f-,  the  weight 
of  the  pound  will  be  5400  grains.  It  is,  however,  just  possible  that  the  weights  were 
adjusted  in  conformity  with  the  words  of  the  Act,  but  that  the  coin  called  the  ster- 
ling fell  F5  grain  short  of  the  full  weight  of  32  corns  of  wheat,  or  24  grains  troy, 
the  weight  of  4 corns  of  wheat  being  usually  considered  equivalent  to  3 grains  troy. 
On  this  supposition  the  pound  defined  in  the  statute  of  the  51st  of  Henry  III.,  and 
in  the  31st  of  Edward  I.,  in  precisely  the  same  words,  would  be  the  pound  of  5760 
troy  grains. 

That  another  pound,  the  libra  rnercatoria,  was  in  use  at  this  time,  is  shown  by  the 
following  extract  from  the  Treatise  on  Arithmetic,  by  Dr.  Peacock,  in  the  Encyclo- 
paedia Metropolitana,  Art.  166: — ‘Though  this  weight  was  the  favourite  of  the  legis- 
lature, there  was  another  pound,  one-fourth  greater,  which  was  in  more  general 
* Clarke,  p.  15.  4 Ibid.  p.  428. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  STANDARDS  OF  WEIGHT. 


755 


use;  it  is  mentioned  in  a Tractatus  de  Ponderibus  of  the  same  age  (the  time  of 
Edward  I.),  where  the  two  pounds  are  said  to  consist  of  20  and  25  shillings  respect- 
ively : in  the  statute  of  the  54th  of  Henry  III.,  where  the  composition  of  the  gallon 
and  pound  (troy  ?)  are  given,  there  is  mentioned  also  una  libra,  pondus  vigintiquinque 
solidorum  legalium  sterlingorum.  On  many  other  occasions  this  libra  mercatoria  is 
referred  to,  and  we  may  consider  its  use  in  mercantile  transactions  and  ordinary  sales 
as  nearly  universal.’ 

If  the  pound  mentioned  in  the  51st  and  54th  of  Henry  III,,  and  the  31st  of 
Edward  I.,  be  supposed  to  contain  5400  grains  troy,  the  libra  mercatoria  will  con- 
tain 6750  grains,  which  does  not  differ  very  much  from  the  old  pounds  of  Ville- 
franche  (6741 '9  grains),  Zieriksee  (6736  grains),  Dresden  stahlgewicht  (6726’2 
grains),  Dantzig  (6722  grains),  Embrun  (6714  grains),  Murcia  (6711  grains). 
This  supposition  is  rendered  probable  by  a passage  from  Fleta  quoted  by  Clarke, 
p.  96,  who  says,  ‘ Quindecim  uncise  faciunt  libram  mercatoriarn.’  Fifteen  Tower 
ounces  of  450  troy  grains,  twelve  of  which  make  the  Tower  pound,  are  equal  to  6750 
troy  grains.  Sixteen  of  these  ounces  make  7200  troy  grains,  a weight  which  ap- 
proaches very  closely  to  the  Ptolemaic  mina  of  7199’96  troy  grains,  the  100th  part  of 
the  large  Alexandrian  talent,  also  divided  into  16  ounces.  This  weight  appears  to 
have  survived  in  the  old  pounds  of  Namur  (7201T  grains),  Altenburg  (7202  grains), 
Ciney  (7202*5  grains),  Valenciennes  (7195*2  grains),  Duerstadt  (7206*1  grains),  Wit- 
tenberg (7207  grains),  Heidelberg  (7207*22  grains),  Aix  la  Chapelle  (7208  grains), 
Liege  (7209*1  grains),  Bruchsal  (7190  grains),  Brunswick  (7212*3  grains),  Mons 
(7185*2  grains),  Dresden  (7215*4  grains),  Binche  (7185  grains),  Gotha  (7213*85 
grains),  Jemappe  (7185*2  grains),  in  the  well-known  Cologne  pound  of  7216  grains, 
and  in  many  others  differing  rather  more  largely  from  7200  grains.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  pound  of  Henry  HI.  and  Edward  I.  contained  5760  troy  grains,  the  libra 
mercatoria  would  weigh  7200  troy  grains. 

In  the  Acts  of  the  2nd  of  Henry  V.  st.  2.  c.  4,  and  of  the  2nd  of  Henry  VI.  c.  13, 
relating  to  Goldsmiths,  mention  is  made  of  the  ‘Pound  Troy*.’  Either  the  Tower 
pound  was  abolished,  or  the  use  of  the  troy  pound  as  a legal  standard  confirmed  in 
1498,  the  12th  of  Henry  VII.  A statute  made  in  that  year  enacts  ‘That  every 

gallon  contain  viii  li  of  wheat  of  Troy  weight and  every  pound  xii  ounces  of 

Troy  weight,  and  every  ounce  contain  xx  sterlings.’  The  sterling  here  mentioned 
must  have  been  a weight,  and  not  the  coin  of  that  name ; for,  during  the  reign  of 
Henry  VIL,  the  weight  of  the  groat  was  48  grains,  and  that  of  the  shilling  144 
grains,  which  gives  only  12  grains  for  the  weight  of  the  coin  called  the  penny  or 
sterling-l-. 

The  troy  pound  appears  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Roman  weight  of  5759*2 
grains,  the  125th  part  of  the  large  Alexandrian  talent,  and  which,  like  the  troy 

* Reynardson,  Philosophical  Transactions,  vol.  xlvi.  p.  61.  t Folkes,  p.  16. 

MDCCCLVI.  5 G 


756  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

pound,  was  divided  by  the  Romans  into  12  ounces.  So  also  the  avoirdupois  pound 
was  probably  derived  from  the  large  Attic  mina  of  6945-3  grains  troy,  the  60th 
part  of  the  large  Attic  talent,  divided  by  the  Romans,  as  the  pound  avoirdupois  is 
divided,  into  16  ounces,  of  nearly  the  same  weight  as  the  modern  Roman  ounce*. 
According  to  Greaves,  it  approximates  much  more  closely  to  the  ancient  Roman 
ounce. 

The  word  ‘ avoirdepois,’  applied  to  commodities,  occurs  in  statutes  of  the  9th  and 
27th  of  Edward  III.  By  a statute  of  the  24th  of  Henry  VIII.,  butchers  were 
obliged  to  provide  themselves  with  beams,  scales  and  weights  sealed,  called  ‘ haber- 
depois.’  It  is  not  known  when  the  avoirdupois  weight  was  first  introduced.  Two 
weights,  one  of  which,  in  its  present  state,  is  about  650  grains  less  than  seven  pounds 
avoirdupois,  in  the  possession  of  C.  C.  Babington,  Esq.,  of  St.  John’s  College,  Cam- 
bridge, are  marked  with  a crowned  H,  which  is  supposed  to  be  of  the  time  of 
Henry  VII.  Two  weights,  one  of  2 pounds,  the  other  of  4 pounds  avoirdupois,  orna- 
mented with  the  Tudor  rose,  and  marked  with  the  letter  H,  and  therefore  pro- 
bably of  the  reign  of  either  Henry  VII.  or  Flenry  VIII.,  are  preserved  in  the  Uni- 
versity Library,  Cambridge.  In  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  avoirdupois  weights  were 
deposited  in  the  Exchequer,  as  appears  from  the  name  and  inscription  thereon.  The 
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  for  1742  and  1743  (vol.  xlii.  p.  541),  contain  an 
account  of  the  comparison  of  various  standards  of  measure  and  weight,  from  which 
the  following  extracts  are  made : — ‘ The  weights  in  His  Majesty’s  Exchequer,  and 
which  are  esteemed  the  standards,  are  a pile,  or  box,  of  hollow  brass  weights,  from 
256  ounces  (troy)  downwards,  to  the  16th  part  of  an  ounce,  all  severally  marked 
with  a crowned  E.’  ‘ The  weight  mentioned  in  all  our  old  Acts  of  Parliament,  from 

the  time  of  King  Edward  I.,  is  universally  allowed  to  be  the  troy  weight,  whose 
pound  consisted  of  12  ounces,  each  of  which  contained  20  pennyweights.  And  as 
the  pound  is  the  weight  of  the  largest  single  denomination  commonly  mentioned  in 
those  Acts,  12  ounces  taken  from  the  pile  of  troy  weights  above  mentioned,  as  there 
is  no  single  troy  pound  weight,  must  now  be  reputed  to  be  the  true  standard  of  the 
troy  pound,  used  at  this  day  in  England. 

‘ Besides  which  troy  standards,  there  are  also  kept  in  the  Exchequer  the  following 
standards  for  averdupois  weights  ; that  is  to  say,  a fourteen  pound  bell-weight  of 
brass,  marked  with  a crowned  E,  and  inscribed 

XIIII.  POVNDE  AVERDEPOIZ.  ELIZABETH.  REGINA.  1582. 

As  also  a seven  pound,  a four  pound,  a two  pound,  and  a single  pound,  like  averdu- 
pois bell-weights,  and  severally  marked  as  follows,  excepting  the  variations  for  the 
number  of  pounds  in  each  respective  weight.’ 

(The  marks  are:  VII.  A.,  AN”  DO,  a crowned  E.  L.,  1588,  A“  REG.  XXX.) 

* Doursther,  Dictionnaire  des  Poids  et  Mesures,  p.  281. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  STANDARDS  OF  WEIGHT. 


757 


^ With  which  are  also  kept  a pile  of  flat  averdupois  weights,  from  14  pounds  to  the 
64th  part  of  a pound.’ 

The  comparisons  were  made  with  considerable  care,  the  weights  being  inter- 
changed so  as  to  eliminate  the  error  produced  by  the  inequality  of  the  arms  of  the 
balance. 

The  results,  in  ounces  troy,  and  grains  of  which  the  ounce  contains  480,  are — 

14  Ib.  + l lb.  (bell-weights)  = 218  oz.  335‘25  grains=  104975*25  grains. 

7 lb.  (bell-weight)  = 102  oz.  45  grains=49005  grains. 

1 lb.  (bell-weight)  = 14  oz.  282  grains=  7002  grains. 

1 lb.  (flat  weight)  = 1 lb.  (bell-weight)  — 2*5  grains=6999*5  grains. 

In  the  year  1758,  a Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons,  appointed  to  inquire 
into  the  standards  of  weight  and  measure,  recommended  that  the  troy  pound  should 
be  made  the  unit  or  standard  by  which  the  avoirdupois  and  other  weights  should  be 
regulated.  By  order  of  the  Committee,  three  several  troy  pounds  were  adjusted  with 
great  care,  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Harris,  the  then  Assay  Master  of  the  Mint, 
by  a mean  of  a great  number  of  comparisons  with  the  old  weights  in  the  Exchequer. 
The  details  of  the  comparisons  are  given  at  length  in  the  Report  of  the  Committee, 
presented  by  Lord  Carysfort  on  the  26th  of  May,  1758.  One  of  these  weights  (the 
imperial  standard  troy  pound  which  was  destroyed  by  the  burning  of  the  Houses  of 
Parliament  in  1834)  was  placed  in  the  custody  of  the  Clerk  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons. The  bill,  however,  brought  in  by  Lord  Carysfort  in  1760  to  give  effect  to  the 
recommendations  of  the  Committee,  in  the  pressure  of  business  attending  the  death 
of  George  H.  and  the  accession  of  George  HI.,  and  the  dissolution  of  Parliament 
soon  following,  was  not  carried  through  all  its  stages. 

In  the  year  1818,  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  Sir  George  Clerk,  Mr.  Davies  Gilbert, 
Dr.  W.  H,  Wollaston,  Dr.  Thomas  Young,  and  Captain  Kater,  were  appointed 
Commissioners  for  considering  how  far  it  might  be  practicable  to  establish  a more 
uniform  system  of  weights  and  measures.  In  that  part  of  their  Report  which  relates 
to  the  subject  of  Weights,  they  recommend  that  the  Parliamentary  standard  of  1758 
should  remain  unaltered  : they  state  that  the  avoirdupois  pound,  which  has  long  been 
in  general  use,  though  not  established  by  any  act  of  the  Legislature,  is  so  nearly 
7000  troy  grains,  that  they  recommend  that  7000  such  troy  grains  be  declared  to  con- 
stitute a pound  avoirdupois : also,  that  from  Sir  George  Shuckburgh’s  weighings 
of  a cube,  cylinder  and  sphere  in  air  and  in  water  in  1797,  and  Captain  Kater’s 
measurements  of  the  linear  dimensions  of  the  same  in  1821,  they  determined  the 
weight  of  a cubic  inch  of  distilled  water,  weighed  in  air  by  brass  weights,  at  the 
temperature  of  62°  Fahr.,  the  barometer  being  at  30  inches,  to  be  equal  to  252*458 
grains,  of  which  the  Imperial  standard  troy  pound  contains  5760. 

The  chief  recommendations  of  this  Committee  passed  into  law  by  an  Act  of  Par- 

5 G 2 


758  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


liament  on  the  17th  of  June,  1824.  In  the  fourth  clause  of  this  Act  it  is  enacted,  that 
the  old  troy  pound  of  1758,  now  in  the  custody  of  the  Clerk  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, shall  continue  to  be  the  original  unit  or  only  standard  of  weight  from  which 
all  other  weights  shall  be  derived;  and  that  it  is  to  be  denominated  ‘The  Imperial 
Standard  Troy  Pound and  that  the  avoirdupois  pound,  now  in  use,  shall  contain 
7000  grains,  of  which  the  troy  pound  contains  5760.  In  the  sixth  clause  it  is 
enacted,  that  if  the  standard  troy  pound  should  be  lost  or  destroyed,  it  is  to  be 
restored  by  a reference  to  the  weight  of  a cubic  inch  of  distilled  water,  which  has 
been  found  and  is  declared  to  be  252*458  troy  grains,  weighed  in  air  with  brass 
weights,  at  the  temoerature  of  62°  Fahr.,  the  barometer  being  at  30  inches. 

The  Imperial  standard  troy  pound  was  compared  with  five  troy  pounds  of  gun- 
metal,  destined  for  the  use  of  the  Exchequer,  the  Royal  Mint,  and  the  cities  of 
London,  Edinburgh  and  Dublin,  by  Captain  Kater  in  1824  or  1825*.  Denoting 
the  standard  troy  pound  by  U,  and  the  troy  pounds  of  the  Exchequer,  the  cities  of 
London,  Edinburgh,  Dublin,  and  the  Royal  Mint,  by  Ex,  L,  Ed,  D,  RM  respectively, 
it  was  found  that 


No.  of  Comps. 
16 
12 
15 
18 
20 


grain. 

Ex  =U  + 0-0010 
L =U+0-0005 
Ed  =U-0-0015 
D =U  + 0-0022 
RM  = U + 0-0021 


In  the  year  1829  the  standard  troy  pound  was  compared  with  extraordinary  care 
by  Captain  v.  Nehus  with  two  brass  troy  pounds  and  a platinum  troy  pound,  all  in 
the  custody  of  Professor  Schumacher,  and  with  a platinum  troy  pound,  the  property 
of  the  Royal  Society. 

Let  Sb,  K denote  the  two  brass  troy  pounds,  Sp  the  platinum  troy  pound  in  the 
custody  of  Professor  Schumacher,  RS  the  platinum  troy  pound  the  property  of  the 
Royal  Society,  t the  temperature  of  the  air  in  degrees  of  Fahrenheit’s  scale,  h the 
height  of  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  in  English  inches,  and  reduced  to  the  tem- 
perature of  melting  snow.  Let  A prefixed  to  the  symbol  of  any  weight  denote  the 
ratio  of  the  density  of  the  weight  at  the  temperature  of  melting  snow  to  the  maximum 
density  of  water.  The  symbol  placed  between  the  symbols  of  two  weights  will  be 
used  to  denote  that  they  appear  to  be  equal  when  weighed  in  air.  The  two  weights 
in  this  case  will  not  be  equal  unless  their  volumes  are  equal.  When  the  weighings 
have  been  made  in  air  of  constant  density,  or  have  been  reduced  to  what  they  would 
have  been  in  air  of  given  density ; or  when,  the  volumes  of  the  weights  and  the  tem- 
perature and  pressure  of  the  air  being  unknown,  we  are  compelled  to  assume  the 
equality  of  their  volumes,  the  symbol  = may  be  substituted  for 


* Philosophical  Transactions  for  1826,  Part  II.  p.  18. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  STANDARDS  OF  WEIGHT. 


759 


According  to  the  observations  of  Captain  v.  Nehus, — 


No.  of  Comps. 

i. 

t. 

300 

Sp  £!:U-0-00857 

29*722 

65-62 

140 

RS  £!:U-0-00205 

29-806 

65-73 

60 

Sb  £!:U-0-01034 

29-965 

64-50 

92 

K =G:U-t- 0-03389 

29-646 

65-09 

16 

RM£i:U-f  0-00887 

29-679 

65-91 

10-log  ASp=8-67392,  10-log  ARS=8-67392,  10-log  ASb=9*08471,  10-log  AK=9-09724  *. 

In  the  burning  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament  in  1834,  all  the  standards  of  measure 
and  weight  were  either  totally  destroyed,  or  injured  to  such  an  extent  as  to  render 
them  quite  useless  as  standards.  The  Imperial  standard  troy  pound  was  never 
recovered  from  the  ruins. 

In  the  year  1838,  the  Astronomer  Royal,  Mr.  F.  Daily,  Mr.  J.  E.  D.  Bethune, 
Mr.  Davies  Gilbert,  Sir  J.  F.  W.  Herschel,  Mr.  J.  S.  Lefevre,  Mr.  J.  W.  Lubbock, 
the  Rev.  George  Peacock,  and  the  Rev.  R.  Sheepshanks,  were  appointed  Commis- 
sioners to  consider  the  steps  to  be  taken  for  the  restoration  of  the  standards  of  weight 
and  measure,  to  replace  those  which  were  destroyed  by  the  burning  of  the  Houses  of 
Parliament.  They  found  provisions  for  the  restoration  of  the  lost  standards  pre- 
scribed to  them  by  Sections  3 and  5 of  the  Act  .'3th  George  IV.,  whereby  it  is  directed 
that,  in  case  of  the  loss  of  the  standards,  the  yard  shall  be  restored  by  taking  the 
length  which  shall  bear  a certain  proportion  to  the  length  of  the  pendulum,  vibrating 
seconds  of  mean  time  in  the  latitude  of  London,  in  a vacuum,  at  the  level  of  the  sea  ; 
and  that  the  pound  shall  be  restored  by  taking  the  weight  which  bears  a certain  pro- 
portion to  the  weight  of  a cubic  inch  of  water  weighed  in  a certain  manner.  The 
Commissioners,  however,  in  their  Report,  dated  December  21,  1841,  decline  to  recom- 
mend the  adoption  of  these  provisions  for  the  following  reasons:  ‘Since  the  passing 
of  the  said  Act,  it  has  been  ascertained  that  several  elements  of  reduction  of  the 
pendulum  experiments  therein  referred  to  are  doubtful  or  erroneous. ...  It  is  evident, 
therefore,  that  the  course  prescribed  by  the  Act  would  not  necessarily  reproduce  the 
length  of  the  original  yard.  It  appears  also  that  the  determination  of  the  weight  of  a 
cubic  inch  of  water  is  yet  doubtful  (the  greatest  difference  between  the  best  English, 
French,  Austrian,  Swedish  and  Russian  determinations  being  about  T-ioo  of  the  whole 
weight,  whereas  the  mere  operation  of  weighing  may  be  performed  to  the  accuracy 
of  1,000,000  of  the  whole  weight).  Several  measures,  however,  exist,  which  were 
most  carefully  compared  with  the  former  standard  yard  ; and  several  metallic  weights 
exist,  which  were  most  accurately  compared  with  the  former  standard  pound  ; and  by 
the  use  of  these,  the  values  of  the  original  standards  can  be  respectively  restored  with- 
out sensible  error.  And  we  are  fully  persuaded  that,  with  reasonable  precautions,  it 
will  always  be  possible  to  provide  for  the  accurate  restoration  of  standards  by  means 

* ScHUMACHEK,  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1836,  p.  437. 


760  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

of  material  copies  which  have  been  carefully  compared  with  them,  more  securely 
than  by  reference  to  experiments  referring  to  natural  constants.’ 

The  weight  of  a given  volume  of  water  at  62°  Fahr.,  by  means  of  which  the  Act  of 
Geo.  IV.  directs  the  pound  to  be  restored,  was  deduced  from  the  weighings  in  air 
and  in  water  of  a brass  cube  of  5 inches,  of  a cylinder  of  4 inches  diameter  and 
6 inches  long,  and  of  a sphere  of  6 inches  diameter,  by  Sir  George  Shuckburgh  in 
1797}  and  the  measurements  of  their  linear  dimensions  by  Captain  Kater  in  1821. 
The  resulting  values  of  the  weight  of  a cubic  inch  of  water  at  62°  Fahr.  in  vacuum, 
in  grains  of  which  the  lost  standard  pound  contained  5760,  were, — by  the  cube  252*74 1, 
by  the  cylinder  252*685,  by  the  sphere  252*741.  Mean  252*722*.  Similar  observa- 
tions had  been  made  in  France  by  MM.  Lefevre-Gineau  and  Fabbroni  for  the  pur- 
pose of  establishing  the  value  of  the  kilogramme,  which  was  intended  to  be  the  weight 
of  a cubic  decimetre  of  water  at  its  maximum  density,  in  a vacuum  : the  solid  used 
on  this  occasion  was  a cylinder  the  diameter  and  axis  of  which  were  nearly  243*5 
millimetres  each'f'.  In  Sweden,  MM.  Berzelius,  Svanberg  and  Akermann,  who 
employed  a cylinder  4 inches  in  diameter  and  6 inches  long,  found  the  weight  of  a 
cubic  decimetre  of  water,  at  62°  Fahr.  in  a vacuum,  to  be  2*350595  Swedish  pounds:};. 
In  Austria,  Professor  Stampfer,  who  used  a cylinder  of  about  3*11  inches  diameter 
and  3*1 1 inches  long,  found  the  weight  of  a Vienna  cubic  inch  of  water,  at  62°  Fahr. 
in  a vacuum,  equal  to  18*2492  grammes^.  Lastly,  in  Russia,  Professor  Kupffer  has 
determined  the  weight  of  an  English  cubic  inch  of  water  in  vacuum  at  62°  Fahr.,  in 
doli  of  which  a kilogramme  contains  22504*86,  to  be  368*380  by  a cylinder  the  axis 
and  diameter  of  which  were  nearly  80  millimetres  each,  and  368*341  by  a cylinder 
the  axis  and  diameter  of  which  were  4 English  inches  each.  Mean  368*361  doli.  At 
the  end  of  the  work  entitled  ‘ Travaux  de  la  Commission  pour  fixer  les  Mesures  et  les 
Poids  de  I’Empire  de  Russie,’  Professor  Kupffer  has  collected  the  different  results 
expressed  in  doli.  The  English  observations  are  affected  by  a small  error  arising 
from  the  uncertainty  of  the  value  of  Professor  Schumacher’s  troy  pound  K,  which 
was  used  by  Professor  Kupffer  in  finding  the  relation  between  the  English  and  French 
standards  of  weight.  This  error,  however,  is  quite  insignificant  compared  with  the 
differences  between  the  results  obtained  by  the  several  observers. 


French  observations  . 

368*365 

English  observations  . 

368*542 

Swedish  observations . 

368*474 

Austrian  observations 

368*237 

Russian  observations  . 

368*361 

* Philosophical  Transactions  for  1821,  Part  I.  p.  326. 
t Base  du  Systhme  Mdtrique,  t.  iii.  p.  558. 

J Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Academy  of  Stockholm,  1825. 

§ Jahrbiicher  des  k.  k.  Polytech.  Institutes  zu  Wien,  B.  16,  S.  53. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  STANDARDS  OF  WEIGHT. 


761 


Assuming  the  Russian  observations  to  be  the  most  accurate,  as  they  probably  are,  it 
will  be  seen  that  even  if  we  leave  entirely  out  of  the  question  the  injurious  effect  of 
the  error  likely  to  arise  in  establishing  the  standard  of  length,  a troy  pound  deduced 
according  to  the  method  prescribed  by  the  Act  would  be  2’829  grains  too  heavy ; 
while,  if  the  Austrian  observations  had  been  accepted  as  the  best,  the  troy  pound 
would  have  been  4’707  grains  too  heavy.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  possible  to 
recover  the  weight  of  the  lost  standard  in  air  to  within  a fraction  of  O’OOl  grain,  by 
means  of  the  troy  pounds  which  had  been  compared  with  it,  and  could  be  easily 
brought  together  for  recomparison.  Seeing,  then,  that  the  error  of  one  of  these  two 
methods  of  restoring  the  lost  standard  is  at  least  2829  times  as  large  as  the  error  of 
the  other  method,  the  Committee  could  not  hesitate  to  recommend  the  adoption  of 
the  latter.  The  Commissioners  recommend  also  that  the  avoirdupois  pound,  being 
universally  used  through  the  kingdom,  while  the  troy  pound  is  wholly  unknown  to 
the  great  mass  of  the  population,  be  adopted  as  the  standard  of  weight ; that  the  troy 
pound  be  no  longer  recognized  ; and  that  the  use  of  the  troy  ounce  be  confined  to 
gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones. 

In  the  year  1843  a Committee  was  appointed  to  superintend  the  construction  of 
the  new  Parliamentary  standards  of  length  and  weight,  to  replace  those  which  were 
destroyed  by  the  burning  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament.  The  members  of  this  Com- 
mittee were,  the  Astronomer  Royal,  the  Marquis  of  Northampton,  the  Earl  of  Rosse, 
the  Lord  Wrottesley,  Sir  J.  W.  Lubbock,  Bart.,  Sir  J.  F.  W.  Herschel,  Bart.,  the 
Rev.  G.  Peacock,  Dean  of  Ely,  the  Rev.  R.  Sheepshanks,  F.  Baily,  Esq.,  J.  E.  D. 
Bethune,  Esq.,  J.  G.  S.  Lefevre,  Esq.,  and  Professor  W.  H.  Miller.  To  the  last 
of  these  was  intrusted  the  construction  of  the  new  standards  of  weight. 

The  evidence  for  ascertaining  the  weight  of  the  lost  Standard  Troy  Pound,  placed 
at  the  service  of  this  Committee,  consisted  of  the  following  weights  : — The  brass  troy 
pound  of  the  Exchequer  Office.  The  brass  troy  pounds  from  the  cities  of  London, 
Edinburgh  and  Dublin.  The  platinum  troy  pound  and  the  two  brass  troy  pounds 
then  in  the  custody  of  Professor  Schumacher.  The  platinum  troy  pound  of  the  Royal 
Society.  The  troy  pound  used  by  the  late  Mr.  Robinson  of  Devonshii’e  Street,  Port- 
land Place,  purchased  by  the  Committee.  Two  troy  pounds,  formerly  in  the  possession 
of  Mr.  Bingley  (one  of  which,  lately  in  the  possession  of  Stansby  Alchorne,  Esq.,  of 
the  Royal  Mint,  has  been  purchased  by  the  Committee).  The  troy  pound  formerly 
the  property  of  Mr.  Freeman,  now  the  property  of  Messrs.  Vandome  and  Titford. 
To  these  has  very  recently  been  added  a troy  pound  the  property  of  the  Bank  of 
England. 

The  results  of  the  comparisons  of  the  troy  pounds  of  the  Exchequer  Office,  of  the 
cities  of  London,  Edinburgh  and  Dublin,  and  of  the  three  troy  pounds  in  the  cus- 
tody of  Professor  Schumacher,  and  the  troy  pound  of  the  Royal  Society,  with  the 
lost  standard,  have  already  been  given.  Mr.  Robinson’s  troy  pound  is  also  said  to 
have  been  compared  by  Captain  Kater,  but  no  record  has  been  discovered  of  the 


762  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


comparison.  Mr.  Vandome’s  pound,  Mr.  Bingley’s  troy  pounds,  and  the  Bank  of 
England  troy  pound,  were  all  constructed,  along  with  the  lost  standard,  in  1758  by 
Mr.  Harris,  Assay  Master  of  the  Mint.  These  were  referred  to,  at  the  suggestion 
of  Professor  Schumacher,  in  the  hope  of 'arriving  at  a knowledge  of  the  volume  of 
the  lost  standard,  which  unfortunately  had  never  been  determined  by  weighing  it  in 
water.  For,  as  long  as  the  volume  of  the  lost  standard  remains  unknown,  the  weight 
of  the  air  displaced  by  it,  and,  consequently,  its  absolute  weight,  is  uncertain  within 
limits  far  exceeding  the  errors  of  weighing. 

The  first  step  in  the  process  of  arriving  at  the  weight  of  the  lost  standard,  was 
obviously  to  compare  among  themselves  the  different  troy  pounds  with  which 
the  lost  standard  had  been  compared  by  Captain  Kater  and  Captain  v.  Nehus. 
These  comparisons  were  made  with  a balance  of  extreme  delicacy  procured  from 
Mr.  Barrow.  In  its  construction  it  nearly  resembles  the  balances  of  the  late 
Mr.  T.  C.  Robinson.  The  beam  is  made  sufficiently  strong  to  carry  a kilogramme  in 
each  pan.  The  middle  knife-edge  is  about  r93  inch  long,  and  rests,  when  the  balance 
is  in  action,  throughout  its  whole  length  on  a single  plane  surface  of  quartz.  The 
surfaces  of  quartz  which  rest  upon  the  extreme  knife-edges,  and  from  which  the  pans 
are  suspended,  are  also  plane.  The  distance  between  the  extreme  knife-edges  is 
about  15'06  inches,  the  length  of  each  about  1'05  inch. 

Instead  of  having  an  index  pointing  downwards,  as  is  usual  in  balances  of  this 
description,  the  beam  has  a pointer  at  each  end,  and  a graduated  scale  is  carried  by 
an  arm  attached  to  the  pillar  of  the  balance  at  a little  distance  behind  the  left-hand 
pointer.  Affixed  to  the  right-hand  end  of  the  beam  is  a thin  slip  of  ivory,  a little  more 
than  half  an  inch  long,  divided  into  spaces  of  about  O'Ol  inch  each,  or  subtending  an 
angle  of  about  5' each  at  the  middle  knife-edge.  This  scale  is  viewed  through  a com- 
pound microscope,  having  a single  horizontal  wire  in  the  focus  of  the  eye-piece.  The 
distance  between  two  divisions  of  the  scale,  as  seen  through  the  microscope,  subtends 
an.  angle  of  about  37'.  This  contrivance  for  determining  the  position  of  the  beam  at 
the  extremity  of  an  oscillation,  was  found  so  superior  to  a scale  and  pointer  viewed 
with  the  naked  eye,  that  after  a trial  of  a few  days,  the  scale  at  the  left  hand  was 
found  to  be  a useless  incumbrance  and  was  accordingly  removed.  A screen  was 
interposed  between  the  observer  and  the  front  of  the  balance  case,  having  a small 
opening  opposite  to  the  eye-piece  of  the  microscope,  through  which  the  scale  could 
be  seen. 

In  order  to  admit  of  the  employment  of  a large  vessel  of  water  in  observations  for 
finding  specific  gravities,  the  base  of  the  balance  has  an  opening  immediately  under 
the  right-hand  pan,  capable  of  being  closed  when  not  in  use  by  a sliding  plate  of 
brass.  A corresponding  opening  exists  in  the  table  on  which  the  balance  stands. 
The  vessel  of  water  is  placed  under  the  table,  and  the  wire  by  which  the  object  to  be 
weighed  in  water  is  suspended  from  a hook  under  the  right-hand  pan,  passes  through 
the  openings  in  the  base  of  the  balance  under  the  table. 


METHODS  OF  WEIGHING. 


763 


In  the  comparisons  of  weights,  I at  first  employed  the  method  of  weighing  invented 
by  the  Pere  Amiot,  more  commonly  known  as  Borda’s*.  The  counterpoise  was  in- 
variably placed  in  the  left-hand  pan,  and  the  weights  to  be  compared  alternately  in 
the  right-hand  pan.  The  reading  of  the  divided  scale  was  noted  at  the  end  of  each  of 
three  consecutive  oscillations.  One-fourth  of  (first  reading-!- third  reading-!-2  second 
reading)  was  taken  as  the  reading  of  the  scale  in  the  position  of  equilibrium  of  the 
balance. 

In  all  the  more  important  weighings  the  reading  of  the  scale  was  noted  at  the  end 
of  each  of  four  consecutive  oscillations,  of  which  the  last  three  only  were  used  in  find- 
ing the  reading  corresponding  to  the  position  of  equilibrium  of  the  beam.  The  first 
reading  is  apt  to  exhibit  small  irregularities,  especially  when  it  follows  very  soon  after 
the  interchange  of  the  weights.  Hence  the  employment  of  it  in  finding  the  position 
of  equilibrium  would  not  be  likely  to  increase  the  accuracy  of  the  result.  The  obser- 
vation of  an  additional  reading  is  not,  however,  without  its  use;  for  by  comparing 
the  first  with  the  third,  as  well  as  the  second  with  the  fourth,  the  error  of  an  integer 
in  either  of  the  readings,  if  it  occurred,  would  be  instantly  detected. 

Let  P,  Q be  the  apparent  weights  in  air  of  two  bodies  P,  Q,  either  of  which  in  the 
right-hand  pan  is  nearly  in  equilibrium  with  the  counterpoise  C in  the  left-hand  pan; 
(C,  P),  (C,  Q)  the  scale  readings  in  the  position  of  equilibrium  of  the  balance  when 
P,  Q respectively  are  in  the  right-hand  pan  ; and  let  m be  the  weight  equivalent  to 
one  part  of  the  scale,  the  readings  increasing  with  an  increase  of  the  weight  in  the 
right-hand  pan.  Then  Q=P-!-m[(C,  Q)  — (C,  P)]. 

Subsequently  I used  the  method  attributed  to  Gauss'I'.  Let  P,  Q be  the  apparent 
weights  in  air  of  two  bodies  P,  Q,  and  (P,  Q)  the  reading  of  the  scale  in  the  position 
of  equilibrium  of  the  balance,  when  P is  in  the  left-hand  pan,  and  Q is  in  the  right- 
hand  pan.  Now  let  P be  placed  in  the  right-hand  pan,  and  Q in  the  left-hand  pan,  and 
let  P,  Q become  R,  S respectively,  by  the  addition  of  small  weights,  in  order  to  bring 
the  balance  nearly  into  its  former  position  of  equilibrium.  Let  (S,  R)  be  the  read- 
ing of  the  scale  in  the  position  of  equilibrium  of  the  balance,  when  R is  in  the  right- 
hand  pan,  and  S is  in  the  left-hand  pan.  Then,  m being  the  weight  equivalent  to  one 
division  of  the  scale,  the  reading  increasing  with  an  increase  of  weight  in  the  right- 
hand  pan,  Q-|-S=P-f-R-f-7/^[(P, Q)  — (S, R)]. 

When  the  weights  P,  Q are  very  nearly  equal,  the  balance  may  be  so  adjusted  by 
placing  a small  constant  weight  in  one  of  the  pans  or  hanging  it  on  the  beam,  that, 
on  interchanging  the  weights  P,  Q,  the  position  of  equilibrium  may  still  be  near  the 
middle  of  the  scale.  Supposing  the  balance  to  be  so  adjusted,  let  (P,  Q)  be  the  read- 
ing of  the  scale  in  the  position  of  equilibrium  of  the  balance,  when  P is  in  the  left- 
hand  pan  and  Q is  in  the  right-hand  pan  ; and  let  (Q,  P)  be  the  reading  of  the  scale 

* Peclet,  Cours  de  Physique,  p.  48. 

* Steinheie,  Denkschriften  der  K.  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Munchen  flir  die  Jahre  1844—46, 
B.  iv.  S.  222. 

5 H 


MDCCCLVI. 


764  PROF.  w.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

when  the  balance  is  in  its  position  of  equilibfium,  with  Q in  the  left-hand  pan  and  P 
in  the  rig-ht-hand  pan.  Then  2Q  = 2P-l-m[(P,  Q)  — (Q,  P)]. 

In  making-  a large  number  of  comparisons,  the  weights  are  exposed  to  the  risk  of 
being  injured  by  wear.  In  order  to  obviate  this  danger,  two  light  pans  were  pro- 
cured of  very  nearly  equal  weight,  each  of  which  has  a loop  of  wire  forming  an  arch 
the  ends  of  which  are  attached  to  the  pan  at  opposite  extremities  of  a diameter  of  the 
pan,  by  which  the  pan  could  be  lifted  with  the  hook  at  the  end  of  a long  handle,  into 
or  out  of  either  of  the  pans  of  the  balance.  Calling  the  pans  X and  Y,  and  the 
weights  to  be  compared  P and  Q,  P was  placed  in  X and  Q in  Y,  and  P-j-X  com- 
pared with  Q-j-Y  n times  ; then  P was  placed  in  Y and  Q in  X,  and  P-f-Y  compared 
with  Q+X  n times.  The  weights  were  thus  exposed  to  the  wear  of  two  ordinary 
comparisons  only  in  the  course  of  2n  comparisons.  The  mean  of  the  2n  compari- 
sons gives  the  difference  between  P and  Q,  unaffected  by  the  very  small  but  unknown 
difference  between  the  weights  of  the  pans  X and  Y.  This  contrivance  was  found  to 
be  especially  useful  when  either  of  the  weights  to  be  compared  consisted  of  several 
parts. 

An  improvement  upon  this  was  made  by  using  the  pans  of  one  of  the  balances 
employed  by  the  French  Pharmaciens,  which  resemble  those  above  described,  with 
the  addition  of  an  iron  hook  at  the  highest  point  of  the  wire  loop.  Either  pan  is 
suspended  by  a wire  of  suitable  length  bent  into  a hook  at  each  end,  from  the  ring 
attached  to  the  agate-plane.  In  using  the  method  of  double  weighing,  the  original 
left-hand  pan  of  the  balance  was  suffered  to  remain  with  the  counterpoise  in  it,  and 
the  pan  X containing  the  weight  P,  and  the  pan  Y containing  the  weight  Q,  alter- 
nately suspended  from  the  right-hand  end  of  the  beam,  and  the  positions  of  equi- 
librium observed  (usually  about  twenty  times).  The  weights  were  then  interchanged, 
and  pan  Y containing  the  weight  P,  and  pan  X containing  the  weight  Q,  suspended 
from  the  right-hand  end  of  the  beam,  and  the  positions  of  equilibrium  observed  the 
same  number  of  times.  Tlie  w'eights  of  X and  Y were  frequently  reduced  in  order 
to  make  them  as  nearly  equal  as  possible,  and  sometimes  in  order  to  remove  rust 
from  the  iron  hooks. 

In  using  Gauss’s  method,  it  was  desirable  to  be  able  to  transfer  the  pans,  and  the 
weights  contained  in  them,  from  one  end  of  the  beam  to  the  other  without  opening  the 
doors  of  the  balance-case,  and  thus  avoid  sudden  changes  of  temperature  of  air  within 
the  balance-case,  and  consequent  production  of  currents  of  air.  In  order  to  effect  this, 
various  contrivances  were  tried.  Of  these  the  following  proved  the  most  successful. 
A slender  brass  tube,  38  inches  long',  passes  freely  through  two  holes  in  tlie  ends  of 
the  balance-case,  which  is  22‘75  inches  long,  near  the  top  of  the  case,  and  half-way 
between  the  balance  and  the  front  of  the  case.  To  the  middle  of  the  tube  is  attached 
a descending  loop  of  wire.  Suppose  that  by  sliding  the  rod,  the  loop  is  brought  near 
to  the  right-hand  end  of  the  beam,  and  a pan  with  a weight  in  it  transferred  from 
the  end  of  the  beam  to  the  wire  loop  by  a brass  rod  having  a deep  groove  filed  round 


METHODS  OF  WEIGHING. 


765 


it  near  the  end,  which  is  inserted  through  a hole  in  the  middle  of  the  right-hand  end 
of  the  balance-case.  By  sliding  the  rod  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  loop  with  the 
pan  and  weight  suspended  from  it,  is  brought  near  to  the  left-hand  end  of  the  beam, 
to  which  the  pan  is  transferred  by  a brass  rod  passing  through  a hole  in  the  left-hand 
end  of  the  balance-case.  Pins  inserted  in  holes  at  each  end  of  the  tube  at  right  angles 
to  it,  prevent  it  from  being  pushed  too  far.  A similar  tube  half-way  between  the 
balance  and  the  back  of  the  case,  serves  to  transfer  the  other  pan  and  weight  from 
one  end  of  the  beam  to  the  other.  In  this  manner  any  number  of  comparisons  may 
be  made  without  opening  the  balance-case,  except  in  the  middle  of  the  series,  for  the 
purpose  of  changing  the  pans.  The  transfer  of  the  pans  and  weights  from  one  end 
of  the  beam  to  the  other,  might  be  effected  still  more  conveniently  by  means  of  two 
coarse  screws  of  the  same  length  as  the  balance-case,  turned  by  small  winches  at 
each  end,  and  provided  with  loosely-fitting  nuts  with  wire  loops  from  which  to 
suspend  the  pans  and  weights. 

In  the  course  of  making  the  preliminary  observations  some  peculiarities  of  the 
instrument  were  discovered,  which,  though  they  probably  exist  in  other  balances,  do 
not  appear  to  have  been  hitherto  noticed.  One  of  these  is,  that  the  expansion  of  one 
arm  by  heat,  the  left  in  the  present  case,  is  a little  greater  than  that  of  the  other  arm. 
Hence,  when  the  weights  in  the  two  pans  are  nearly  equal  and  of  equal  volume,  the 
reading  of  the  scale  in  the  position  of  equilibrium  diminishes  as  the  temperature  of 
the  beam  increases.  Another  is,  that  the  sensibility  of  the  balance,  as  measured  by 
the  number  of  parts  of  the  scale  equivalent  to  a given  weight,  was  found  to  diminish 
with  an  increase  of  temperature.  The  cause  of  this  is  obvious.  The  beam  being  of 
bronze  and  the  knife-edges  of  steel,  the  balance-beam  becomes  an  over-compensated 
pendulum,  and  an  increase  of  temperature  increases  the  distance  between  the  middle 
knife-edge  and  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  beam  and  weights,  supposing  the  latter 
concentrated  in  the  extreme  knife-edges.  Possibly  also,  the  flexure  of  the  beam  may 
increase  with  the  temperature,  or  the  mean  expansion  of  the  upper  bar  of  the  beam 
may  be  greater  than  that  of  the  under  bar.  The  variation  of  the  sensibility  of  the 
balance  is  so  large,  that  it  is  necessary  to  determine  the  weight  equivalent  to  a given 
number  of  parts  of  the  scale  for  each  set  of  observations,  except  in  cases  where  the 
temperature  is  very  nearly  the  same. 

For  the  comparison  of  the  smaller  weights  two  excellent  balances  by  Robinson 
were  used,  one  having  a beam  10‘5,  the  other  a beam  5‘5  inches  long.  The  reading 
of  the  scale  of  these  balances  increases  on  the  addition  of  a small  weight  to  the  weight 
in  the  left-hand  pan. 

Comparisons  q/Sp,  RS,  Sb,  K,  Ex,  L,  Ed,  R. 

T is  a platinum  troy  pound  left  a little  in  excess ; P the  sum  of  five  weights  of 
platinum  making  together  a troy  pound  ; h is  the  height  of  the  mercury  in  the 

5 H 2 


766  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND 


barometer  in  inches,  reduced  to  the  freezing-point;  t the  temperature  of  the  air  in 
the  balance-case  in  degrees  of  Fahrenheit’s  scale. 


1844,  March  29. 

gi'- 

T=Sp-)-0-0147 

-f00122 
-h  0-0181 
+ 0-0189 
+ 0-0217 
+ 0-0155 
+ 0-0147 
+ 0-0136 
+ 0-0161 
+ 0-0156 
+ 0-0124 
+ 0-0174 
+ 0-0209 
+ 0-0194 
+ 0-0175 
+ 0-0185 

Mean  T=Sp  + 0-01670  grain. 


gr- 

T=RS  + 0-0092 
+ 0-0124 
+ 0-0128 
+ 0-0090 
+ 0-0085 
+ 0-0078 
+ 0-0072 
+ 0-0103 
+ 0-0108 
+ 0-0110 
+ 0-0081 
+ 0-0087 
+ 0-0138 
+ 0-0107 
+ 0-0111 
+ 0-0090 

Mean  T=RS  + 0-01002  grain. 


100  parts  =0-1810  grain, 
gr.  pt. 

RS=Sp  + 0-010-3-70 
+ 0-010-2-60 
+ 0-010-3-00 
+ 0-010  — 3-15 
+ 0-006  + 1-48 
+ 0-006  + 0-60 
+ 0-006  + 1-40 
+ 0-006  + 0-25 
+ 0-006  + 1-95 

Mean  RS=Sp  + 0-00640  grain. 


The  numbers  in  the  columns  headed  Sp-j-X,  P+Y,  Sp  + Y,  P+X  are  the  readings 
of  the  scale  in  the  positions  of  equilibrium  of  the  beam  with  the  counterpoise  in  the 
left-hand  pan,  and  the  weights  Sp-fX,  P-l-Y,  Sp+Y,  P+X  respectively  in  the  right- 
hand  pan.  The  scale  readings  of  the  alternate  weighings  are  arranged  in  separate 
columns  for  the  sake  of  greater  convenience  in  adding  up  the  results. 


June  18.  100  parts=  0 22082  grain. 


Sp+X. 

P+Y. 

Sp+Y. 

P+X. 

25-30 

27-80 

22-50 

22-90 

26-10 

27-00 

21-90 

22-90 

24-05 

25-20 

22-05 

21-40 

24-60 

25-30 

26-50 

26-45 

24-40 

24-60 

27-15 

29-50 

23-50 

24-40 

28-50 

28-65 

22-75 

23-55 

28-50 

27-30 

23-00 

23-00 

28-90 

29-30 

22-20 

22-55 

29-65 

30-10 

21-90 

22-40 

29-75 

30-40 

237-80 

245-80 

265-40 

268-90 

10(Sp  + X)=10(P  + Y) 

— 8 parts. 

Mean  Sp=P-0-001 

10(Sp  + Y)  = 
27  grain. 

10(P  + X)  — 3-5  parts. 

12. 

100  parts  =0-23641 

grain. 

RS+X. 

P+Y. 

RS+Y. 

P+X. 

19-60 

18-60 

20-70 

21-20 

20-20 

18-10 

21-10 

19-00 

20-00 

18-70 

21-60 

19-30 

20-00 

18-50 

20-80 

19-50 

19-30 

19-10 

21-30 

19-40 

19-85 

18-00 

20-80 

18-70 

118-95 

111-00 

126-30 

117-10 

-(RS  + X)=6(P  + Y)  + 7-95  parts. 

Mean  RS  = P+ 0 00318 

6(RS  + Y)  = 
grain. 

:6(P  + X)  + 9‘2  parts. 

COMPARISONS  OF  Sp,  RS,  ETC. 


767 


April  22,  23.  100  parts 

= 0*14798  grain. 

gr.  pt. 

Spii:Sb  + 0*0 1—0*45 
+ 0-01—0*45 
+ 0*01—0*60 
+ 0*01-1*90 
+ 0*01-0*70 
+ 0*01—0*95 
+ 0*01  — 1*05 
+ 0*01-3*10 
+ 0*01-3*00 
+ 0*01—2*90 


Mean  Sp  — Sb  + 0*00777  gr»  in  air 
(<=62*2,  6=30*145). 


April  24.  100  parts 

= 0*14009  grain. 

gr.  pt. 

K£iSp  + 0*027 -0*10 
+ 0-027-M5 
+ 0*027  — 0*90 
+ 0*024 + 0*20 
+ 0*024  + 0*50 
+ 0*024  + 0*25 
+ 0*024  — 0*10 
+ 0*024  + 0*30 
+ 0*024-0*30 

Mean  K:i2:Sp  + 0*02479  gr-  in  air 
(<=62*2,  6=30*186). 


April  23.  100  parts 

= 0*14798  grain. 

gr.  pt. 

RSiiSb  + 0*0l6~0*35 
+ 0*016- 1*45 
+ 0*016-0*90 
+ 0*016-1*45 
+ 0*016-1*70 
+ 0*016-1*10 
+ 0*016  — 1*05 
+ 0*016  — 1*10 
+ 0*016  — 0*65 
+ 0*016  — 1*70 
+ 0*016-0*95 

Mean  RS  :£iSb  + 0*01 433  gr.  in  air 
(<=62*33,  6=30*235). 


gr.  pt. 

K£:RS  + 0*016  + 1*00 
+ 0*016  + 1*85 
+ 0*016+1*80 
+ 0*016  + 1*70 
+ 0*016  + 1*45 
+ 0*016  + 2*00 
+ 0*016  + 1*60 
+ 0*016  + 1*45 

Mean  Kii:RS  + 0*01 837  gr.  in  air 
(<=62*33,  6=30*196). 


April  23.  100  parts=0*144  grain, 

gr.  pt. 

K=Sb  + 0*040-4*95 
+ 0*030  + 0*12 
+ 0*034  — 2*37 
+ 0*030  + 6*40 
+ 0*030  + 3*80 
+ 0*030  + 4*05 
+ 0*030  + 3*45 
+ 0*030  + 2*40 
+ 0*020  + 8*20 
+ 0*030  + 2*40 
+ 0*030  + 0*95 
+ 0*030  + 1*80 
+ 0*030  + 0*70 
+ 0*030+1*00 

Mean  K = Sb  + 0*033l6  grain. 


Aprils.  100  parts= 0*2244  grain, 
gr.  pt. 

K = Sb  + 0*031  + l*00 
+ 0*031  + 1*65 
+ 0*031  + 1*95 
+ 0*031  + 1*80 
+ 0*031  + 1*20 
+ 0*031  + 1*40 
+ 0*031  + 1*90 

Mean  K = Sb  + 0*03449  grain. 


April  22.  100  parts= 0*1 48  grain, 

gr.  pt. 

Ex  = Sb  + 0*0l6-0*25 
+ 0*020-2*72 
+ 0*013  — 2*00 
+ 0*010  + 0*05 
+ 0*010-0*63 
+ 0*010  + 0*60 
+ 0*010  + 1*45 
+ 0*010  + 0*40 
+ 0*010  + 0*95 
+ 0*010+1*00 
+ 0*010+1*20 
+ 0*010  + 1*10 

Mean  Ex  = Sb  + 0*01172grain. 


gr.  pt. 

K=Ex  + 0*010  + 3*13 
+ 0*014  + 0*37 
+ 0*014  + 0*35 
+ 0*015  — 1*95 
+ 0*015-1*70 
+ 0*015  — 0*65 
+ 0*015  + 0*05 
+ 0*015  — 0*50 
+ 0*015  — 0*05 
+ 0*015  — 0*25 
+ 0*015  — 0*20 
+ 0*015  — 0*10 

Mean  K = Ex + 0*01 406  grain. 


gr. 

L=Sb  + 0*02,33 
+ 0*0206 
+ 0*0203 
+ 0*0158 
+ 0*0171 

+ 0*0169 
+ 0*0181 
+ 0*0178 
+ 0*0196 

Mean  L=Sb  + 0*01883 grain. 

100  parts=  0*1 16  grain. 

gr.  pt. 

K=L  + 0*007-0*35 
+ 0*007  + 0*25 
+ 0*007  + 1*40 
+ 0*007  + 2*80 
+ 0*010  + 1*75 
+ 0*010  + 2*70 

+ 0*013  + 0*50 
+ 0*013  — 0*35 
+ 0*013  — 0*01 


K=L  + 0*01079  grain, 
gr. 

Ed=Sb  + 0*0285 

+ 0*0290 
+ 0*0287 
+ 0*0227 
+ 0*0235 
+ 0*0248 
+ 0*0276 
+ 0*0250 
+ 0*0204 
+ 0*0232 

Mean  Ecl  = Sb  + 0*02534  grain, 

K = Erl + 0*0065 
+ 0*0082 
+ 0*0062 
+ 0*0059 
+ 0*0054 
+ 0*0064 
+ 0*0037 
+ 0*0078 
+ 0*0060 
+ 0*0059 

Mean  K = Ed + 0*00621  grain. 

100  parts  = 0*121  grain, 
gr.  pt. 

D = Sb  + 0*031-l*40 
+ 0*031  — 1*90 
+ 0*031  — 1*60 
+ 0*030  + 0*65 
+ 0*030  — 1*30 
+ 0*030  — 1*80 
+ 0*030-1*80 
+ 0*030  — 1*40 
+ 0*030-1*40 

I Mean  D = Sb  + 0*02873  grain. 


s 


768  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  FOUND. 


March  27,  April  13. 

gr.  pt. 

K=D  + 0'006-2-65 
+ 0-003-0-60 
+ 0-003-0-20 
— 1-60 
-2-30 
— 1-20 
-0-70 
+ 1-20 
+ 3-50 
+ 1-90 
+ 0-60 
+ 1*70 
+ 2-20 
+ 3-10 


April  25.  100  parts=:0-1456  grain. 

gr.  pt. 

L=Ex  + 0-008  + 0-20 
+ 0-008-0-65 
+ 0-008  — 1-35 
+ 0-008-1-25 
+ 0-006-0-90 
+ 0-006  — 0-80 
+ 0-006  — 0-65 
+ 0-006-0-60 
+ 0-006-1-75 
+ 0-006  — 0-65 
+ 0-006  — 0-55 
+ 0-006-1*00 


April  25. 

gr.  pt. 

Ed=L+ 0-000 + 4-90 
+ 0-010-2-70 
+ 0-010—2-20 
+ 0-000  + 5-90 
+ 0-007  + 0-50 
+ 0-007+0-15 
+ 0-007+1-00 
+ 0-007  + 0-75 
+ 0-007  + 1-20 
+ 0 007  + 0-20 
+ 0-007  + 1*30 
+ 0-007+1*40 


Mean  L=Ex  + 0-00546  grain. 


Mean  Ed=L  + 0-00784  grain. 


Mean  K = D + 0-00129  grain. 


April  16.  100  parts=0*1310  grain, 

gr.  pt. 

Sb=R  + 0-006  + 3-75 
+ 0-010  + 0-70 
+ 0-010  — 1-15 
+ 0-010-0-97 
+ 0-008  + 0-68 
+ 0-008  — 1-63 
+ 0-008-2-27 
+ 0-008-1-97 
+ 0-006-1-00- 
+ 0-006-0-75 

Mean  Sb=R  + 0-00740  grain. 


gr.  pt. 

K = R + 0-035-0-10 
+ 0-035  + 2-60 
+ 0-037  + 2-20 
+ 0-038  + 0-60 
+ 0-038  — 0-73 
+ 0-038  + 2-50 
+ 0-038  + 2-23 
+ 0-038  + 2-20 
+ 0-040  + 1-25 
+ 0-040  + 0-27 


April  26.  100  parts=0-1456  grain, 

gr.  pt. 

Ed=Ex  + 0-014-0-90 
+ 0-014—2-10 
+ 0-014  — 3-10 
+ 0-014  — 1-50 
+ 0-010+1-40 
+ 0-010+0-85 
+ 0-010  + 0-50 
+ 0-010  + 0-55 
+ 0-010  + 1-75 
+ 0-010  + 0-10 
+ 0-010  + 0-55 
+ 0-010  + 0-90 


April  27. 

gr.  pt. 

D=L  + 0-007  + 2-30 
+ 0-010  + 0-05 
+ 0-010 + 0-35 
- +0-010+1-05 
+ 0-010  + 0-35 
+ 0-010  + 0-20 
+ 0-010  + 0-70 
+ 0-010  + 0-50 
+ 0-010  + 0-60 
+ 0-010  + 0-05 
+ 0-010  + 0-05 

Mean  D=L  + 0-01055  grain. 


Mean  Ed=Ex  + 0-01121  grain. 


April  24. 


April  25.  100  parts  = 0-1456  grain. 

gr.  pt. 

D = Ex  + 0-014  + 0-30 
+ 0-014  + 0-70 
+ 0-014  + 0-50 
+ 0-014  + 0-85 
+ 0-014-0-80 
+ 0-014  + 0-70 
+ 0-014  + 0-40 
+ 0-014-0-50 
+ 0-014  — 0-40 
+ 0-014-0-50 
+ 0-014  — 0-55 


pt. 

Ed=D+l-85 
+ 0-80 
+ 0-60 
+ 0-30 
+ 0-30 
-0-80 

— 0-35 

— 0-50 
-0-45 

— 1-20 


Mean  Ed  = D + 0-00008  grain. 


+ 0-014-0-25 


Mean  K = R + 0-03941  grain. 


Mean  D = Ex  + 0*01405  grain. 


Before  any  use  can  be  made  of  these  weighings,  the  results  must  be  reduced  to 
what  they  would  have  been  either  in  a vacuum  or  in  air  of  given  density.  The  latter 
is  to  be  preferred,  for  then  the  result  will  be  less  affected  by  any  uncertainty  in  the 
densities  of  the  weights,  or  the  value  of  the  density  of  air,  and  also  because  we  are 
not  in  possession  of  the  data  requisite  for  the  reduction  of  the  weighings  in  1824. 

Let  P appear  to  weigh  as  much  as  Q in  air  (thermometer  = ^,  barometer  = 6),  p,  q 
being  the  weights  of  the  air  displaced  by  P and  Q respectively.  Let  P appear  to 
weigh  as  much  as  Q+R  in  air  (thermometer  = ^',  barometer  = 6'),  p',  q'  being  the 
weights  of  the  air  displaced  by  P and  Q respectively, — 

V—p—Q—q  and  P— jo'  = Q+R  — 


COMPARISONS  OF  Sp,  RS,  K,  ETC.  769 

Whence  V-\-p'—p  appears  to  weigh  as  much  as  ^ in  air  (thermometer^^', 

barometer  = 6'). 

In  calculating  the  densities  of  Sp,  K,  Sb,  Professor  Schumacher  adopted  the  for- 
mulae and  constants  given  in  Bessel’s  paper  on  the  reduction  of  weighings,  in  the 
Astronornische  Nachrichten,  B.  vii.  S.  373.  It  will  therefore  be  proper  to  use  his 
tables  in  reducing  the  weighings  of  1844,  even  though  the  values  of  some  of  the  con- 
stants, according  to  recent  and  more  accurate  observations,  differ  slightly  from  those 
employed  by  Bessel. 

Let  vP  be  the  volume  of  the  weight  P at  the  temperature  of  melting  snow,  the  unit 
of  volume  being  the  volume  of  one  grain  of  water  at  its  maximum  density;  p the 
weight  in  grains  of  the  air  displaced  by  P;  ^ the  temperature  of  the  air  in  degrees  of 
Fahrenheit’s  scale ; and  b the  height  of  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  in  English 
inches  reduced  to  the  temperature  of  melting  snow.  Then 

log  p = log  h-\-  log  ^;P-l-  log  from  Table  A.-j-log  from  Table  B.  or  P.,  according  as  the 
weight  is  of  brass  or  platinum,  t being  the  argument  in  each  of  the  tables. 

Of  the  following  tables,  copied  as  far  as  they  are  wanted  from  the  Philosophical 
Transactions  for  1836,  p.  486,  A contains  the  logarithm  of  the  ratio  of  the  density  of 
air  temperature  t,  and  under  the  pressure  of  one  inch  of  mercury  at  the  temperature 
of  melting  snow,  to  the  maximum  density  of  water.  B and  P contain  the  logarithms 
of  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  brass  and  platinum,  respectively,  at  the  temperature  of 
melting  snow,  to  the  density  at  the  temperature  t of  Fahrenheit’s  scale. 


if. 

.4. 

t. 

B. 

if. 

P. 

6l 

5-61177 

61 

0-000394 

61 

0-000189 

62 

5-61092 

62 

0-000408 

62 

0-000195 

63 

5-61007 

63 

0-000421 

63 

0-000202 

64 

5-60922 

64 

0-000435 

64 

0-000209 

65 

5-60837 

65 

0-000449 

65 

0-000215 

66 

5-60752 

66 

0-000462 

66 

0-000222 

67 

5-60668 

67 

0-000476 

67 

0-000228 

Let  A prehxed  to  the  symbol  by  which  any  weight  is  designated  denote  the 
ratio  of  the  density  of  the  weight  at  the  temperature  of  nielting  ice  to  the  maxi- 
mum density  of  water.  Then  (Philosophical  Transactions  for  1836,  pp.  490-493), 
ASp=21'1874,  ARS  = 21'1874,  AK=7'994,  ASb  = 8'228.  The  density  of  U is  un- 
known. Let  it  be  assumed  equal  to  a mean  between  the  densities  of  K and  Sb,  or 
AU=:8‘111.  The  platinum  weights  contain  about  5759‘5  grains,  the  brass  weights 
about  5760  grains  each.  Hence  log  uSp  = 2‘43430,  log  i;RS  = 2'43430,  log  wK  = 
2-85766,  logySb  = 2-84513,  logt;U=2-85135. 

The  temperature  and  pressure  to  which  it  will  be  most  convenient  to  reduce  the 
weighings,  is  the  mean  of  the  temperatures  and  pressures  observed  during  the  com- 
parisons of  Sp  and  RS  with  U.  This,  taking  into  account  the  number  of  observa- 
tions in  the  two  cases,  is, — thermometer  =65-66  Fahrenheit,  barometer  =29*75 
English  inches.  When  both  the  weights  are  of  brass,  or  both  of  platinum,  the 
reduction  is  so  small  as  to  be  insensible. 


770 


PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEVF  STANDARD  POUND. 


Calculation  of  the  weights  of  air  displaced  by  Sp,  RS,  K,  &c.  when  (^=65"66,  b—29'75). 


b 

29*75 

1*47349 

b 29*75 

1*47349 

A 

65*66 

5*60781 

A 65*66 

5*60781 

P 

65*66 

0*00022 

B 65*66 

0*00046 

7*08152 

7*08176 

Log  V. 

Log  air  displaced. 

Air  displaced. 

Sp 

2*43430 

9*51582 

0*32796 

RS 

2*43430 

9*51582 

0*32796 

K 

2*85766 

9*93942 

0*86980 

Sb 

2*84513 

9*92689 

0*84506 

U 

2*85135 

9*93311 

0*85726 

Reduction  of  the  weighings  of  Sp,  RS,  K,  &c.  to  air  (^=65‘66,  b=29‘75). 


Sp:iiU  — 0*00857  grain  in  air  (^=65*62,  &=29*722). 


29*722 

1*47308 

29*722 

1*47308 

65*62 

5*60784 

65*62 

5*60784 

65*62 

0*00022 

2*43430 

65*62 

0*00046 

2*85135 

0*32767 

9*51544 

Sp  displaces 

0*85650 

0*32767  gr.  of  air. 

9*93273 

U displaces  0*85650  gr.  of  air. 

Sp  iiU— 0*00810  grain  in  air  (^=65*66,  b=29’75). 

RS  £i:U— 0*00205  grain  in  air  (^=65*73,  i=29*806). 


29*806 

1*474:^0 

29*806  1*47430 

6 5*73 

5*60775 

65*73  5*60775 

£0*73 

0*00022 

65*73  0*00046 

2*43430 

2*85135 

0*32853  9*51657 

0*85874  9*93386 

RS  dis]jlaces  0*32853  gr.  of  air. 

U displaces  0*85874 

gr.  of  air. 

RSiiU- 

0*00296  grain  in  air 

(<=65*66,  ^ = 29*75). 

SpiiSb  + 0*00777  grain  in  air 

(<=62*2,  i = 30*145). 

30*145 

1*47921 

30*145  1*47921 

62*2 

5*61075 

62*2  5*61075 

62*2 

0*00020 

62*2  0*00041 

2*43430 

2*84513 

0*33455  9*52446 

0*86198  9*93550 

Sp  displaces  0*33455  gr.  of  air. 

Sb  displaces  0*86198  gr.  of  air. 

Sp  — Sb  — 0*00256  grain  in  air  (<=65*66,  i=29*75). 


K£iSp  + 0*02479  grain 

in 

air  (<=62*2,  6=30*186). 

30*186 

1*47980 

30*186  1*47980 

62*2 

5*61075 

62*2  5*61075 

62*2 

0*00041 

62*2  0*00020 

2*85766 

2*43430 

0*88842 

9*94862 

0*33501  9*52505 

K displaces  0*88842  gr.  of  air. 

Sp  displaces  0*33501  gr.  of  air. 

KihSp  + 0*03636  grain 

in 

air  (<=65*66,  6=29*75). 

RS  — Sb  + 0*01433  grain 

in 

air  (<=62*4,  6 = 30*235). 

30*235 

1*48051 

30*235  1*48051 

62*4 

5*61058 

62*4  5*61058 

62*4 

0*00020 

62*4  0*00041 

2*43430 

2*84513 

0*33542 

9*52559 

0*86424  9*9366.3 

RS  displaces  0*33542  gr.  of  air. 

Sb  displaces  0*86424  gr.  of  air. 

RS  — Sb  + 0*00261  grain 

in 

air  (<=65*66,  6=29*75). 

K — RS  + 0*01837  grain 

in 

air  (<=62*4,  6 = 30*196). 

30*196 

1*47995 

30*196  1*47995 

62*4 

5*61058 

62*4  5*61058 

62*4 

0*00041 

62*4  0*00020 

2*85766 

2*43430 

0*88838 

9-94860 

0*33499  9*52503 

K displaces  0*88838  gr.  of  air. 

RS  displaces  0*33499  gr.  of  air. 

K — RS  + 0*02992  grain 

in 

air  (<=65*66,  6=29*75). 

COMPARISONS  OF  Sp,  RS,  K,  ETC. 


771 


Let  U,  Sp,  RS,  &c.  denote  the  apparent  weights  in  air  (^=65’66,  &=29‘75)  of  the 


pounds  U,  Sp,  RS,  &c. 

Then,— 

In  1824. 

gr- 

No.  of  obs. 

gr. 

No.  of  obs. 

7 

K 

= Sp  +0-0364 

9 

a 

Ex  =U  +0-0010 

16 

8 

RS 

= Sb  +0-0026 

11 

h 

Ed  =U  -0-0015 

15 

9 

K 

= RS  + 0-0299 

8 

c 

L =U  +0-0005 

1.2 

10 

K 

= Sb  +0-0336 

21 

d 

D =U  +0-0022 

18 

11 

Ex 

= Sb  +0-0117 

12 

e 

RM=U  +0-0021 

20 

12 

K 

= Ex  +0-0141 

12 

In  1829. 

Sp  =U  -0-0081 

RS  =U  —0-0030 

Sb  =U  -0-0103 

K =:U  +0-0339 

13 

L 

= Sb  +0-0188 

9 

f 

9 

h 

k 

300 

140 

60 

92 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

K 

Ed 

K 

D 

K 

= L +0-0108 
= Sb  +0-0253 
= Ed + 0-0062 
= Sb  +0-0287 
= D +0-0013 

9 

10 

10 

9 

14 

1 

RM  = U +0-0089 

16 

19 

Sb 

= R +0-0074 

10 

In  1844. 

20 

K 

= R +0-0394 

10 

1 

T =Sp  +0-0167 

16 

21 

L 

= Ex  +0-0055 

12 

2 

T =RS  + 0-0100 

16 

22 

Ed 

= Ex  +0-0112 

12 

3 

RS  =Sp  +0-0064 

9 

23 

D 

= Ex  +0-0140 

12 

4 

Sp  =P  -0-0013 

20 

24 

Ed 

= L +0-0078 

12 

5 

RS  =P  +0-0032 

12 

25 

D 

= L +0-0106 

11 

6 

Sp  =Sb -0-0026 

12 

26 

Ed 

= D +0-0001 

10 

The  results  11  and  12  appear  to  be  considerably  in  error. 


The  numbers  in  the  first  column  in  the  following  Table  indicate  the  equations  from 
which  the  results  are  deduced ; those  in  the  last  column  express  roughly  the  weights 
of  the  results,  supposing  all  the  observations  to  be  equally  good. 


gr. 

1,2  RS  = Sp  + 0’0067 

3 RS=Sp  + 0-0064 

4.5  RS=Sp  + 0*0045 

6.8  RS  = Sp  + 0-0052 

Mean  ...RS=Sp  + 0-0057 
gr- 

6 Sp=Sb— 0-0026 

3.8  Sp  = Sb-0-0038 

7.10  Sp=Sb-0-0028 

Mean  ...Sp  = Sb-0-0030 

8 RS  = Sb  + 0-0026 

3.6  RS  = Sb  + 0-0038 

9.10  RS=Sb  + 0-0037 

Mean  ...RS  = Sb  + 0-0032 

7 K = Sp  + ?0364 

3.9  K = Sp  + 0-0363 

6.10  K=Sp  + 0-0362 

Mean  ...K  = Sp  + 0-0363 


1 

1 

1 

1 


2 

1 

1 


2 

1 

1 


2 

1 

2 


gr- 

9 K = RS  + 0-0299 

2 

3,7  K = RS  + 0-0300 

1 

8,10  K = RS  + 0-0310 

2 

Mean  ...K  = RS  + 0-0304 

6,7 

gr. 

K = Sb  + 0-0338 

1 

8,9 

K=Sb  + 0-0325 

1 

10 

K=Sb  + 0-0336 

4 

11,  12 

K=Sb  + 0-0258 

1 

13,  14 

K=Sb  + 0-0296 

1 

19,  20 

K=:Sb  + 0-0315 

1 

17,  18 

K = Sb  + 0-0300 

1 

19,  20 

K = Sb  + 0-0320 

1 

Mean,  omitting  the  4th  result  on  account  of  the  large 
difference  between  it  and  the  others, 

K = Sb  + 0-0324 


In  1829. 


In  1844.' 


gr- 


9 

RS 

= Sp 

+ 0-0051 

/, 

h 

Sp 

= Sb 

+ 0-0022 

9^ 

h 

RS 

= Sb 

+ 0-0073 

f 

k 

K 

= Sp 

+ 0-0420 

9^ 

k 

K 

= RS  + 0-0369 

h, 

k 

K 

= Sb 

+ 0-0442 

gr- 

RS=Sp  +0-0057 
Sp  =Sb  -0-0030 
RS=Sb  +0-0032 
K =Sp  +0-0363 
K =RS  + 0-0304 
K =Sb +0-0324 


5 I 


MDCCCLVI. 


772  PROF.  W,  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

In  the  interval  between  1829  and  1844,  the  difference  between  the  two  platinum 
troy  pounds  Sp  and  RS  had  undergone  no  very  sensible  relative  change.  If,  as 
appears  highly  probable,  Sp  and  RS  have  undergone  no  sensible  absolute  change, 
Sb  has  gained  0*0046  grain,  and  K has  lost  0*0061  grain. 

In  1844,  Sb+K=Sp4-RS+0‘0333  grain.  Assuming  Sp  and  RS  to  have  expe- 
rienced no  change  since  1829,  Sp-|-RS=2U— 0*01 1 1 grain;  whence  Sb+K=2U 
+ 0*0222  grain. 

The  equations  11  ...18  give — - 

gr.  gr. 

2Ex=Sb  + K-0-0024=Sp  + RS  + 0-0309 
2L  =Sb  + K + 0-0080  = Sp  + RS  + 0-0413 
2Ed=Sb  + K + 0-0191  = Sp  + RS  + 0-0525 
2D  =Sb  + K + 0-0274=Sp  + RS-|-0-0607 


The  first  column  of  the  following  Table  exhibits  the  errors  of  Ex,  L,  Ed,  D,  as 
deduced  from  the  above  equations ; the  second  column  exhibits  the  errors  of  the 
same  weights,  as  determined  by  Captain  Kater,  in  1824,  by  direct  comparison  with 
U ; the  third  shows  the  increase  of  weight  of  the  several  troy  pounds  in  the  course 


of  twenty  years. 


In  1844. 


In  1824. 


gr. 

Ex-U= -I- 0-0099 
L -U=  + 0-0151 
Ed  — U=  +0-0206 
D -U= + 0-0248 


gr.  gr. 

Ex-U= + 0-0010  0-0089 

L —U= +0-0005  0-0146 

Ed  — U=— 0-0015  0-0221 

D —U=  + 0-0022  0-0226 


In  1824,  RM=U+0*0021  grain;  in  1829,  RM =U+ 0*0089  ; consequently  RM 
gained  0*0068  grain  in  five  years.  With  the  single  exception  of  K,  all  the  new  brass 
weights  have  become  heavier  since  they  were  first  compared  with  U,  in  consequence 
probably  of  the  oxidation  of  their  surfaces,  while  U,  which  was  made  in  1758,  was 
preserved  from  further  change  by  the  coat  of  oxide  already  formed.  One  of  these, 
Sb,  appeared  to  have  been  protected  by  gilding,  though  imperfectly,  as  parts  of  its 
surface  were  slightly  tarnished.  Ex  and  L were  brighter  than  Ed  and  D.  K,  though 
it  had  become  lighter,  was  much  tarnished,  yet  exhibited  no  traces  of  abrasion.  The 
discordances  presented  by  the  different  weighings  of  K previous  to  1844  were  highly 
perplexing,  and  were  probably  the  cause  of  the  very  numerous  and  accurate  com- 
parisons of  the  various  troy  pounds  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  Committee,  with  the 
lost  standard,  on  which  alone  the  possibility  of  restoring  it  with  sufficient  accuracy 
depends. 

Professor  Schumacher  received  K in  March  1827,  accompanied  by  a statement 
that  it  had  been  found  by  Captain  Kater  to  exceed  the  standard  very  little,  not  more 
tlian  0 006  grain*.  In  June  1828,  Captain  Kater  compared  a second  weight  Kn  with 
each  of  two  troy  pounds  in  his  possession,  the  errors  of  which  were  well  determined. 
One  of  these  was  0*0122  grain  too  heavy,  the  other  0*0267  grain  too  heavy.  Let 
2W  denote  the  sum  of  these  two  troy  pounds.  Then  W=U+0*0194  grain.  By  a 


* Philosophical  Transactions,  1836,  p.  457. 


COMPARISONS  OF  Sp,  RS,  K,  ETC. 


773 


mean  of  eight  comparisons  Kn=W— 0-0170  grain.  In  September  1828,  by  a mean 
of  twenty  comparisons.  Professor  Schumacher  found  K=:Kn+ 0-0198  grain  ; whence 
K=U+0-0223  grain.  In  February  and  March  1829,  by  a mean  of  twenty  comparisons, 
Captain  Kater  found  K=W+0-0065;  whence  K=U+0-0259  grain.  This  differs 
from  the  first  result,  0-0199  grain  (not  0-0299  grain  as  it  is  erroneously  printed).  By 
ninety- two  direct  comparisons  of  K with  the  standard  by  Captain  v.  Nehus  in  June 
and  July  1829,  K=U+0*0339  grain.  In  the  autumn  of  1829  Professor  Schumacher 
compared  K again  with  the  sum  of  three  brass  weights  of  5000  grains,  400  grains, 
300  grains  and  60  grains  of  platinum,  with  which  it  had  been  compared  on  its  arrival 
at  Altona  in  1827,  and  there  was  no  sensible  difference  from  the  first  comparison. 
By  thirty  comparisons  in  October  1829  and  February  1830,  Professor  Schumacher 
found  K=Kn+0-0200  grain.  This  differs  but  0-0002  grain  from  the  result  obtained 
in  1828.  In  April  1844,  2K=Sp+RS+0-0667  grain,  Sp  + RS=2U— 0-01 1 1 grain. 
Therefore  K=U-|-0-0278  grain. 

On  taking  K out  of  its  case  after  1 had  received  it  from  Professor  Schumacher  in 
March  1844,  I observed  a small  fragment  of  wood,  like  a grain  of  coarse  sawdust, 
adhering  to  the  under  surface  of  the  weight  so  firmly  that  I was  unable  to  brush  it 
off  with  a feather,  and  had  some  difficulty  in  removing  it  with  a pointed  bit  of  quill. 
The  adhesion  of  the  bit  of  wood  to  the  weight  is  due  apparently  to  the  pressure  pro- 
duced by  screwing  down  very  tightly  the  lid  of  the  box  in  which  it  was  contained. 
Two  or  three  similar  grains  were  imbedded  in  the  velvet  lining  of  the  case.  In  all 
probability  this  bit  of  wood  had  been  attached  to  K immediately  after  its  first  com- 
parison by  Captain  Kater,  when  it  appeared  to  be  0-006  grain  too  heavy,  and  pre- 
vious to  its  comparison  by  Professor  Schumacher  with  the  brass  weights  of  5000 
grains,  400  grains  and  300  grains,  and  the  platinum  weights  of  60  grains. 

By  the  observations  of  February  and  March  1829,  K=W+0-0065  grain,  and  by 
those  of  June  and  July  1829,  K = U + 0-0339  grain  ; whence  W=  11+ 0-0274  grain. 
But  W=U+0-0194  grain  when  first  compared.  Therefore  in  1829  W had  gained 
0-0080  grain.  At  the  same  time  RM,  which  has  been  very  carefully  preserved,  had 
gained  0-0068  grain.  In  1844  the  well-preserved  troy  pounds  Ex  and  L had  gained 
0-0089  grain  and  0-0146  grain  respectively,  and  Ed  and  D,  which  were  in  a less  per- 
fect state  of  preservation,  had  gained  0-0221  grain  and  0-0226  grain  respectively. 
The  whole  gain  of  K up  to  1844  appears  to  be  0-0218  grain,  about  the  same  as  that 
of  Ed  or  D.  If,  as  seems  probable,  K was  compared  with  W about  the  end  of  1826 
or  the  beginning  of  1827,  this  error  of  +0-0218  must  include  the  gain  of  W up  to 
that  period.  The  discordances  in  the  weighings  of  K may  be  explained  by  supposing 
the  gain  of  K,  including  that  of  W up  to  1829,  to  be  0-014  grain,  and  the  gain  from 
1829  to  1844  to  be  0-008  grain,  since  it  maybe  assumed  that  brass  having  a recently 
polished  surface  gains  weight  faster  than  when  its  surface  is  protected  by  a film  of 
oxide ; also,  that  in  the  same  interval,  Sb,  which  was  in  some  measure  protected  by 
gilding,  had  gained  rather  less  than  K,  and  that  the  bit  of  wood  weighed  0-014  grain. 

5 I 2 


774  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Then,  original  error  of  K=+0'006  grain.  Error  of  K in  1829  = original  error 
+ 0’014  grain  (wood)  +0'014  grain  (oxygen)  = +0’034  grain.  Error  of  K in  1844 
= error  of  K in  1829  —0‘014  grain  (wood)  +0'd08  grain  (oxygenj  = +0'028  grain. 
The  comparisons  of  the  troy  pounds  Ex,  L,  Ed,  D with  each  other  in  1814  give 


Ex+0  0102  grain  =L+0"0061  grain  =Ed  = D. 

This  result  agrees  with  the  conclnsion  already  derived  from  the  comparison  of  Ex,  L, 
Ed,  D with  Sb  and  K,  in  showing  that  the  differences  between  Ex,  L,  Ed,  and  D 
have  very  sensibly  changed  in  the  course  of  twenty  years. 

The  troy  pound  R,  which  is  much  tarnished,  is  about  0*012  grain  lighter  than  U, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  either  of  the  weights  used  by  Captain  Kater  in  finding  the 
errors  of  K and  Kn. 

The  discrepancies  presented  by  the  weighings  of  the  brass  troy  pounds  at  different 
times,  due  to  the  effect  of  oxidation  or  other  causes,  are  so  large,  that  I resolved,  with 
the  consent  of  the  Astronomer  Royal,  to  rest  for  the  evidence  of  the  weight  of  the 
lost  standard  entirely  on  the  comparisons  of  the  two  platinum  troy  pounds  Sp  and 
RS.  In  a note  appended  to  Professor  Schumacher’s  paper  in  the  Transactions  of  the 
Royal  Society  for  1836,  p.  471,  Mr.  Baily  observes,  that,  for  some  unexplained  reason, 
Mr.  Cary,  who  was  commissioned  to  construct  the  troy  pound  RS,  used  for  this  pur- 
pose some  platinum  of  his  owm  instead  of  that  which  was  supplied  to  him  by  the 
Royal  Society.  The  exchange,  whatever  may  have  been  the  cause  of  it,  does  not 
appear  to  have  been  detrimental,  for  the  surface  of  RS,  though  certainly  inferior  to 
that  of  the  newly  made  platinum  kilogrammes  and  metre  bars  which  1 saw  in  Paris 
in  1844,  is  superior  to  that  of  Sp,  in  which  plugs  have  been  inserted  to  fill  up  holes 
left  by  drilling  out  defective  .places,  and  is  much  better  than  that  of  the  other  pound 
weights  made  since  of  platinum  prepared  in  England. 

If  we  consider  tl)e  discordances  presented  by  the  weighings  of  the  brass  troy 
pounds  simply  as  errors  of  observation,  without  paying  any  regard  to  their*  pt*obable 
causes,  the  resulting  value  of  U will  not  be  very  different  from  that  given  by  the 
platinum  troy  pounds  alone. 

By  the  observations  of  1824  and  1829, — 


gr.  weight. 

U=  Sp  +0-0081  30 

U=  RS  + 0-0030  14 

U=  Sb +0-0103  6 

U=  K -0-0339  9 

U=REx  + L + Ed  + D)-0-0022  6 


By  the  observations  of  1844, — 

gi*. 

RS  =Sp  +0-0057 

Sb  =Sp  +0-0030 

K =Sp  +0-0363 

Ex  + L + E(l  + D=2(Sb  + K)  + 0-0260 


Whence,  supposing  the  errors  of  the  weighings  to  be  insensible  compared  with  the 
discordances  of  the  brass  troy  pounds, — 


COMPAUISON  OF  THERMOMETERS. 


775 


gr.  weiglit. 

1 U=Sp  + 0-0081  30 

2 U=Sp  + 0-0087  14 

3 U=:Sp  + 0-0133  6 

4 U=Sp  + 0-0024  9 

5 U=:Sp  + 0-0261  6 


The  mean  of  all  the  equations  gives 

U=Sp-j-0*0096  grain. 

Excluding  the  last,  which  depends  upon  the  weighings  in  1824, 

U=Sp+0’0079  grain. 

Excluding  all  except  the  result  of  the  comparisons  of  U with  the  two  platinum  troy 
pounds, 

U=Sp+0'0083  grain. 

Comparison  of  Thermometers. 

The  thermometer  K was  supplied  by  the  Committee  of  the  Kew  Observatory.  It 
bears  the  inscription  “ No.  43,  Kew  Observatory,  July  1 853.”  It  is  graduated  by  lines 
etched  upon  the  tube  at  every  fifth  of  a centesimal  degree.  The  distance  between 
the  freezing-  and  boiling-points  is  about  18’1  inch.  Mr.  Welsh,  under  whose  super- 
intendence it  was  constructed,  examined  it  by  the  method  employed  by  Mr.  Sheep- 
shanks, and  concluded  that  the  graduation  was  correct  throughout  the  scale  to  one- 
tenth  of  a small  division,  or  0°'02  C.  He  obtained  the  following  data  for  deter- 
mining its  boiling-point  at  the  Kew  Observatory,  the  stem  being  vertical  : — 


1853. 

Barom. 

Att.  therm. 

Barom.  in  millims. 
of  mercury  at  0°  C. 

Reading  of  K. 

Temp,  by  Regnault’s 
Tables. 

Error. 

July  27. 

30-039 

65-5 

760-47 

99*98 

100-02 

— 0-04 

August  l6. 

29*726 

64-3 

752-61 

99*70 

99*73 

— 0-03 

August  17. 

29-640 

63-2 

750-51 

99*38 

99-65 

— 0-07 

Mean — 0-047 


Hence  the  boiling-point  with  the  stem  vertical  under  the  pressure  of  760  millimetres  of 
mercury  at  0°C.,  is  99°*953.  The  freezing-point,  with  the  stem  vertical,  was  ~-0°'04, 
before  boiling,  and  — 0°'12,  after  boiling. 

Assuming  100°  C.  to  be  the  temperature  of  steam  under  Laplace’s  standard  atmo- 
spheric pressure,  or  the  pressure  of  a column  of  mercury  at  0°  C.,  the  height  of  which 
in  millimetres  is  760-1-  T946  cos  2 latitude  -1-0*0001492  height  in  metres  above  the  sea, 
the  temperature  of  steam  at  Kew  under  the  pressure  of  760  millimetres  of  mercury 
at  0°C.,  will  be  100°*016.  But  the  reading  of  K was  99°*953.  Hence,  denoting  by 
K the  reading  of  No.  43  at  the  temperature  # by  a thermometer  the  freezing-  and 
boiling-points  of  which  are  accurately  determined,  when  ^=0°,  K=-f0°*12,  and 

when  100°,  K=  -l-0°*063.  In  August  1853  it  was  heated  to  rather  above  100°  C. 
On  December  15  the  freezing-point  had  ascended  to  — 0°*04.  The  reading  was  0°*00 
when  the  thermometer  was  surrounded  with  broken  ice.  May  26,  1855,  and  also 
when  immersed  in  pounded  ice,  July  10,  1855.  The  determination  of  the  zero  of  a 


776  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


thermometer  by  ice  is  said  to  be  less  accurate  than  when  snow  is  used.  In  the  pre- 
sent instance  it  appears  from  the  following  comparisons  to  have  been  sufficiently 
exact.  In  February  1844  the  freezing-point  of  a thermometer  G,  having  an  arbitrary 
scale,  was  37*4.  In  March  1845  it  was  37'5,  the  thermometer  having  been  im- 
mersed in  snow  in  both  cases.  In  May  1855,  the  bulbs  of  G and  K being  almost 
in  contact  with  each  other  and  surrounded  with  broken  ice,  the  reading  of  G was 
37*55,  while  that  of  K was  0°‘00.  In  July  1855,  the  reading  of  G,  when  immersed  in 
pounded  ice,  was  again  found  to  be  37*55.  In  March  1855,  by  a mean  of  ten  com- 
parisons, the  reading  of  G was  48'541,  when  that  of  K was  2°^365.  By  a mean  of  ten 
other  comparisons,  the  corresponding  readings  of  G and  K were  90°*797  and  11°'432 
respectively.  Hence,  one  part  of  G=0°’2145.  If  we  suppose  the  zero  of  G unchanged 
since  1845,  the  freezing-point  of  K would  be  — 0°‘004.  But  if  we  suppose  the  zero 
of  G to  have  been  correctly  determined  by  immersion  in  ice  in  May  and  July  1855, 
or  that  the  zero  had  ascended  0*05  part  =0°'011  since  1845,  the  freezing-point  of  K 
would  be  -l-0°'007. 

Assuming  the  freezing-point  of  K in  1855  to  be  0°'00,  as  given  by  observation,  the 
corrections  of  K will  be, — 


t. 

t-K. 

t. 

#-K. 

t. 

if-K. 

o 

0 

0-000 

35 

-0-020 

O 

70 

-0-040 

5 

-0-003 

40 

— 0-023 

75 

— 0-043 

10 

-0-006 

45 

— 0-026 

80 

-0-046 

15 

— 0-009 

50 

— 0-029 

85 

— 0-048 

20 

— 0-011 

55 

— 0-031 

90 

— 0-051 

25 

— 0-014 

60 

— 0-034 

95 

— 0-054 

30 

-0-017 

65 

— 0-037 

100 

-0-057 

The  thermometers  B,  C,  D were  made  by  the  late  M.  Bunten  of  Paris.  They  are 
all  divided  into  centesimal  degrees  by  lines  etched  upon  the  tubes.  The  graduation 
of  B extends  from  —23°  up  to  -1-107°.  It  bears  the  inscription  ‘25  Mai  1843. 
Divise  le  18  Mai  1844.’  The  graduation  of  C extends  from  —24°  up  to  -f41°.  It 
is  dated  1841.  The  graduation  of  D,  which  is  also  dated  1841,  extends  from  —25° 
up  to  -|-53°. 

The  graduation  of  B was  examined  at  certain  points  of  the  scale  by  the  method 
described  by  Professor  Forbes  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  for  1836, 
p.  578;  and  the  boiling-  and  freezing-points  determined,  in  order  that  the  other  ther- 
mometers might  be  referred  to  it  as  a standard.  It  was  not,  however,  used  as  a 
standard,  in  consequence  of  the  acquisition  of  the  Kew  thermometer,  which  has  a 
scale  of  much  larger  dimensions,  and  is  more  accurately  and  closely  divided,  and 
also  on  account  of  the  inconvenience  in  using  it  as  a standard,  arising  from  the  large 
amount  of  the  displacement  of  its  zero.  Immediately  after  boiling,  February  1,  1845, 
the  freezing-point  of  B was  — 0°'20;  on  February  4 it  was  — 0°T5  ; on  March  3 it 
was  — 0°T  1 ; in  December  1846  it  was  0°‘00  ; and  in  July  1855  it  was  -|-0°T1.  The 
depression  of  the  zero,  which  in  the  present  case  amounts  to  0°'31  C.,  depends  upon 


COMPARISON  OF  THERMOMETERS. 


777 


the  composition  of  the  glass,  and  perhaps  also  upon  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
worked  by  the  glass-blower.  Legrand  observed  depressions  of  from  0°"3  to  0°’5  in 
thermometers  by  M.  Bunten*.  Despretz  found  changes  amounting  to  0°'47,  0°’45, 
0°'23,  0°‘30,  0°‘57,  0°'61,  0°'60,  0°’60 ; and  that  the  freezing-point  became  stationary 
at  the  end  of  about  four  years  Mr.  Welsh  has  observed  a depression  in  the 
thermometers  constructed  at  Kew  varying  from  0°‘09  to  0°'ll.  In  the  thermo- 
meters employed  by  Mr.  Sheepshanks  it  amounts  to  about  0°'17.  In  ten  different 
thermometers  examined  by  Dr.  Lamont,  the  depressions  were  0°*31,  0°'28,  0°‘45, 
0°‘25,  0°*31,  0°'37,  0°'62,  0°'25,  0°'31,  0°'27  respectively.  He  also  found  that  it  takes 
about  five  years  for  the  zero  to  regain  its  permanent  position  after  boiling 

The  depression  of  the  freezing-point  of  B below  +0°T1,  from  March  1845  up  to 
January  1851,  is  represented  with  sufficient  accuracy  by  0‘0044wi^,  where  m is  the 
time  in  months  up  to  the  middle  of  January  1851.  The  computed  depressions  are, — 


1 845.  March,  April 0*22 

May  0-21 

June,  July  0‘20 

August  0*19 

September,  October  ...  0*18 
November,  December..  0*17 

1846.  January,  February 0*1 6 

March,  April 0*15 


1846.  May,  June 0*14 

July,  August 0*13 

September,  October  ...  0*12 
November,  December  . 0*11 

1847.  January — March  0*10 

April — June  0*09 

July,  August  0*08 


September — November  0*07 


O 

1847.  December — February...  0*06 

1848.  March — June  0*05 

July — September  0*04 

October — February  ...  0*03 

1849.  March — July  0*02 

August — February 0*01 

1850.  March — December  ...  0*00 


Means  of  Comparisons  of  B and  K in  February  and  March  1855. 


No.  of  comparisons. 

B. 

K. 

B-K. 

K-A 

B-t. 

10 

4*895 

4*712 

0*183 

0*003 

0*186 

10 

5*344 

5*177 

0*167 

0*003 

0*170 

10 

6*319 

6*143 

0*176 

0*003 

0*179 

10 

9*219 

9*016 

0*203 

0*006 

0*209 

10 

10*740 

10*493 

0*247 

0*006 

0*253 

10 

12*893 

12*652 

0*241 

0*008 

0*249 

10 

14*532 

14*279 

0*253 

0*009 

0*262 

10 

15*336 

15*095 

0*241 

0*009 

0*250 

10 

16*379 

16*126 

0*253 

0*009 

0*262 

10 

17*581 

17*329 

0*252 

0*010 

0*262 

10 

18*000 

17*749 

0*251 

0*010 

0*261 

10 

18*000 

17*750 

0*250 

0*010 

0*260 

10 

18*180 

17*917 

0*263 

0*010 

0*273 

10 

21*382 

21*116 

0*266 

0*011 

0*277 

10 

23-202 

22*919 

0*283 

0*013 

0*296 

10 

25*331 

25*045 

0*286 

0*014 

0*300 

t. 

B-ri 

t. 

B-ri 

t. 

B-t. 

t. 

B-t. 

0 

0*11 

7 

0*19 

14 

0*25 

21 

0*28 

1 

0*12 

8 

0*20 

15 

0*25 

22 

0*29 

2 

0*13 

9 

0*21 

16 

0*26 

23 

0*30 

3 

0*14 

10 

0*23 

17 

0*26 

24 

0*30 

4 

0*16 

11 

0*25 

18 

0*26 

25 

0*30 

5 

0*17 

12 

0*25 

19 

0*27 

6 

0*18 

13 

0*25 

20 

0*28 

* Annales  de  Chimie,  1836,  tome  Ixiii.  p.  368. 


t Ibid.  1837,  tome  Ixiv.  p.  312. 


X Jahresbericht  der  Miinchener  Sternwarte  fiir  1852,  S.  64,  93,  101  ; and  Aimalen  fiir  Meteorologie,  1842, 


Heft  iv.  S.  X.  XV. 


778  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 
The  observations  for  determining  the  freezing-points  of  C and  D gave, — 


C. 

D. 

1845,  March  

...  0-00 

0‘05  in  snow. 

1846,  December  

...  0-01 

0"08  in  snow. 

1855,  May 

...  0-02 

0‘07  in  ice. 

1855,  July 

...  0-00 

0’08  in  ice. 

Means  in  1855  ... 

...  0-01 

0-07 

Comparisons  of  C and  D with  K in  March  and  May  1855. 


No.  of  comparisons.  C.  K. 

D. 

No.  of  comparisons.  C. 

K.  D. 

10 

6-047  6-004 

6-064 

33 

17-000 

17-056  17-030 

6 

7-780  7-772 

7-783 

24 

18-000 

18-062  18-032 

5 

10-314  10-316 

10-310 

11 

20-161 

20-268  20-228 

10 

13-097  13-137 

13-098 

17 

24-955 

25-079  25-086 

24 

16-000  16-042 

16-037 

t. 

f-K. 

K-C. 

^-C. 

K-D. 

f-D. 

0 

0-000 

— 0-010 

-0-070 

6 

-0-004 

-0-043 

— 0-047 

-0-060 

— 0-064 

8 

— 0-005 

— 0-008 

— 0-013 

-0-011 

— 0-016 

10 

— 0-006 

+ 0-002 

— 0-004 

+ 0-006 

0-000 

13 

-0-008 

+ 0-040 

+ 0-032 

+ 0-039 

+ 0-031 

16 

-0-009 

+ 0-042 

+ 0-033 

+ 0-005 

—0-004 

17 

— 0-010 

+ 0-056 

+ 0-046 

+ 0-026 

+ 0-016 

18 

— 0-010 

+ 0-062 

+ 0-052 

+ 0-030 

+ 0-020 

20 

-0-011 

+ 0-107 

+ 0-096 

+ 0-040 

+ 0-029 

25 

-0-014 

+ 0-124 

+ 0-110 

-0-007 

-0-021 

t. 

t-C.  t-T). 

t. 

f-C. 

f-D. 

t. 

f-C.  f-D. 

0 

— 0-01  —0-07 

9 

-0-01 

— 0-01 

18 

+ 0-05  +0-02 

1 

— 0-02  —0-07 

10 

0-00 

0-00 

19 

+ 0-07  +0-02 

2 

-0-03  -0-07 

11 

+ 0-01 

+ 0-01 

20 

+ 0-10  +0-03 

3 

-0-03  —0-07 

12 

+ 0-02 

+ 0-02 

21 

+ 0-10  +0-02 

4 

_0-04  —0-07 

13 

+ 0-03 

+ 0-03 

22 

+ 0-10  +0-01 

5 

-0-04  -0-06 

14 

+ 0-03 

+ 0-02 

23 

+ 0-10  0-00 

6 

— 0-05  —0-06 

15 

+ 0-03 

+ 0-01 

24 

+ 0-11  —0-01 

7 

— 0-03  —0-04 

16 

+ 0-03 

0-00 

25 

+ 0-11  -0-02 

8 

-0-01  -0-02 

17 

+ 0-05 

+ 0-02 

The  zero-points  of  C and 

D do  not 

appear  to  have  undergone 

any  very  appreciable 

change.  The  comparisons  of  B,  C,  D with  each  other  at  distant  intervals  may,  there- 
fore, be  used  to  check  the  values  of  the  depression  of  the  zero  of  B deduced  from  the 
observations  of  the  freezing-point  in  1845,  1846  and  1855. 


Comparisons  of  C,  B,  D,  July  31,  1846. 


No.  of  comparisons. 

C. 

B. 

n. 

10 

20-492 

20-769 

20-620 

10 

19-697 

19-969 

19-805 

10 

20-707 

20-977 

20-841 

10 

18-347 

18-589 

18-425 

Mean  of  40  comparisons  .. 

. 19-810 

20-076 

19-923 

Hence,  at  20°, 


B-C=:-l-0-266, 


B— D=-l-0-153. 


COMPARISON  OF  THERMOMETERS. 


779 


Comparisons  of  C,  B,  D in  July  1855. 


No.  of  comparisons. 

C. 

B. 

D. 

10 

19-884 

20-258 

19-967 

10 

20-535 

20-885 

20-616 

Mean  of  20  comparisons  .. 

. 20-209 

20-571 

20-291 

Hence,  at  20°,  B — C=+0-362,  B— D=+0-280. 

Also,  by  a mean  of  11  comparisons  at  20°,  K— C=+0‘107j  K — D=4-0'040.  By 
30  comparisons  at  18°,  and  10  at  21°,  B — K=4-0'261.  Therefore  B — C=+0'368, 
B— D=+0’301.  The  resulting  mean  value  of  the  depression  of  the  zero  of  B is 
0°'12.  The  value  deduced  from  the  observations  of  the  freezing-point  is  0°T3. 


Comparisons  of  C,  B,  D in  September  1846. 


No.  of  comparisons. 

c. 

B. 

D. 

10 

26-551 

26-884 

26-750 

10 

25-385 

25-695 

25-516 

10 

24-401 

24-670 

24-531 

10 

23-448 

23-725 

23-577 

10 

26-634 

26-949 

26-796 

10 

23-646 

23-940 

23-774 

Mean  of  60  comparisons  .. 

. 25-011 

25-311 

25-157 

Hence,  at  25°,  B — 

C=+0-30, 

B-D= 

+0-153. 

By  a mean  of  16  comparisons  of  C,  B,  D between  23°'9  and  26°‘2,  in  July  1855, 
their  corresponding  readings  were 

C.  B.  D. 

25-081  25-487  25*204 

Hence,  at  25°,  B-C=:+0-406,  B-D=+0-283. 

Also,  17  comparisons  of  C,  K,  D,  gave  K— C=+0T24,  K— D=  — 0‘007,  and  10  com- 
parisons of  B,  K,  gave  B — K=+0’286.  Therefore  B — C= -f-0'410,  B— D = -f0‘279. 
The  resulting  mean  value  of  the  depression  of  the  zero  of  B is  0°T2,  the  same  as  its 
calculated  value. 

The  thermometers  G,  L have  arbitrary  scales,  the  divisions  of  which  are  traced  on 
the  tubes  vvith  a diamond  point  at  every  tenth  of  an  inch.  The  parts  of  the  scales 
of  G,  L,  as  well  as  those  of  B,  C,  D,  K,  are  subdivided  to  hundredths  of  an  inch  by 
sliding  scales  of  glass.  The  division  of  the  sliding  scale  which  is  brought  into  appa- 
rent coincidence  with  the  extremity  of  the  thread  of  mercury,  is  viewed  through  a 
hole  in  a plate  of  brass  attached  to  a very  light  brass  frame  which  carries  the  scale, 
so  that  the  direction  of  vision  may  be  perpendieular  to  the  axis  of  the  tube.  'I'he 
hundredths  of  an  inch  are  subdivided  by  estimation. 


5 K 


MDCCCLVI. 


780  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Means  of  Comparisons  of  G and  L with  K in  February  1855. 


No.  of  comparisons. 

G. 

K. 

No.  of  comparisons. 

L. 

K. 

10 

48-541 

2-365 

10 

51-465 

15-753 

10 

90-797 

11-432 

10 

54-545 

16-089 

10 

111-350 

15-753 

10 

73-010 

18-389 

10 

124-050 

18-389 

10 

92-384 

20-828 

10 

94-698 

21-055 

10 

94-869 

21-079 

10 

97-790 

21-448 

10 

101-515 

21-911 

By  a mean  of  30  comparisons  of  G and  L between  17°  and  20°  in  July  1846,  their 
corresponding  readings  were 

G.  L. 

120-897  67-591 


Means  of  Comparisons  of  G,  K,  L in  March  and  May  1855. 


No.  of  comparisons.  G.  K.  L. 

11  117-79  17-08  62-38 

10  124-24  18-43  73-36 

6-45  1-35  10^ 

1 part  of  G=0°-2093,  1 part  of  L=0°-12295,  1 part  of  G = l-702  parts  of  L. 

G.  K.  L. 

Mean  of  all  120-860  17-723  67-609 


In  July  1846  the  corresponding  readings  of  G,  L were  120-897  and  67'59]. 

By  the  observations  of  1855,  K=17'731  when  G=  120-897,  and  K=  17*721  vvhen 
L=67-591. 

Hence  L stood  0°-01  higher,  compared  with  G,  in  1855  than  it  did  in  July  1846. 
Between  March  1845  and  May  1855  the  zero  of  G appears  to  have  ascended  0°-01. 
It  is  probable  that  the  whole  or,  at  any  rate,  the  greater  part  of  this  ascent  occurred 
before  July  1846.  On  this  supposition,  in  July  1846,  the  depression  of  the  zero  of 
G below  its  permanent  place  would  be  0°*00,  and  that  of  L would  be  0°'01. 

The  thermometers  H,  P were  used  only  in  the  earlier  observations.  The  divisions 
of  H were  on  the  tube.  The  scale  of  P was  traced  on  paper  and  enclosed  between 
the  tube  of  the  thermometer  and  an  exterior  tube  of  glass  joined  by  fusion  to  the 
thermometer  tube  at  the  lower  end,  and  sealed  at  the  upper  end.  The  freezing-point 
of  H was  -l-0°-50.  The  freezing-point  of  P was  -]-0°-25. 

By  a mean  of  13  comparisons  of  H,  P,  C,  D,  their  corresponding  readings  were 

H.  p.  c.  D. 

3-31  3-13  2-93  2-99 

Let  2M=C-1-D.  Then  the  corresponding  readings  of  H,  P,  M,  t will  be 

n.  p.  M.  t.  if-H.  f-p. 

3-31  3-13  2-96  2-91  —0-40  -0-22 


COMPARISON  OF  THERMOMETERS. 


781 


Means  of  Comparisons  of  H,  B,  P,  March  3,  1845. 


No.  of  comparisons. 

H. 

B. 

P. 

8 

6*09 

5*66 

6*02 

10 

11*45 

11*37 

11*84 

9 

17*06 

17*19 

17*94 

10 

19*67 

19*82 

20*73 

10 

23*40 

23*71 

24*82 

Hence,  observing  that  the  zero  of  B was  0*22  lower  in  March  1845  than  in  1855, — 


t. 

^-P. 

5*70 

-0*39 

-0*32 

11*34 

— 0*11 

—0*50 

17*15 

+ 0*09 

-0*79 

19*76 

+ 0*09 

-0*97 

23*63 

+ 0*23 

-1*19 

Means  of  Comparisons  of  H,  P with  G and  L in  July  and  August  1844. 


No.  of  comparisons. 

H. 

P. 

G. 

L. 

25 

16*43 

17*13 

114*96 

27 

17*46 

18*24 

65*90 

14 

18*37 

19*32 

124*75 

13 

20*73 

21*82 

93*03 

The  corresponding  readings  of  G,  K,  L,  K,  t in  1855  were, — 

G.  K.  t.  L.  K.  t. 

114*96  16*504  16*49  65*90  17*503  17*49 

124*75  18*535  18*52  93*03  20*909  20*90 


At  a given  temperature  the  readings  of  G and  L were  higher  in  1855  than  in  July 
1844  by  0°*02  C.  and  0°*04  C.  respectively.  Hence  the  corresponding  readings  of 
G,  L,  t,  in  July  1844,  would  have  been, — 


G.  t. 

114*96  16*51 

124*75  18*54 


L.  t. 

65*90  17*53 

93*03  20*94 


The  corresponding  readings  of  H,  P,  t,  in  July  1844,  would  have  been, — 


H. 

P. 

t. 

#-H. 

t-V. 

16*43 

17*13 

16*51 

+ 0*08 

-0*62 

17*46 

18*24 

17*53 

+ 0*07 

-0*71 

18*37 

19*32 

18*54 

+ 0*17 

-0*78 

20*73 

21*82 

20*94 

+ 0*21 

-0*88 

graphic  interpolation 

the  following 

ralues  of  H,  t— 

P were  obtained 

t. 

t. 

if-H. 

t. 

if-P. 

t. 

if-P. 

0 

-0*50 

13 

— 0*07 

0 

-0*25 

13 

-0*53 

1 

-0*48 

14 

— 0*02 

1 

— 0*25 

14 

-0*57 

2 

-0*46 

15 

+ 0*01 

2 

— 0*26 

15 

-0*62 

3 

— 0*43 

16 

+ 0*04 

3 

-0*27 

16 

— 0*67 

4 

— 0*41 

17 

+ 0*07 

4 

— 0*28 

17 

— 0*72 

5 

-0*38 

18 

+ 0*10 

5 

-0*29 

18 

-0*78 

6 

-0*35 

19 

+ 0*14 

6 

-0*31 

19 

-0*84 

7 

-0*31 

20 

+ 0*17 

7 

— 0*33 

20 

-0*90 

8 

-0*27 

21 

+ 0*19 

8 

-0*36 

21 

-0*97 

9 

-0*24 

22 

+ 0*21 

9 

-0*39 

22 

— 1*04 

10 

— 0*20 

23 

+ 0*22 

10 

-0*42 

23 

— 1*12 

11 

-0*16 

24 

+ 0*23 

11 

-0*45 

24 

-1*20 

12 

-0*11 

12 

-0*49 

5 K 2 


782  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


The  thermometer  R was  used  in  some  of  the  earlier  observations.  It  has  an  ivory 
scale  the  dimensions  of  which  vary  with  the  quantity  of  moisture  present  in  the 
atmosphere,  and  consequently  the  error  is  very  sensibly  different  at  different  times. 

By  a mean  of  twenty  comparisons  of  R,  B in  October  1846,  their  corresponding 
readings  were : — 

R.  B.  B-R. 

19-31  18-90  -0-41 

But  in  October  1846,  at  19°,  B=  — 0’15.  Therefore  R=  — 0°’56. 


Comparison  of  Barometers. 

Up  to  the  end  of  August  1844  a siphon  barometer  by  the  late  Mr.  Robinson  was 
employed.  It  resembles  Bunten’s  improved  Gay-Lussac’s  barometer  in  all  respects 
except  that  it  is  graduated  in  English  inches,  and  the  attached  thermometer  in 
degrees  of  Fahrenheit’s  scale.  The  observations  were  reduced,  for  the  mercury  to 
32°  Fahr.,  and  for  the  scale  to  62°  Fahr.,  by  the  tables  in  Schumacher’s  Jahrbuch 
fiir  1837. 

From  the  beginning  of  September  1844  a cistern  barometer  by  Ernst  of  Paris  was 
used.  It  is  graduated  in  millimetres,  and  the  attached  thermometer  in  centesimal 
degrees.  In  the  following  comparisons  with  the  barometer  of  the  Paris  Observatory, 
made  by  one  of  the  Assistants  of  the  Observatory,  O,  T denote  the  readings  of  the 
Observatory  barometer,  and  of  its  attached  thermometer;  F,  E those  of  Ernst,  and 
of  its  attached  thermometer. 


0. 

T. 

F. 

E. 

0-F. 

mm. 

mm. 

mm. 

753-16 

21-4 

752-90 

21-0 

0-26 

753-64 

21-8 

753-30 

21-3 

0-34 

754-00 

22-3 

753-60 

21-7 

0-40 

754-14 

22-3 

753-70 

21-7 

0-44 

754-32 

22-5 

753-90 

21-9 

0-42 

757-40 

21-1 

757-00 

20-9 

0-40 

756-90 

22-4 

756-50 

21-7 

0-40 

758-64 

19-5 

758-25 

19-3 

0-39 

758-20 

21-7 

757-70 

21-1 

0-50 

Mean  0-393 


Ernst  stands  0*393  millimetre  lower  than  the  Observatory  barometer.  The  latter 
requires  no  correction.  Ernst  was  suspended  close  to  the  Observatory  barometer 
all  night  previous  to  the  day  on  which  the  comparisons  were  made,  their  tempera- 
tures must,  therefore,  have  been  very  nearly  equal.  Yet  E is  less  than  T,  while,  by  a 
subsequent  comparison  with  B,  E was  found  to  be  0°*45  too  great.  There  is  reason 
to  believe  that  this  discrepance  is  due  to  the  lodgment  of  a small  quantity  of  mercury 
in  the  upper  end  of  the  tube  of  the  thermometer,  which  occurs  sometimes  after  the 
instrument  has  been  conveyed  in  a carriage  over  a rough  pavement,  as  was  done  pre- 
vious to  its  comparison  with  the  Observatory  barometer. 

In  March  1845  the  thermometer  B was  suspended  so  that  its  bulb  was  in  contact 


COMPARISON  OF  BAROMETERS. 


783 


with  the  brass  covering  of  the  bulb  of  E,  and  the  corresponding  readings  of  B and  E 
observed.  At  this  time  the  freezing-point  of  B was  0°'22  lower  than  in  1855.  Tlie 
readings  of  a thermometer  free  from  error  are  denoted  by  t. 


No.  of  comparisons. 

B. 

E. 

B-E. 

#-B. 

t-E. 

10 

5*25 

3-75 

-0-50 

+ 0-05 

-0-45 

10 

7-46 

7-94 

-0-48 

+ 0-03 

— 0-45 

17 

9-73 

10-12 

-0-39 

-0-01 

-0-40 

9 

11-65 

12-09 

-0-44 

-0-03 

-0-47 

9 

15-10 

15-52 

-0-42 

-0-03 

-0-45 

7 

21-58 

22-03 

-0-45 

-0-06 

-0-51 

Mean  

-0-45 

Since  the  reduction  of  F to 

0°  C.,  ' 

with  a temperature  E 0°‘‘ 

45  too  great,  would 

make  the  reduced  value 

of  F 0'055  mm.  too  small,  the  error  of  E will  be  corrected 

by  adding  0*45  mm.  instead  of  0‘39  mm.  to  the  reduced  value  of  F. 

Subsequently,  by  the  kindness  of  the  Rev.  W.  T.  Kingsley, 

an  opportunity  was 

afforded  of  comparing  F with  a 

Standard  barometer  having  a tube  of  very  large  bore. 

also  constructed  by  Ernst,  belonging  to  the  Taylor  Library  in 

Sidney-Sussex  Col- 

lege,  Cambridge.  According  to  the  maker’s  statement,  the  reading  of  this  barometer 

is  0*04  mm.  too  great. 

Taylor. 

Att.  therm. 

F. 

E. 

April  11,  1851. 

761-28 

9-50 

760-80 

10-00 

761-28 

9-60 

760-85 

10*10 

761-32 

9-75 

760-90 

10-20 

761-22 

9-75 

760-87 

10-15 

761-18 

9-75 

760-80 

10-30 

761-26 

9-69 

760-84 

10-15 

April  12. 

760-78 

9-25 

760-38 

9-6 

760-80 

760-42 

760-83 

9-5 

760-40 

9-8 

760-74 

9-6 

760-30 

10-1 

760-74 

760-36 

760-74 

9-75 

760-30  " 

10-2 

760-76 

9-52 

760-36 

9-92 

T. 

Att.  therm. 

F. 

E. 

Means 

...761-01 

9-60 

760*60 

10-03 

Taylor— F=0'41  mm.  But 

Taylor  stands  0’04 

mm.  too  high.  Therefore  F is 

0‘37  mm.  too  low.  E is  0°'43  higher  than  the  attached  thermometer  of  Taylor.  The 
redaction  due  to  0°‘43  is  0 053  mm.  Therefore  the  error  of  E will  be  corrected  by 
adding  0 423  mm.  instead  of  0'37  mm.  to  the  reduced  height  of  F. 

The  mean  of  the  two  corrections  gives  0*44  millimetre  to  be  added  to  the  height  of 
F reduced  to  0°  C.  The  reductions  were  made  by  the  tables  in  Schumacher’s 
Jahrbuch  fiir  1838. 


784  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


If^eight  of  Air. 


According  to  Ritter*  the  observations  of  Regnault'|“  show  that  in  Paris, 
lat.  48°  50'  14",  60  metres  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  a litre  of  dry  atmospheric  air  at 
0°C.,  under  the  pressure  of  760  millimetres  of  mercury,  weighs  1'2932227  gramme. 
Assuming  that  atmospheric  air  contains  on  an  average  0‘0004  of  its  volume  of 
carbonic  acid  the  density  of  which  is  1'529  of  that  of  atmospheric  air,  the  weight  of 
a litre  of  dry  atmospheric  air  containing  its  average  amount  of  carbonic  acid,  under 
the  circumstances  already  stated,  will  be  1'2934963  gramme.  It  appears  from  the 
discussion  of  pendulum  experiments  by  Mr.  Baily:}:,  that  if  we  take  G to  denote  the 
force  of  gravity  at  the  mean  level  of  the  sea  in  lat.  45°,  the  force  of  gravity  in  lat.  A, 
at  the  mean  level  of  the  sea, 


= 0(1—0-0025659  cos  2X). 

Poisson  § has  proved  that  the  force  of  gravity  in  a given  latitude  at  a place  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth  at  the  height  2 above  the  mean  level  of  the  sea 


ll 

rj 


X (force  of  gravity  at  the  level  of  the  sea  in  the  same  latitude). 


where  r is  the  radius  of  the  earth,  its  mean  density,  and  the  density  of  that  part  of 
the  earth  which  is  above  the  mean  level  of  the  sea.  If,  as  is  probable, 

3 p' 

2— 2 p = 1’32  nearly,  r=6366198  metres. 


Hence  the  weight  in  grammes  of  a litre  of  dry  atmospheric  air  containing  the  average 
amount  of  carbonic  acid,  at  0°,  and  under  the  pressure  of  760  millimetres  of  mercury 
at  0°,  at  the  height  s:  above  the  mean  level  of  the  sea  in  lat.  X,  is 

1 -2930693  1 — 1 -32  jV  1 — 0-0025659  cos  2>.). 


Regnault  found  the  expansion  of  air  from  0°  to  100°,  under  constant  pressure, 
equal  0-36706  of  its  volume  at  0°;  also  that,  at  50°,  the  mercurial  thermometer  was 
a little  in  advance  of  the  air  thermometer  |j.  The  difference  between  the  mercurial 
and  air  thermometers,  at  50°,  amounts  to  about  Hence,  the  expansion  of  air 

between  0°  and  50°-2  is  0”  18353  of  its  volume  at0°;  or,  between  0°  and  50°,  the  ratio 
of  the  density  of  air  at  0°  to  its  density  at  is  1+0-003656#.  The  density  of  the 
vapour  of  water  is  0-622  of  that  of  air.  Hence,  if  # be  the  temperature  of  the  air,  b 
the  barometric  pressure,  v the  pressure  of  the  vapour  present  in  the  air,  h and  v being 
expressed  in  millimetres  of  mercury  at  0°,  at  a place  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  at  a 
height  z above  the  mean  level  of  the  sea,  in  lat.  X,  the  weight  in  grammes  of  a litre 


*■  Memolres  de  la  Societe  de  Physique  et  d’Histoire  Naturelje  de  Genhve,  t.  xiii.  p.  361. 
t Memoires  de  I’lnstitut,  t.  xxi.  p.  157.  J Memoirs  of  the  Astronomical  Society,  vol.  vii.  p.  94. 

§ Traite  de  Mecanique,  t.  ii.  p.  629.  ||  Memoires  de  ITnstitut,  tome  xxi.  pp.  91,  238. 

•[  Annales  de  Chimie,  3“®  sdrie,  tome  v.  p.  99. 


WEIGHT  OF  AIR. 


785 


of  air  will  be 


1-2930693  &-0-378IJ/  z 

1+0-003656^  760 


1 — 0-0025659  COS  2X). 


In  the  cellar  under  the  Mineralogical  Museum  in  Cambridge,  where  tiie  weights 
were  compared,  in  lat.  52°  12'  18",  about  8 metres  above  the  mean  level  of  the  sea, 
this  becomes 

1-293893  5-0-378W 

1+0-003656^  760 


Since  a litre  is  the  volume  of  1000  grammes  of  water  at  its  maximum  density,  the 
above  expression,  divided  by  1000,  gives  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  air  to  the  maximum 
density  of  water.  The  logarithm  of  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  air  at  t°,  to  the  maxi- 
mum density  of  water,  is  obtained  by  adding  the  logarithm  of  b—0’S78v  in  milli- 
metres to  log  At. 


Table  I. 


(. 

0 

1 

2 

.3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 


10+log  1-293893  — 3-log  760  — log  (1 -1-0-003656  t). 


10+  log  Af. 
4-231083 
4-229500 
4-227921 
4-226347 
4-224780 
4-223217 
4-221661 
4-220110 
4-218565 
4-217025 
4-213490 
4-213961 
4-212437 

4-210919 

4-209406 

4-207898 


Diff. 

1585 

1579 

1574 

1567 

1563 

1556 

1551 

•545 

1540 

•535 

1529 

1524 

1518 

•513 

1508 


t. 

10+log  Af. 

15 

4-207898 

16 

4-206396 

17 

4-204898 

18 

4-203406 

19 

4-201919 

20 

4-200436 

21 

4-198959 

22 

4-197488 

23 

4-196020 

24 

4-194538 

25 

4-193101 

26 

4-191648 

27 

4-190201 

28 

4-188758 

29 

4-187320 

30 

4-185887 

DifF. 

1 502 
1498 
1492 
1487 

1483 

1477 

1471 

1468 

1462 

1457 

1452 

•447 

•443 

•438 

•433 


The  logarithms  in  the  preceding  Table,  when  diminished  by  0-000028,  serve  for  the 
reduction  of  the  weighings  in  Somerset  House,  lat.  51°  30' 40",  29*56  metres  above  the 
mean  level  of  the  sea;  and  when  diminished  by  0-000132,  they  may  be  used  for  the 
reduction  of  weighings  in  Paris. 

According  to  a document  to  which  the  names  of  Biot,  Regnault,  and  Bianchi  are 
appended*,  the  pressure  of  vapour  in  rooms  that  are  not  heated  artificially,  in  Paris, 
is  two-thirds  of  the  maximum  pressure  due  to  the  temperature.  It  is  probable  that 
in  Cambridge  the  hygrometric  condition  of  the  air  is  very  nearly  the  same. 


* Memorie  di  Matematica  e di  Fisica  della  Societa  Italiana  della  Scienze  residente  in  Modena,  tomo 


XXV.  p.  1. 


786  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Table  II. 

Values  of  0'378  where  Vt  is  the  maximum  pressure  of  vapour  at  the  temperature  t, 
in  millimetres  of  mercury  at  0°,  according  to  Regnault’s  observations*. 


t. 

0. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

0 

1-16 

1*17 

M8 

M8 

M9 

1-20 

1-21 

1-22 

1-23 

1-24 

1 

1-25 

1-25 

1-26 

1-27 

1*28 

1*29 

1-30 

1-31 

1-32 

1-33 

2 

1-34 

1-35 

1-36 

1*37 

1-37 

1*38 

1-39 

1-40 

1-41 

1-42 

3 

1-43 

1*44 

1-45 

1-46 

1-47 

1-48 

1-49 

1-50 

1-51 

1-53 

4 

1-54 

1-55 

1-56 

1-57 

1-58 

1-59 

1-60 

1-61 

1*63 

1-64 

5 

1*65 

1-66 

1-67 

1-68 

1-69 

i'70 

1-72 

1-73 

1-74 

1-75 

6 

1-76 

1-78 

1*79 

1-80 

1-81 

1-82 

1-84 

1-85 

1-86 

1*87 

7 

1*89 

1-90 

1-91 

1-93 

1-94 

1*95 

1-96 

1-98 

1*99 

2-01 

8 

2-02 

2-03 

2-05 

2-06 

2-08 

2-09 

2*10 

2-12 

2-13 

2-15 

9 

2-16 

2-17 

2*19 

2-21 

2-22 

2-24 

2-25 

2*27 

2-28 

2*29 

10 

2-31 

2-32 

2*34 

2-35 

2*37 

2-39 

2-40 

2-42 

2-44 

2-45 

11 

2-47 

2-48 

2-50 

2*52 

2-53 

2-55 

2-57 

2-58 

2-60 

2-62 

12 

2-64 

2-65 

2-67 

2-69 

2-71 

2-72 

2-74 

2-76 

2-78 

2-80 

13 

2-81 

2-83 

2-85 

2-87 

2-89 

2*91 

2-93 

2-94 

2*96 

2-98 

14 

3-00 

3-02 

3-04 

3-06 

3-08 

3-10 

3-12 

3-14 

.3-16 

3-18 

15 

3-20 

3-22 

3-24 

3-26 

3-28 

3-31 

3-33 

3-35 

3-37 

3-39 

16 

3-41 

3-43 

3-46 

3-48 

3-50 

3-52 

3-54 

3-57 

3-59 

3-61 

17 

3-63 

3-66 

3-68 

3-71 

3-73 

3-75 

3-78 

3-80 

3-82 

3-85 

18 

3-87 

3-90 

3-92 

3-95 

3-97 

4-00 

4-02 

4-04 

4-07 

4*09 

19 

4*12 

4*15 

4-17 

4-20 

4-22 

4-25 

4-28 

4-30 

4-33 

4-36 

20 

4-38 

4-41 

4-44 

4-47 

4-49 

4*52 

4*55 

4-58 

4-6] 

4-63 

21 

4-66 

4-69 

4-72 

4-75 

4-78 

4-81 

4-84 

4-87 

4-90 

4-92 

22 

4-95 

4-99 

5-02 

5-05 

5-08 

5-11 

5-14 

5-17 

5-20 

5-23 

23 

5-26 

5-30 

5-33 

5-36 

5-39 

5-43 

5-46 

5-49 

5-52 

5-56 

24 

5-59 

5-62 

5-66 

5-69 

5-73 

5-76 

5-80 

5-83 

5-87 

5-90 

25 

5-93 

5-97 

6-01 

6-04 

6-08 

6-12 

6-15 

6-19 

6-22 

6-26 

26 

6-30 

6-34 

6-37 

6-41 

6-45 

6-49 

6-53 

6-56 

6-60 

6’64 

27 

6-68 

6-72 

6-75 

6-79 

6-83 

6-87 

6-91 

6-95 

6-99 

7*03 

28 

7*08 

7*12 

7*17 

7*21 

7-25 

7*29 

7*34 

7*38 

7*42 

7*46 

29 

7*51 

7*55 

7*59 

7*64 

7*68 

7*73 

7*77 

7*82 

7-86 

7*91 

30 

7*95 

8-00 

8-04 

8-09 

8'14 

8-18 

8-23 

8-28 

8-32 

8-37 

Expansion  of  Brass. 

The  mean  rate  of  expansion  of  cast  brass  from  0°  to  100°,  usually  assurnecfc 
0*0000187  of  its  length  at  0°  for  1°,  is  considerably  larger  than  the  rate  at  ordinary 
atmospheric  temperatures,  according  to  the  observations  of  Mr,  Sheepshanks, 
who  found  that  at  about  17°  the  coefficient  of  the  linear  expansion  of  cast  brass 
=0*00001722. 


* Annales  de  Chimie,  1845,  3““®  serie,  tome  xv.  p.  138. 


EXPANSION  OF  BRASS. 


787 


Table  III. 

Logarithms  of  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  brass  at  0°  to  its  density  at  f,  and 
their  arithmetical  complements,  assuming  the  coefficient  of  linear  expansion 
= 0-00001722. 


t. 

logBr. 

10— log  Br. 

t. 

log  Br. 

10— log  Br. 

0 

0-0000000 

10-0000000 

16 

0-0003588 

9-9996412 

1 

0-0000224 

9-9999776 

17 

0-0003812 

9-9996188 

2 

0-0000449 

9-9999551 

18 

0-0004037 

9-9995963 

3 

0-0000673 

9-9999327 

19 

0-0004261 

9-9995739 

4 

0-0000897 

9-9999103 

20 

0-0004485 

9-9995515 

o-i 

22 

5 

0-0001122 

9-9998878 

21 

0-0004709 

9-9995291 

0-2 

45 

6 

0-0001346 

9-9998654 

22 

0-0004933 

9-9995067 

0-3 

67 

7 

0-0001570 

9-9998430 

23 

0-0005158 

9-9994842 

0-4. 

90 

8 

0-0001795 

9-9998205 

24 

0-0005382 

9-9994618 

0-5 

1 1 2 

9 

0-0002019 

9-9997981 

25 

0-0005606 

9-9994394 

0-6 

*35 

10 

0-0002243 

9-9997757 

26 

0-0005830 

9-9994170 

0-7 

*57 

11 

0-0002467 

9-9997533 

27 

0-0006054 

9-9993946 

0-8 

*79 

12 

0-0002691 

9-9997309 

28 

0-0006277 

9-9993723 

o“9 

202 

13 

0-0002916 

9-9997084 

29 

0-0006502 

9-9993498 

14 

0-0003140 

9-9996860 

30 

0-0006726 

9-9993274 

15 

0-0003364 

9-9996636 

Expansion  of  Bronze. 

Table  IV. 

Logarithms  of  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  the  alloy  adopted  by  Mr.  Baily  for  tlie 
standard  bars  at  0°  to  its  density  at  f,  the  coefficient  of  its  linear  expansion  at 
17°  being  0-00001705,  according  to  the  observations  of  Mr.  Sheepshanks. 


t. 

log  Ba. 

10  — log  Ba. 

t. 

log  Ba. 

10— log  Ba. 

0 

0-0000000 

10-0000000 

16 

0-0003553 

9-9996447 

1 

0-0000222 

9-9999778 

17 

0-0003775 

9-9996225 

2 

0-0000444 

9-9999556 

18 

0'0003997 

9-9996003 

o-i 

22 

3 

0-0000666 

9-9999337 

19 

0-0004219 

9-9995781 

0-2 

44 

4 

0-0000888 

9-9999112 

20 

0-0004441 

9-9995559 

0-3 

67 

5 

0-0001111 

9-9998889 

21 

0-0004663 

9-9995337 

0-4 

89 

6 

0-0001333 

9-9998667 

22 

0-0004884 

9-9995116 

0-5 

1 1 1 

7 

0-0001555 

9-9998445 

23 

0-0005106 

9-9994894 

0-6 

*33 

8 

0-0001777 

9-9998223 

24 

0-0005328 

9-9994672 

0-7 

*55 

9 

0-0002009 

9-9997991 

25 

0-0005550 

9-9994450 

0-8 

*78 

10 

0-0002221 

9-9997779 

26 

0-0005772 

9-9994228 

0-9 

200 

11 

0-0002443 

9-9997557 

27 

0 0005994 

9-9994006 

12 

0-0002665 

9-9997335 

28 

0-0006216 

9-9993784 

13 

0-0002887 

9-9997113 

29 

0-0006437 

9-9993563 

14 

0-0003109 

9-9996891 

30 

0-0006659 

9-9993341 

15 

0-0003331 

9-9996669 

Expansion  of  Platinum. 

Schumacher  has  given  two  tables  of  the  expansion  of  platinum,  one  calculated  on 
the  supposition  that  the  coefficient  of  the  linear  expansion  is  0-00000900,  the  other 
with  the  coefficient  0-00000909,  as  if  in  doubt  which  deserved  the  preference.  Stein- 
HEiL  adopts  0-0000085655  in  the  reduction  of  the  weighings  of  the  platinum  kilo- 
gramme des  Archives.  In  comparing  the  standard  platinum  m^tre  with  a glass 
mkre  the  expansion  of  which  was  known,  at  temperatures,  however,  not  differing 
much  from  each  other,  he  obtained  0-00000905  for  the  coefficient  of  expansion. 

5 L 


MDCCCLVI. 


788  PROF.  W.  H.  31ILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

Table  V. 

Logarithms  of  the  ratio  of  the  density  of  platinum  at  0°  to  its  density  at  and  their 
arithmetical  complements,  assuming  the  coefficient  of  the  linear  expansion  of 
platinum  to  be  0"00000900. 


i. 

log  P. 

10-logP. 

t. 

logP. 

10-log  P. 

0 

0-0000000 

10-0000000 

16 

0-0001876 

9*9998124 

1 

0-0000117 

9*9999883 

17 

0-0001993 

9*9998007 

2 

0-0000235 

9-9999765 

18 

0-0002110 

9*9997880 

o-i 

12 

3 

0-0000352 

9*9999648 

19 

0-0002227 

9*9997773 

0-2 

23 

4 

0-0000469 

9*9999531 

20 

0-0002345 

9*9997655 

0*3 

35 

5 

0-0000586 

9*9999414 

21 

0-0002462 

9*9997538 

0*4 

47 

6 

0-0000704 

9*9999296 

22 

0-0002579 

9*9997421 

0*5 

59 

7 

0-0000821 

9*9999179 

23 

0-0002696 

9*9997304 

0*6 

70 

8 

0-0000938 

9*9999062 

24 

0-0002813 

9*9997187 

0-7 

82 

9 

0-0001055 

9*9998945 

25 

0-0002931 

9*9997069 

0*8 

94 

10 

0-0001173 

9*9998828 

26 

0-0003048 

9*9996952 

0-9 

105 

11 

0-0001290 

9*9998710 

27 

0-0003165 

9*9996835 

12 

0-0001407 

9*9998593 

28 

0*0003282 

9*9996718 

13 

0-0001524 

9*9998476 

29 

0-0003.399 

9*9996601 

14 

0-0001641 

9*9998359 

30 

0-0003516 

9*9996484 

15 

0-0001759 

9-9998241 

Expansion  of  Water. 

The  latest  and  best  observations  for  determining  the  expansion  of  water  by  heat, 
are  those  of  Stampfer*,  Despretz'^,  Pierre  tabulated  by  Frankenheim  §,  Kopp||, 
and  Plucker  and  Geissler^.  The  observations  of  Hallstrom  and  Muncke  are  not 
included  in  this  list,  on  account  of  certain  sources  of  error  pointed  out  by  Despretz. 

The  following  Table  exhibits  the  ratios  of  the  maximum  density  of  water  to  its 
density  at  f C,  according  to  the  different  observers  above  mentioned. 


t. 

Stampfer. 

Despretz. 

Pierre. 

Kopp. 

Plucker  and  Geissler. 

Min. 

1-000000 

1-0000000 

1-0000000 

1-000000 

1-000000 

5 

1-000012 

1-0000082 

1-0000091 

1-000006 

1-000013 

6 

1-000038 

1-0000309 

1-0000336 

1-000026 

1-000038 

7 

1-000079 

1-0000708 

1-0000716 

1-000061 

1-000079 

8 

1-000135 

1-0001216 

1-0001232 

1-000109 

1-000134 

9 

1-000205 

1-0001879 

1-0001882 

1-000171 

1-000204 

10 

1-000289 

1-0002684 

1-0002670 

1-000247 

1-000287 

11 

1-000387 

1-0003598 

1-0003580 

1-000336 

1-000381 

12 

1-000497 

1-0004723 

1-0004608 

1-000437 

1-000495 

13 

1-000620 

1-0005862 

1-0005745 

1-000552 

14 

1-000757 

1-0007146 

1-0007065 

1-000679 

15 

1-000906 

1-0008751 

1-0008463 

1-000818 

16 

1-001066 

1-0010215 

1-0009972 

1-000969 

17 

1-001239 

1-0012067 

1-0011592 

1-001133 

18 

1-001422 

1*00139 

1-0013320 

1-001307 

19 

1-001617 

1-00158 

1-0015153 

1*001493 

20 

1-001822 

1-00179 

1-0017128 

1-001690 

21 

1-002039 

1-00200 

1-0019185 

1-001899 

22 

1-002265 

1-00222 

1-0021296 

1-002118 

23 

1-002502 

1-00244 

1-0023498 

1-002348 

24 

1-002749 

1-00271 

1 0025836 

1-002588 

25 

1-003005 

1-00293 

1-0028263 

1-002838 

* Jalirbiicher  des  k.  k.  polytechnischen  Institutes  in  Wien,  B.  xvi.  S.  1. 
t Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  1839,  2™®  serie,  tome  Ixx.  p.  47. 

X Ibid.  1845,  3"’^  sme,  tome  xv.  p.  350.  § Poggendorff’s  Annalen,  B.  Ixxxvi.  S.  451. 

y Ibid.  B.  Ixxii.  S.  1.  ^ Ibid.  B.  Ixxxvi.  S.  238. 


EXPANSION  OF  WATER. 


789 


The  discordances  which  these  tables  exhibit  are  partly  due  to  errors  in  the  assumed 
expansions  of  brass,  glass  and  mercury,  on  which,  by  the  nature  of  the  experiments, 
the  value  of  the  expansion  of  water  is  made  to  depend. 

Stampfer  deduced  the  expansion  of  water  from  the  apparent  weight  of  a hollow 
cylinder  of  brass  suspended  in  water.  The  coefficient  of  the  linear  expansion  of  the 
brass  was  found  to  be  0*0000 192,  by  experiments  in  which  the  variations  of  tem- 
perature amounted  to  from  38°  to  62°  (the  absolute  temperatures  are  not  given).  At 
about  17°  Mr.  Sheepshanks  found  the  coefficient  of  expansion  of  cast  brass  equal  to 
0*00001722.  This  is  0*00000153  less  than  the  mean  coefficient  of  expansion  from  0° 
to  100°,  assuming  the  latter  to  be  0*00001875.  The  error  of  the  assumed  expan- 
sion of  the  cylinder  at  ordinary  atmospheric  temperatures  will  probably  be  not  quite 
so  large.  If  taken  equal  to  0*00000133,  the  correction  will  be  — 0*000004(^ — 4). 
Despretz  experimented  with  thermometers  filled  with  water.  The  expansion  of 
the  glass  was  inferred  from  the  apparent  expansion  of  mercury  in  the  thermometer 
from  0°  to  28°,  using  for  the  coefficient  of  the  expansion  of  mercury  0*00018018, 
the  value  obtained  by  Dulong  and  Petit.  But  the  expansion  of  mercury  from  0°  to 
28°  is  0*005032  according  to  Regnault*.  The  resulting  mean  coefficient  of  expan- 
sion is  0*00017971.  Hence  the  expansions  obtained  by  Despretz  must  be  dimi- 
nished by  0*00000047(^—4).  Pierre  and  Kopp,  who  employed  the  same  method, 
deduced  the  expansion  of  the  glass  from  the  apparent  expansion  of  the  mercury  from 
0°  to  100°,  assuming*  its  absolute  expansion  between  those  points  to  be  0*01 8018.  But 
the  absolute  expansion  of  mercury  from  0°  to  100°  is  0 018 153.  The  glass  used  by 
Pierre  contained  oxide  of  lead,  and  probably  had  very  nearly  the  same  rate  of 
expansion  at  both  high  and  low  temperatures.  It  is  not  known  how  far  the  glass 
used  by  Kopp  possessed  this  property.  Hence  these  expansions  require  the  addition 
of  0*00000135(^—4).  The  observations  of  Plucker  and  Geissler  extend  only  to 
12°.  They  were  made  with  a thermometric  apparatus  the  capacity  of  which  is  com- 
pensated by  mercury  so  as  to  be  invariable,  or  very  nearly  so.  Assuming  the  expan- 
sion of  mercury  from  0°  to  100°  to  be  0*018018,  the  cubic  expansion  of  the  glass 
fi'om  0°  to  100°,  deduced  from  the  apparent  expansion  of  mercury,  is  0*002818. 
But  according  to  Regnault'^  the  coefficient  of  the  cubic  expansion  of  a glass  free 
from  lead  was  0*00002761  from  0°  to  100°,  and  0*00002628  from  0°  to  10°.  It  is 
therefore  probable  that  the  coefficient  of  the  cubic  expansion  uf  the  glass  has  been 
taken  0*00000133  too  great.  Also  the  quantity  of  mercury  used  for  compensating 
the  expansion  of  the  glass  will  be  too  small  in  the  ratio  of  0*000179714,  the  rate  of 
expansion  of  mercury  from  0°  to  10°,  to  0*000181 53,  the  rate  of  expansion  of  mercury 
from  0°  to  100°.  Hence,  upon  the  whole,  the  expansion  must  be  diminished  by 
0*0000013(^-4). 

The  ratios  of  the  maximum  density  of  water  to  its  density  at  f,  according  to  the 
* Memoires  de  ITnstitut,  tome  xxi.  p.  328.  t p.  237. 

5 L 2 


790  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

observations  of  Stampfer,  Despretz,  Pierre,  Kopp,  and  Plucker  and  Geissler, 
respectively,  after  applying  the  corrections  above  indicated,  become, — 


t. 

S. 

D. 

P. 

K. 

P.  G. 

Min. 

1-000000 

1-000000 

1-000000 

1-000000 

1-000000 

5 

1-000008 

1-000008 

1-000010 

1-000007 

1-000013 

6 

1-000030 

1-000030 

1-000036 

1-000029 

1-000036 

7 

1-000067 

1-000069 

1-000076 

1-000065 

1-000076 

8 

1-000119 

1-000120 

1-000129 

1-000114 

1-000129 

9 

1-000185 

1-000186 

1-000195 

1-000178 

1-000198 

10 

1-000265 

1-000266 

1-000275 

1-000255 

1-000279 

11 

1-000359 

1-000357 

1-000368 

1-000345 

1-000372 

12 

1-000465 

1-000469 

1-000472 

1-000448 

1-000485 

13 

1-000584 

1-000582 

1-000587 

1-000564 

14 

1-000717 

1-000710 

1-000720 

1-000693 

15 

1-000862 

1-000870 

1-000861 

1-000833 

16 

1-001018 

1-001016 

1-001013 

1-000985 

17 

1-001187 

1-001201 

1-001177 

1-001151 

18 

1-001366 

1-001383 

1-001351 

1-001326 

19 

1-001557 

1-001573 

1-001536 

1-001513 

20 

1-001758 

1-001783 

1-001734 

1-001712 

21 

1-001971 

1-001992 

1-001942 

1-001922 

22 

1-002193 

1-002212 

1-002154 

1-002142 

23 

1-002426 

1-002431 

1-002376 

1-002374 

24 

1-002669 

1-002701 

1-002611 

1-002615 

25 

1-002921 

1-002920 

1-002855 

1-002866 

On  account  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  correction  to  be  applied  to  Stampfer’s 
observations,  and  the  small  range  of  those  of  Plucker  and  Geissler,  it  appears  best 
to  rely  exclusively  on  the  corrected  observations  of  Despretz,  Pierre  and  Kopp. 
In  the  details  of  the  observations,  I am  unable  to  detect  any  particular  that  warrants 
the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  any  one  in  preference  to  the  other  two.  The  mean 
of  all  three  will  probably  approximate  more  nearly  to  the  truth  than  any  one  of  them 
taken  by  itself.  Assuming  3°’945  C.  to  be  the  temperature  at  which  the  density  of 
water  is  a maximum,  in  accordance  with  the  result  obtained  by  Messrs.  Playfair 
and  Joule*,  the  logarithms  of  the  means,  to  seven  places  of  decimals  considered  as 
integers,  are  represented  with  sufficient  accuracy,  between  4°  and  25°,  by 

3272(#—3-945)"—0-215(^— 3-945)". 


Comparison  of  the  means  of  D,  P,  K with  the  formula. 


t. 

Means  of  D,  P,  K. 

Formula. 

■t. 

Means  of  D,  P,  K. 

Formula. 

3-945 

1-000000 

1-000000 

15 

1-000855 

1-000854 

5 

1-000008 

1-000008 

16 

1-001005 

1-001009 

6 

1-000032 

1-000031 

17 

1-001176 

1-001175 

7 

1-000070 

1-000069 

18 

1-001353 

1-001352 

8 

1-000121 

1-000121 

19 

1-001541 

1-001540 

9 

1-000186 

1-000186 

20 

1-001743 

1-001739 

10 

1-000265 

1-000265 

21 

1-001952 

1-001948 

11 

1-000356 

1-000357 

22 

1-002169 

1-002167 

12 

1-000463 

1-000460 

23 

1-002394 

1-002396 

13 

1-000578 

1-000581 

24 

1-002642 

1-002634 

14 

1-000708 

1-000712 

25 

1-002880 

1-002882 

* Memoirs  of  the  Chemical  Society,  vol.  hi.  p.  199. 


EXPANSION  OF  WATER. 


791 


Table  VI. 


Logarithms  of  the  ratios  of  the  maximum  density  of  water  to  its  density  at  for 
every  fifth  of  a centesimal  degree,  according  to  the  formula. 


t. 

logW,. 

Diff. 

t. 

log  W;. 

3-945 

0-0000000 

14-4 

0-0003.331 

4-2 

0-0000002 

5 

n 

14-6 

0-0003455 

4-4 

0-0000007 

14-8 

0-0003580 

4-6 

0-0000014 

/ 

10 

15-0 

O-OOO37O8 

4-8 

0-0000024 

I 2 

15-2 

0-0003838 

5-0 

0-0000036 

‘5 

18 

15-4 

0-0003970 

5-2 

0-0000051 

15-6 

0-0004104 

5-4 

0-0000069 

20 

2 2 

15-8 

0 0004240 

5-6 

0-0000089 

16-0 

0-0004378 

5-8 

0-0000111 

25 

28 

16-2 

0-0004518 

6-0 

0-0000136 

16-4 

0-0004660 

6-2 

0-0000164 

30 

33 

35 

37 

40 

A “7 

16-6 

0-0004804 

6-4 

0-0000194 

16-8 

0-0004950 

6-6 

0-0000227 

17-0 

0-0005098 

6-8 

0-0000262 

17-2 

0-0005248 

7-0 

0-0000299 

17*4 

0-0005400 

7-2 

0-0000339 

17-6 

0-0005554 

7-4 

0-0000381 

42 

17-8 

0 0005709 

7-6 

0-0000426 

45 

48 

50 

52 

18-0 

0-0005867 

7-8 

0-0000474 

18-2 

0-0006026 

8-0 

0-0000524 

18-4 

0-0006187 

8-2 

0-0000576 

18-6 

0-0006351 

8-4 

0-0000630 

54 

18-8 

0-0006516 

8-6 

0-0000687 

57 

fid 

19-0 

0-0006682 

8-8 

0-0000747 

f\  T 

19-2 

0-0006851 

9-0 

0-0000808 

yj  1 

64 

67 

68 

19*4 

0-0007022 

9-2 

0-0000872 

19-6 

0-0007194 

9-4 

0-0000939 

19-8 

0-0007368 

9-6 

0-0001007 

72 

20-0 

0-0007544 

9-8 

0-0001079 

20-2 

0-0007722 

10-0 

0-0001152 

73 

76 

78 

80 

82 

85 

87 

89 

20-4 

0-0007902 

10-2 

0-0001228 

20-6 

0-0008083 

10-4 

0-0001306 

20-8 

0-0008266 

10-6 

0-0001386 

21-0 

0-0008451 

10-8 

0-0001468 

21-2 

0-0008637 

11-0 

0-0001553 

21-4 

0 0008826 

11-2 

0-0001640 

21-6 

0-0009016 

11-4 

0-0001729 

21-8  - 

0-0009207 

11-6 

0-0001821 

92 

22-0 

0-0009400 

11-8 

0-0001915 

94 

96 

98 

22-2 

0-0009596 

12-0 

0-0002011 

22-4 

0-0009793 

12-2 

0-0002109 

22-6 

0-0009991 

12-4 

0-0002209 

loo 

103 

22-8 

0-0010191 

12-6 

0-0002312 

23-0 

0-0010393 

12-8 

0-0002416 

104 

107 

23-2 

0-0010596 

13-0 

0-0002523 

23-4 

0-0010801 

13-2 

0-0002632 

109 

23-6 

0-0011008 

13-4 

0-0002743 

III 

23-8 

0-0011216 

13-6 

0-0002857 

“4 

24-0 

0-0011426 

13-8 

0-0002972 

“5 

24-2 

0-0011637 

14-0 

0-0003089 

“7 

24-4 

0-0011850 

14-2 

0-0003209 

1 20 

24-6 

0-0012065 

14-4 

0-0003331 

122 

24- 8 

25- 0 

0-0012281 

0-0012498 

Diff. 

124 

125 
128 
130 
132 

134 

136 

138 

140 

142 

H4 

146 

148 

150 

152 

‘54 

‘55 

158 

‘59 

i6j 
164 
‘65 
166 
1 69 

‘7‘ 

‘72 

‘74 

176 

‘78 

180 

181 
183 
‘85 
1 86 

189 

190 
‘9‘ 
‘93 
196 

‘97 

198 

200 

202 

203 

205 

207 

208 
2 10 
21  I 

213 

2‘5 

216 

217 


Reduction  of  Weighings. 

If  the  weights  P and  Q appear  to  be  equal  when  compared  in  air, — 
weight  of  P—  weight  of  air  displaced  by  P= weight  of  Q—  weight  of  air  displaced  by  Q, 


792  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Let  t be  the  temperature  of  the  air  in  centesimal  degrees,  b its  pressure  in  millimetres 
of  mercury  at  0°,  v the  pressure  of  the  vapour  contained  in  it,  also  in  millimetres 
of  mercury,  0•378^’,  AP,  AQ  ratios  of  the  densities  of  P and  Q at  0°  to  the 

maximum  density  of  water  ; eP^,  eQ^  the  expansions  in  volume  of  P and  Q.  Then 
log  weight  in  grains  of  the  air  displaced  by  P 

= log  A 4-  log  A^-f-  log  (14-eP^)+log  weight  of  P in  grains  — log  AP. 

If  vP  be  taken  to  denote  the  volume  of  P at  0°,  the  unit  of  volume  being  the 
volume  of  a grain  of  water  at  its  maximum  density, 

log  vP=:  log  weight  of  P in  grains  — log  AP. 

^die  expression  for  the  weight  of  air  displaced  by  Q differs  from  the  above  only  in 
the  substitution  of  Q for  P. 

The  value  of  A is  deduced  froin  h by  means  of  Table  II.,  assuming  that  the  amount 
of  vapour  in  the  air  is  two-thirds  of  the  quantity  in  saturated  air.  Table  I.  gives  the 
second  term  for  the  expression  for  the  weight  of  the  air  displaced,  and  Tables  III., 
IV.,  V.  give  the  third  term  according  as  the  weight  is  of  brass,  bronze  or  platinum. 

Calculation  of  Densities. 

Let  P in  water  at  f appear  to  weigh  as  much  as  Q in  air.  Then  weight  of  water 
at  t°  displaced  by  P=  weight  of  P—  weight  of  Q4-  vveight  of  air  displaced  by  Q, 
log  ^;P=  log  weight  in  grains  of  the  water  displaced  by  P4- log  Wj— log  (1 -peP/), 
where  VP^  is  the  ratio  of  the  maximum  density  of  water  to  its  density  at  f obtained 
from  Table  VI.  Log  AP=  log  weight  of  P in  grains  — logt>P. 

An  approximate  value  of  vV  having  been  found  by  assuming  the  weight  of  P equal 
to  its  apparent  weight  in  air,  this  value  of  «;P  may  be  used  in  reducing  the  weight  of 
P,  and  thus  a more  accurate  value  of  vV  obtained,  by  means  of  which  a closer 
approximation  to  the  values  of  the  absolute  weight  of  P and  of  AP  may  be  found. 
This  process  is  to  be  repeated  when  greater  exactness  is  required. 

Densities  of  the  Troy  Pounds  constructed  in  1758. 

Though  it  appears  that  only  two  of  the  five  weights  with  which  U was  compared 
are  in  a state  of  unexceptionable  preservation,  and  the  number  of  trustworthy  com- 
parisons is  reduced  frotn  608  to  440,  these  are  amply  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of 
ascertaining  the  apparent  weight  of  U in  air  (^=65‘66  F,  h=29’75  inches).  But,  in 
order  to  find  the  absolute  weight  of  U,  or  indeed  its  apparent  weight  in  air  of  a 
density  different  from  that  which  it  has  when  ^=65  66,  l)  = 29'7^,  a knowledge  of  the 
volume  of  the  lost  standard  is  requisite.  It  is  not  probable  that  U was  ever  weighed 
in  water,  and  certainly  no  record  of  any  such  weigliing  is  known  to  exist.  There  is 
therefore  no  direct  method  of  finding  its  volume.  An  indirect  way  of  arriving  at  it 
was  suggested  to  Professor  Schumacher  by  an  examination  of  three  Parliamentary 
Reports,  the  first  presented  May  26,  1758,  the  second  April  11,  1759,  and  a third 
oidered  to  be  printed  March  2,  1824. 


DENSITIES  OF  THE  TROY  POUNDS  CONSTRUCTED  IN  1758. 


793 


It  appears  from  the  first  of  these  Reports  that  Mr.  Harris,  then  Assay-Master  of 
the  Mint,  presented  to  the  first  Committee  three  troy  pounds  made  under  his  direc- 
tion, one  of  which  was  the  lost  Imperial  Standard  Troy  Pound.  The  third  Report 
contains  the  evidence  of  Dr.  Kelly,  who  in  reply  to  the  query,  “What  was  effected 
with  regard  to  weights  and  measures  by  the  Committee  of  1758?”  answers,  “They 
ordered  three  several  troy  pounds  to  be  adjusted,  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Harris, 
the  then  Assay-Master  of  the  Mint.  One  of  these  was  placed  in  the  custody  of  the 
Clerk  of  the  House  of  Commons  ; another  was  left  vidth  Mr.  Harris,  and  is  now  in 
the  possession  of  Mr.  Bingley  ; and  the  third  was,  I understand,  delivered  to 
Mr.  Freeman,  weight-maker  to  the  Mint,  the  Exchequer  and  the  Bank  of  England, 
who  used  it  as  his  standard,  and  it  is  still  so  employed  by  his  successor  Mr.  Vandome.” 
The  same  page  contains  the  following  note : — This  weight  [Mr.  Bingley’s  pound]  was 
produced  to  the  Committee,  by  Mr.  Bingley",  who  said  it  had  formerly  belonged  to 
Mr.  Harris  when  he  held  the  situation  of  Assay-Master.  There  was  a memorandum 
on  the  lid  of  the  box  in  which  it  was  kept,  stating  that  Mr.  Harris  had  made  from 
it  the  pound  weight  which  was  placed  in  the  custody  of  the  Clerk  of  the  House  of 
Commons  by  direction  of  the  Committee  of  17^8,  and  which  is  commonly  called  the 
Parliamentary  Pound. 

Professor  Schumacher  then  observes  that  “ if  Dr.  Kelly’s  statements  be  exact,  as 
there  is  no  doubt  they  are,  and  Messrs.  Bingley’s  and  Vandome’s  pound  be  really  the 
two  remaining  weights  of  the  often  mentioned  three  which  Mr.  Harris  presented  to 
the  Committee  of  17o8,  we  can  still  either  determine,  with  the  highest  degree  of  pro- 
bability, the  specific  gravity  of  the  lost  Imperial  standard  troy  pound,  or  know  with 
certainty  that  all  hope  to  arrive  at  this  knowledge  is  lost.  It  will  be  only  requisite 
to  ascertain  with  the  greatest  care  the  specific  gravities  of  both  pounds,  the  one  in 
the  possession  of  Mr.  Bingley,  the  other  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Vandome.  If  the 
specific  gravity  of  both  is  found  the  same,  we  might  from  that  circumstance  draw  the 
highly  probable  conclusion,  that  the  three  single  pounds  of  y.  Fig.  i. 

Mr.  Harris,  according  to  my  hypothesis,  were  really  made  of 
the  same  identical  metal ; and  the  specific  gravities  of  the 
two  remaining  pounds  might  with  safety  be  considered  as  that 
of  the  lost  standard.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  two  remaining 
pounds  prove  to  be  of  different  specific  gravities,  the  hypo- 
thesis that  all  three  were  made  of  the  same  metal  is  evi- 
dently erroneous,  and  nothing  can  be  inferred  from  the  spe- 
cific gravity  of  either  of  the  two  remaining.” 

These  two  weights  were  found  to  be  still  in  existence. 

Mr.  Vandome  readily  consented  to  allow  the  troy  pound  in 
his  possession  to  be  experimented  upon  by  the  Committee. 

In  form  and  size  this  weight  very  closely  resembles  the 
figure  of  the  lost  standard  given  by  Captain  v.  Nehus.  The 


794  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


upright  stroke  of  the  5 in  the  type  appears  to  have  been  broken  off,  and  the  defect 
supplied  in  the  inscription  by  a cut  with  a chisel.  The  letters  SF  are  impressed  dia- 
metrically opposite  to  the  T.  This  weight,  as  well  as  the  others  of  the  same  date, 
is  of  one  piece  of  metal,  without  any  cavity  for  adjustment  by  the  addition  of  bits 
of  wire.  Mr.  Simms,  to  whom  it  was  shown,  pronounced  it  to  be  of  soft  gun-rnetal, 
as  hard  as  cast  brass,  but  not  so  hard  as  hammered  brass,  and,  for  such  an  alloy,  a 
very  bad  casting. 

As  the  balance  ordered  of  Mr.  Barrow  was  not  yet  ready,  Mr.  Vandome’s  troy 
pound  (V)  was  weighed  in  water  with  a balance  of  10^  inches  beam  by  Robinson. 
The  case  of  this  was  too  small  to  admit  a large  cylinder  of  water,  the  use  of  which  is 
considered  essential  to  the  accuracy  of  observations  of  this  kind,  and  some  unaccount- 
able discordances  in  the  weighings  of  V in  air  impair  the  probable  accuracy  of  the 
result.  For  these  reasons  the  result  alone  is  given,  omitting  the  details  of  the  obser- 
vations. By  a mean  of  six  weighings  in  water  in  July  and  August,  1843,  the  density 
of  V at  0°  C.  appeared  to  be  8*15105  times  the  maximum  density  of  water.  This 
value,  notwithstanding  its  uncertainty,  was  sufficiently  exact  for  a preliminary  com- 
parison of  the  densities  of  the  weights  made  in  1758.  The  accurate  determination  of 
the  density  of  V and  of  the  other  weights  of  the  same  date  presents  considerable 
difficulty;  for  the  pores  in  the  metal  are  so  deep,  that  the  complete  expulsion  of 
the  air  contained  in  them  is  very  questionable,  even  after  prolonged  immersion  in 
boiling  water. 

The  following  observations  were  made  with  Barrow’s  balance  under  circumstances 
more  favourable  to  accuracy.  The  glass  jar  containing  the  distilled  water  in  which 
V was  weighed,  was  6*7  inches  in  diameter  and  6*5  inches  deep.  V was  suspended, 
from  the  pan  of  the  balance,  by  a hook  attached  to  a fine  copper  wire,  7’5  inches 
of  which  weighed  about  one  grain.  In  order  to  expel  the  air  adhering  in  bubbles 
to  the  weight,  or  contained  in  the  cavities  in  the  metal,  it  was  placed,  with  the  fine 
wire  attached  to  it,  in  water  in  a bell-shaped  jar  of  thin  glass,  just  large  enough  to 
contain  the  weight.  The  jar  was  suspended  over  the  flame  of  a spirit-lamp  by  a stout 
wire  bent  at  its  lower  end  into  a ring  into  which  the  jar  descended  to  its  rim,  and  the 
water  allowed  to  boil  till  it  was  supposed  that  the  air  was  entirely  expelled.  The 
small  jar  containing  the  weight  was  then  immersed  in  the  water  which  very  nearly 
filled  the  large  jar,  the  suspending  wire  hooked  on  to  the  under  side  of  the  scale  pan, 
and  the  small  jar  lowered  till  the  weight  hung  clear  of  it,  and  then  removed.  The 
transfer  of  the  weight  from  the  small  jar  to  the  large  one  was  thus  effected  without 
taking  it  out  of  the  water.  The  counterpoise  was  placed  in  the  left-hand  pan  of  the 
balance;  V was  suspended  in  water  from  the  right-hand  pan.  Small  weights  were 
placed  in  the  right-hand  pan  till  equilibrium  was  produced,  and  the  readings  of  the 
scale  observed.  V was  then  removed,  leaving  the  hook  suspended  in  water,  and  a 
volume  of  water  equal  to  that  ofV  added  to  the  water  in  the  jar  ; the  weights  A,  B,  C,  D, 
&c.  were  placed  in  the  right-hand  pan  till  equilibrium  was  again  produced,  and  the 


DENSITIES  OF  THE  TROY  POUNDS  CONSTRUCTED  IN  1758. 


795 


readings  of  the  scale  observed.  The  thermometer  B was  suspended  with  its  bulb 
in  a horizontal  plane  through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  V.  The  thermometer  C was 
in  the  balance  case.  F denotes  the  reading  of  Ernst’s  barometer,  E that  of  the 
attached  thermometer.  100  parts  of  the  micrometer  scale  =0’2  grain  nearly,  when 
V is  suspended  in  water,  or  when  the  hook  alone  is  suspended  in  water,  and  the 
right-hand  pan  contains  5053*3  grains. 


Observations  for  finding  the  density  of  V. 


184.5,  July  7. 


Weighing  of  V in  air. 


100  parts= 0*3302  grain. 
S=A-|-B  + C + D + F. 


pt. 


gr- 


pt. 


V + 0*31 + XiiS  + Y-|- 0*50 

V+ 0*31 + Y£:S  + X + 0*20 

+ 0*25 

+ 0*30 

— 0*50 

+ 0*40 

0*00 

+ 0*65 

+ 0*20 

+ 1*00 

— 0*20 

+ 0*80 

-0*10 

+ 1*15 

0*00 

+ 0*75 

+ 0*20 

+ 0*80 

+ 0*20 

+ 0-70 

+ 0*055 

+ 0*675 

gr- 

gr- 

V + 0*31£!:A  + B + C + D + F+0*0012. 

Vii5759*l60  grains  of  platinum  in 

air  (<=16*13,  ^»=76l*27). 

Weighing  of  V in  water. 


1845,  April  2. 

V and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

0*14 

18*0 

8*5 

8 

765*8 

8*5 

0*14 

20*0 

• 

0*14 

20*0 

0*14 

19-6 

0*18 

26*5 

0*10 

12*3 

8*45 

0*14 

20*1 

0*14 

20*0 

0*14 

20*3 

0*14 

20*2 

8^ 

8 

7^ 

8*5 

0*140 

19*7 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gp,  Scal6* 

A + B + C + D + L + (8)  + (4)  + (1)  + 0*80  20-0 

0*80  18*5 

0*80  22*5 

0-80  19'2 

0*80  19*4 

0*80  19*6 

0*80  20*2 


0*800  19-9 


V in  water  (B=8*47)  — A-t-B  + C-l-D  + L + (8)-|-(4)  + (l)-|-0*7396  in  air  (C — 8,  F — 765*8,  E — 8*5). 


5 M 


MDCCCLVI. 


796  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


May  2. 

V and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C.  F. 

E. 

gr. 

Scale. 

0-24 

22-8 

0-20 

20-4 

10-5 

11-1  758-3 

11-5 

0-20 

18-0 

0-24 

19-1 

0-24 

25-0 

0-20 

21-0 

0-20 

21-5 

0-16 

12-0 

, 0-20 

23-7 

0-16 

17-0 

0-20 

22-5 

10-55 

0-16 

14-5 

10-52 

11*1  758-3 

11-5 

0-200 

19-81 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

A + B + C + D + N + (8)  + (4)  + (1)  + 0-92 

19-2 

-t-0-92 

20-0 

-f-0-92 

20-0 

0-920 

19-7 

V in  water  (B=  10-52) 

£tA  + B + C + D + N+(8)  + (4)  + (l)  + 0-7202  in  air  (C=ll-1,  F=: 

758-3,  E: 

June  28. 

V and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C.  F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

14-45 

1-08 

20-6 

1-08 

20-7 

14-5 

1-08 

22-0 

14-5 

15-7 

1-07 

19-0 

744-5 

16 

1-08 

22-3 

14-6 

15-85 

1-07 

20-0 

1-07 

20-3 

1-07 

20-4 

14-51 

15-77  744-5 

16 

1-075 

20-66 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

A + B + C + D + N + (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-88 

22-8 

0-87 

19-7 

0-87 

19-5 

0-88 

22-5 

0-87 

19-8 

0-87 

19-2 

0-88 

24-2 

0-87 

20-0 

0-8737 

2096 

June  28. 

V and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C.  F. 

E. 

gT. 

Scale. 

14-75 

15-7 

1-08 

27-6 

1-06 

21-8 

1-04 

14-5 

747-9 

15-7 

1-06 

22-0 

1-05 

18-0 

1-06 

21-5 

14-75 

1-05 

17-5 

1-06 

21-1 

1-05 

19-2 

14-76 

15-7  747-9 

15-7 

1-0567 

20-35 

' in  water  (B=  14-63):ii 

A + B + C + D + N + (8)  + (4)4-(2). 

B'- 

— (l)-f  0-807  in  air  (C=  15-73,  F 

= 746-2, 

DENSITIES  OF  THE  TROY  POUNDS  CONSTRUCTED  IN  1758. 


797 


July  1.  V and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

14-7 

750-8 

15-2 

1-08 

19-5 

1-08 

19-4 

14-35 

1-08 

20-2 

1-08 

20-5 

1-08 

20-3 

1-08 

20-8 

14-4 

1-08 

21-1 

14-37 

14-7 

750-8 

15-2 

1-080 

20-3 

Hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 

gr.  Scale. 

A-f.B-l-C-hD  + N-p(8)-|-(4)-|-(2)-t-0'90  22-0 

0-87  19-5 

0-88  20-9 

0-87  19*7 

0-87  19-8 

0-87  18-7 

0-88  20-5 

0-87  18*1 

0-88  20-5 

0-88  20-6 


0-877  20-03 


V and  hook  in 

water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

14-7 

1-08 

18-8 

16 

750-8 

16-3 

1-09 

19-6 

1-09 

20-1 

14-75 

1-09 

21-6 

1-08 

20-3 

14-85 

1-08 

20-3 

1-08 

20-8 

1-07 

19-9 

1-07 

20-5 

14-95 

1-07 

21-5 

14-83 

16 

750-8 

16-3 

1-080 

20-34 

gr- 

Vin  water  (B=14-6)iiA-hB  + C-fD  + N + (8)  + (4)-H(2)-(l)-P  0-798  in  air(C  = 15-35,  F=750-8,  E = 13-73). 


V and  hook  in 

water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gi'- 

Scale. 

14-3 

14-6 

759-2 

16-1 

1-07 

18-2 

1-08 

19-2 

14-3 

1-08 

20-4 

1-07 

19-1 

1-08 

19-8 

1-08 

20-0 

14-4 

1-08 

20-3 

1-08 

20-8 

14-4 

15-3 

759-4 

15-7 

1-08 

21-1 

14-35 

14-95 

759-3 

15-4 

1-0778 

19-9 

5 M 2 


798  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


Scale. 

A + B -t- C + D + N -1- (8)  + (4) -f- (2)  + 0-88 

23-1 

0-88 

22-2 

0-87 

20-1 

0-87 

20-0 

0-87 

19*6 

0-87 

20-2 

0-87 

19-7 

0-87 

18-4 

0-87 

18-0 

0-88 

22-0 

0-87 

18-8 

0-8727 

20-19 

V and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

14-6 

15-6 

759*5 

15-8 

1-05 

19-9 

1-05 

19-9 

1-05 

20-6 

1-05 

20-0 

14-65 

1-05 

20-0 

1-05 

19-8 

1-05 

20-0 

14-65 

15-6 

759-6 

15-9 

1-05 

20-7 

14-63 

15-6 

759-55 

15-85 

1-050 

20-1 

Vinvvater(B=14-49)^A  + B-|-C  + D-l-N-l-(8)-f(4)-|-(2)-(l)+?*808in  alr(C=15-27,  F=759-42,  E=  15-62). 


t.  grs.  of  platinum. 

t. 

h. 

V in  water.. 

. 8-49  — 5063-194  in  air 

7-99 

765-19 

V in  water.. 

.1 0-49  5053-257  in  air 

11-09 

757-34 

V in  water.. 

.14-58  £1:5053-344  in  air 

15-76 

744-73 

V in  water.. 

.14-55  £1:5053-335  in  air 

15-38 

749-33 

V in  water.. 

..  14-44£b5053-345  in  air 

15-30 

757-95 

Where  t is  the  temperature  in  centesimal  degrees,  h the  height  of  the  mercury  in 
the  barometer  in  millimetres  corrected  and  reduced  to  0°C. 

For  the  platinum  of  which  the  weights,  A,  B,  C,  &c.  are  made  log  A=  1*32564. 
The  resulting  values  of  vSf , AV  and  log  AV  are, — 


»v. 

AV. 

log  AV. 

706-580 

8-1515 

0-911238 

706-555 

8-1518 

0-911253 

706-661 

8-1505 

0-91H88 

706-669 

8-1505 

0-911183 

706-656 

8-1506 

0-911191 

Means,  giving  to  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth  results  twice  the  weight  of  the  first 
and  second,  because  each  of  these  was  deduced  from  two  separate  series  of  weighings 
in  water,  while  the  first  and  second  were  deduced  each  from  one  series  of  weighings 
in  water, — 

vS . AV.  log  AV. 

706-638  8-15084  0-911202 

In  air  (#=  16-13,  6 = 761*27).  V:iiA-fB  + C + D+F— 0*3088 gr.  But 
A + B + C+D  + F-T-0*00l7gr.  Therefore  V ^T— 0*3105  gr. 


DENSITIES  OF  THE  TROY  POUNDS  CONSTRUCTED  IN  1758. 


799 


gr.  gr.  gr. 

V displaces  0‘8616.  and  T— O’SIO  displaces  0'33 17  of  air  (^=16'13,  &=761-27). 
Hence  V=T+0'2194  grain. 

gr.  gr.  gr. 

V displaces  0*8468,  and  T— 0*310  displaces  0*3261  of  air  (#=18*7,  ^=755*64). 

Hence,  in  air  (#=18*7,  &=755*64),  0*3013  gr.  But  TiO:  U — 0*0074  gr. 

Therefore  V^^U— 0*3087 grain  in  air  (#=18*7,  ^=7^5*64). 

Mr.  Bingley  had  in  his  possession  two  troy  pounds  of  the  same  date.  One  of 
these  (O)  is  said  to  be  the  original  weight  from  which  the  standard  was  made  for  the 
House  of  Commons  in  1758.  It  is  distinguished  by  a small  dot  under  the  T,  and 
the  imperfection  in  the  type  of  the  5 is  remedied  by  a cut  with  a chisel  as  in  V. 
This  weight  has  since  (in  1851)  been  purchased  by  the  Committee.  The  other  (M), 
in  which  the  5 is  left  imperfect,  and  which  has  the  mark  @ © impressed  on  its  under 
surface,  has  since  been  presented  to  the  Mint  by  its  former  possessor. 


O.  Fig.  2.  M.  Fig.. 3. 


Mr.  Bingley  was  unwilling  to  permit  either  of  these  troy  pounds  to  be  weighed  in 
water ; Messrs.  Troughton  and  Simms  were  therefore  commissioned  to  construct  an 
instrument  on  the  principle  of  the  Stereometer  invented  by  M.  Say  for  the  purpose 
of  determining  the  specific  gravity  of  gunpowder*,  but  with  some  improvements 
which  I had  described  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine  for  July  to  December,  1834, 
vol.  V.  p.  203.  It  consists  of  two  glass  tubes,  PQ,  DB  (fig.  4),  of  equal  diameter, 
cemented  into  cylindrical  cavities  communicating  with  each  other  at  their  lower 
ends,  in  an  oblong  piece  of  iron  G.  In  the  axes  of  the  two  cavities  are  holes  con- 
centric with  the  tubes.  The  hole  under  PQ  is  closed  by  a screw  K,  into  the  other  is 
screwed  an  iron  stopcock  L.  The  upper  end  of  the  tubePQ  is  cemented  into  an  iron 
cylinder  N carrying  a ring  which  surrounds  the  upper  end  of  the  tube  DB.  The 
inside  of  the  cylinder  is  tapped  to  receive  the  screw  of  the  stopcock,  and  the  outside 
tapped  so  as  to  screw  into  the  under  end  of  a cup  F,  having  its  rim  ground  plane, 

* Annales  de  Chimie,  1797,  tome  xxiii.  p.  1. 


800  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


and  capable  of  being  closed  so  as  to  be  air-tight  by  a plate  of  glass  E, 
smeared  with  lard.  The  tube  PQ  is  graduated  by  lines  traced  upon  the 
glass.  The  original  tube,  graduated  in  inches,  having  been  broken,  was 
replaced  by  a tube  graduated  in  centimetres  by  M.  Bunten.  The  sub- 
division is  effected  by  an  ivory  scale  S,  of  ten  millimetres  divided  on  the 
side  next  to  the  glass  tube,  to  every  fifth  of  a millimetre,  attached  to  a 
rectangular  rod  of  deal  carrying  frames  on  which  filaments  of  silk  TU, 
VW  are  stretched,  and  slips  of  brass  having  eye-holes  so  adjusted  that 
the  planes  through  the  threads  and  the  corresponding  eye-holes  may  be 
perpendicular  to  the  rod,  the  tubes  being  between  the  eye-holes  and  the 
Fig.  5.  threads,  as  shown  in  the  section  fig.  5.  A weak  brass  spring 
attached  to  the  rod  keeps  it  in  contact  with  the  tubes,  with 
the  silk  threads  and  ivory  scale  close  to  that  part  of  PQ 
which  is  graduated,  so  that  it  can  be  easily  moved  up  and 
down,  and  is  retained  in  the  position  in  which  it  is  left  by 
the  pressure  of  the  spring.  The  support  of  the  stereometer 
is  adjusted  by  three  foot  screws  till  a thread  of  unspun  silk  by  which  a 
small  weight  is  suspended,  hangs  coinciding  with  the  axis  of  the  tube  DB. 
Within  E is  a cup  in  which  is  placed  the  solid  the  volume  of  which  is 
sought.  Mercury  having  been  poured  into  D till  its  surface  rises  to  P, 
the  first  division  of  the  graduation,  the  mouth  of  the  cup  is  closed  so 
as  to  be  air-tight  by  the  plate  of  glass.  The  stopcock  is  then  opened 
and  the  mercury  allowed  to  escape  till  the  difference  of  the  altitude  of 
the  mercury  in  the  two  tubes  is  nearly  equal  to  half  the  height  of  the 
mercury  in  the  barometer  at  the  time  of  the  observation.  Let  the  point 
M of  the  graduation  mark  the  height  of  the  mercury  in  PQ,  and  C the 
height  of  the  mercury  in  DB.  Let  u be  the  volume  of  the  air  in  the  cup 
F before  the  solid  was  placed  in  it ; the  volume  of  the  solid ; b the 
altitude  of  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  reduced  to  the  temperature  of 
the  mercury  in  PQ  and  BD.  Then 

5-MC 


Fig.  4. 


U — V- 


MC 


vol.  PM. 


3 


13 


In  order  to  find  the  capacity  of  the  portion  of  the  tube  included  between 
P and  any  point  M in  the  graduation,  the  cup  F is  taken  off’  and  the 
stopcock  L screwed  into  the  iron  collar  N.  The  screw  K is  taken  out, 
and  the  tubes  placed  vertical  in  an  inverted  position.  The  tube  PQ  is 
then  filled  up  to  about  50  cm  with  mercury  poured  through  a slender 
glass  tube  inserted  into  the  opening  at  K.  This  precaution  is  necessary 
in  order  to  prevent  the  formation  of  air-bubbles  on  the  inner  surface  of 
the  tube,  which  would  interfere  with  the  correct  estimation  of  the 
capacity  of  the  tube.  The  stopcock  is  then  opened,  and  the  mercury  contained  in  a 


DENSITIES  OF  THE  TROY  POUNDS  CONSTRUCTED  IN  1758. 


801 


known  number  of  divisions  of  the  tube  suffered  to  run  into  a light  glass  jar  in  which 
it  is  weighed.  This  process  is  to  be  repeated  till  the  upper  end  of  the  column  of 
mercury  descends  to  the  point  P. 

The  stereometer  was  mounted  in  a room  in  Mr.  Bingley’s  house  at  the  Mint, 
September  12,  1843,  and  a few  comparisons  made  of  the  volumes  of  V,  O,  M.  The 
results,  however,  in  consequence  of  the  unequal  heating  of  different  parts  of  the 
stereometer  in  putting  it  together,  did  not  prove  satisfactory.  On  the  16th,  the 
volumes  of  O,  M and  C,  a hollow  cylinder  of  brass,  were  compared  with  better 
success.  The  unit  of  volume  being  the  volume  of  a grain  of  water  at  its  maximum 
density,  these  observations  gave  ?;0+5'3=t;M=vC— 0'6. 

By  observations  made  August  19,  1843,  C:2:600001  grains  of  brass  +78'832 
grains  of  platinum  in  air  (^=24‘23,  & = 756'78).  C in  water  (^=  1 8T)  :C!:  — 9’707 
grains  of  platinum.  Hence  C in  air  (^=24‘23,  h=756‘78)  in  water  (^=18T) 
+ 600’001  grains  of  brass  +88'539  grains  of  platinum  in  air  (^=24‘23,  b=756'7S). 
The  weights  displace  0*092  grain  of  air;  C displaces  0*810  grain  of  air.  Hence  C 
displaces  689*258  grains  of  water  at  18*1,  and  the  volume  of  C at  0°  is  equal  to  the 
volume  of  689*562  grains  of  water  at  its  maximum  density.  Hence  wO  = 683*66, 
^;M  = 688*96.  By  weighing  in  air  and  in  water  it  was  found  that  wV=706*34.  The 
large  differences  between  these  numbers  show  that  the  volume  of  the  lost  standard 
cannot  be  inferred  with  any  high  degree  of  probability  from  a comparison  of  the 
volumes  of  the  three  remaining  pounds. 

The  only  resource  now  remaining  was  indicated  by  Professor  Schumacher’s 
remarks  on  the  figure  of  the  lost  troy  pound: — ‘'As  soon  as  the  Imperial  standard 
troy  pound  was  brought  to  Somerset  House,  Captain  Nehus’s  first  care  was  to  make 
an  accurate  drawing  of  its  shape  and  marks,  measuring  all  its  dimensions  with  the 
greatest  care.  The  annexed  drawing  represents  this  pound  in  its  actual  dimensions, 
and  is  now,  since  the  original  has  been  destroyed  by  the  calamitous  fire  that  con- 


U. 


Fig.  6. 


sumed  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament  in  1834,  the  only  thing 
remaining  which  can  preserve  an  idea  of  it.”  An  applica- 
tion was  made  to  Professor  Schumacher  for  the  original 
drawing,  if  still  in  existence,  or  for  any  information  that 
would  show  how  far  the  accuracy  of  the  wood  engraving 
might  be  depended  upon.  In  his  reply,  dated  October  3, 

1843,  he  wrote  as  follows: — “ The  dimensions  of  the  lost 
standard  were  only  taken  with  a bow-legged  compass  in 
order  to  give  an  accurate  drawing  of  the  standard  pound, 
and  in  this  respect  I called  them  in  my  papers  accurate,  but 
they  certainly  are  not  sufficient  to  give  a near  approxima- 
tion of  its  volume.  I find  that  he  (Captain  v.  Nehus)  has 
immediately  transferred  the  taken  dimensions  to  paper. 

This  paper,  with  the  original  drawing,  has  served  to  give 
the  woodcut  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions,  but  to  my  best  recollection  Mr.  Baily 


802  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


has  returned  it,  though  I cannot  find  it  amongst  rny  papers.  Even  if  you  had 
Nehus’s  original  drawing  you  would  not  be  able  to  find  the  volume,  the  only  height 
he  has  measured  being  that  of  the  whole  pound.  The  heights  of  the  points  a,  b,  c are 
only  found  by  holding  a scale  in  a vertical  position  near  the  pound.  The  diameters 
on  the  contrary  are  measured.” 

By  a comparison  of  the  figure  of  U with  a profile  of  V traced  mechanically,  and 
with  careful  measurements  of  its  axis  and  diameters,  the  axis  and  the  extreme 
diameters  of  the  knob  and  cylindrical  portion  of  U appear  to  be  a very  little 
greater  than  the  corresponding  dimensions  of  V,  the  differences  in  other  parts  being 
exactly  where  we  might  expect  the  drawing  to  be  inaccurate  from  the  manner  in 
which  it  was  made.  (In  the  figures  of  the  weights  V,  O,  M,  B,  the  dotted  line  is 
the  profile  of  U.)  The  diameters  and  axis  of  U being  measured  with  a bow-legged 
compass,  were  more  likely  to  err  in  excess  than  in  defect.  Making  every  allowance 
for  this,  it  did  not  seem  possible,  on  looking  at  the  profiles  of  U and  V,  to  suppose 
that  the  volume  of  U was  less  than  that  of  V.  But  the  volume  of  O,  as  well  as  that 
of  M,  being  less  than  that  of  V,  it  appeared  that  of  the  three  weights  V,  O,  M, 
V approximated  most  nearly  to  U in  volume.  As  the  existing  data  were  utterly 
insufficient  to  determine  how  much,  if  at  all,  U exceeded  V in  volume,  it  appeared 
safest  to  assume  the  volumes  of  U and  V to  have  been  equal.  This  course  was 
recommended  also  by  Professor  Schumacher  in  his  letter  of  October  3,  1843. 

Long  after  this  resolution  had  been  taken  and  acted  upon,  and  the  new  standard 
constructed  in  accordance  therewith, the  troy  pound  O came  by  purchase  into  the  hands 
of  the  Committee.  The  surface  of  O was  studded  with  numerous  small  pores,  show- 
ing it  to  be  an  extremely  bad  casting.  It  was  only  after  repeatedly  boiling  the  water 
in  which  it  was  suspended  that  the  air-bubbles  which  attached  themselves  to  the  pores 
ceased  to  appear.  It  was  weighed  in  water  April  2,  and  then  left  to  dry  till  April  28, 
when  on  being  weighed  in  air  it  appeared  to  be  about  16  grains  too  heavy.  By  heat- 
ing it  to  above  the  boiling-point,  the  water  that  had  been  retained  in  the  cavities  was 
expelled,  and  the  weight  reduced  to  5759‘83  grains.  Afterwards,  by  placing  it  in  a 
jar  containing  water,  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  and  alternately  exhausting 
the  receiver  and  boiling  the  water,  the  cavities  communicating  with  the  surface  were 
found  capable  of  containing  21 ’37  grains  of  water.  This  explains  the  seeming  para- 
dox, that  although  the  linear  dimensions  of  O are  hardly  less  than  those  of  V,  and 
sensibly  greater  than  those  of  M and  B,  its  specific  gravity  is  considerably  greater 
than  that  of  V,  and  slightly  exceeds  that  of  either  M or  B. 

Of  the  weights  used  in  the  following  weighings,  those  marked  (100),  (200),  (400) ..., 
of  nearly  100,  200,  400  ...  grains  respectively,  are  of  bronze,  for  which  log  A=0'92260. 
The  smaller  weights  are  of  platinum.  By  a mean  of  four  observations,  April  30,  1853, 

0^(3200)-l-(1600)-|-(800)-f-(100)-l-(32)  + (16)-f (8)-l-(4)  — 0T360  grain  in  air 
(D=12,  C=12-2,  F=756-4,  E=ll-8). 

0 :2: 5699’9704  grains  of  bronze  -f  59  8607  grains  of  platinum  in  air  (^=12‘1, 
/;  = 7b5’4). 


DENSITIES  OF  THE  TROY  POUNDS  CONSTRUCTED  IN  1758. 


803 


By  one  observation,  April  2,  1853,  O in  water  (B=  10*4)  (3200) + (1600) + (200) 

(bronze)  + (64)  + (16)  + (2)  + (l)  — (8)  — 0'075  grain  (platinum)  in  air  (D=10'9, 
C=ll,  F=7547,  E=10-8). 

O in  water  (^=10*16)  :ii4999‘9640  grains  of  bronze  + 747759  grains  of  platinum 
in  air  (^=  10-96,  Z>=753-82). 

Hence  ?;0=685-665,  A0=8-40036,  0 = 5759*8333  grains. 

The  weight  of  O is  given  more  accurately  by  the  following  observations  : — 

July  15,  1853.  D=  17-55,  C=17-6,  F=747-55,  E=17-6.  100  parts=0-3916  grain. 


Left-hand. 

Right-hand. 

Scale. 

Left-hand. 

Right-hand. 

Scale. 

gr. 

O + 0-1113  + X 

T + Y 

27*15 

T + Y 

gr. 

O + 0*1113  + X 

16*66 

0 + 0*13  +X 

T + Y 

21*06 

T + Y 

0 + 0*13  +X 

20*50 

0 + 0*13  +X 

T + Y 

21*15 

T + Y 

0 + 0*13  +X 

20*97 

0 + 0*13  +Y 

T+X 

21*70 

T + X 

0 + 0*13  +Y 

19*79 

0 + 0*13  +Y 

T + X 

22*04 

T + X 

0 + 0*13  +Y 

20*46 

0 + 0*13  +Y 

T+X 

21*41 

T + X 

0 + 0*13  +Y 

• 20*59 

OliiT— 0-13196  grain  in  air  (^=17-61,  6=745*87). 

O displaces  0*8146  grain,  T— 0*132  grain  displaces  0*3231  grain  of  air  (#=  17*61, 
6=745*87).  Hence  O=T+0*3595  grain. 

In  air  (^=18*7,  6=755*64),  O £2=  T— 0*1363  gr.,  and  0*0074  gr.  Therefore 

O^U— 0*1437  gr. 

By  the  good  offices  of  Sir  J.  F.  W.  Herschel,  at  that  time  Master  of  the  Mint,  per- 
mission was  obtained  from  the  Treasury  to  weigh  M in  air,  and  to  repeat  the  obser- 
vations with  the  stereometer  for  finding  its  volume  with  more  care  and  more  leisurely 
than  on  the  former  occasion,  when  they  were  made  in  Mr.  Bingley’s  house. 

By  three  series  of  comparisons  made  with  the  stereometer. 

May  11,  12,  1855  . . . ^;M=^;0+4*33=690*00 


September  16,  1843 


r^;M=^;C  — 0*6  =688*96 
UM=t;0+5*3  =690*97 


According  to  a mean  of  all  three  results,  the  volume  of  M at  0°  is  equal  to  the 
volume  of  689*98  grains  of  water  at  its  maximum  density. 


Comparison  of  M with  T,  July  14,  1853. 


D=18*2, 

C=18*3,  F 

=743*2,  E= 

= 17*7.  100  parts=0*3916 

grain. 

Left-hand. 

Right-hand. 

Scale. 

Left-hand. 

Right-hand. 

Scale. 

M + 0^*06 + Y 

T + X 

15*30 

T+X 

M + 0^()6  + Y 

24*55 

M + 0*04  + Y 

T + X 

20*02 

T + X 

M + 0*04  + Y 

18*80 

M + 0*04  + Y 

T + X 

20*31 

T + X 

M + 0*04  + Y 

18*97 

M + 0*04  + X 

T + Y 

19*05 

T+Y 

M+0*04  + X 

17*59 

M + 0*04  + X 

T + Y 

18*12 

T+Y 

M + 0*04  + X 

18*44 

M + 0*04  + X 

T + Y 

18*94 

T+Y 

M + 0*04  + X 

19*01 

M :i2:T  — 0*0415  grain  in  air  (^=  18*28,  6=741*52). 

5 N 


MDCCCLVI. 


804  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


M displaces  0’81284  grain,  T — 0’0415  grain  displaces  0’32045  grain  of  air 
(^=18'28,  6 = 741'52).  Hence  M=T4-0‘4509  grain.  AM  = 8‘3491. 

In  air(^=187,  /;=755-64),  M iiT— 0-04012  gr.  But  U— 0-0074  gr.  There- 
fore M U - 0*0475  gr. 

In  a letter  from  William  Miller,  Esq.,  of  the  Bank  of  B-  Fig.  7. 
England,  dated  August  22,  1855,  I was  apprised  of  the 
existence  at  the  Bank  of  a fourth  troy  pound  of  1758,  and 
soon  afterwards  received  it  from  him  with  permission  to 
weigh  it  in  air  and  also  in  water.  This  weight  (B)  is  a bad 
casting,  though  much  better  than  O.  The  upright  stroke  of 
the  5 is  left  incomplete.  The  under  surface  is  slightly  con- 
cave, the  depth  of  the  concavity  being  about  0*01  inch. 

By  one  comparison,  October  6,  1855,  B :ii:  (3200)4“  (1600) 

+ (800)  4-  (100)  (bronze)  -f  (32)  + (16)  4-  (8)  4-  (4)  4-  0*271 
grain  (platinum)  in  air  (C=16‘0,  F=746-3,  E=16-4). 

B :2: 5699*9704  grains  of  bronze  4“  60*2678  grains  of  plati- 
num in  air  (^=  16*03,  6 = 744*77)- 

By  observations  made  October  2,  1855,  B in  water 
(K=  17'67)  — (3200)-|-(1600)4-(200)  (bronze) -}- (64)4- (4) -{- 0*2505  grain  (platinum) 
in  air  (C=l7-0,  F=754*55,  E=l7-4). 

B in  water  (/=  17‘66)  4999*9640  grains  of  bronze  4-68*3459  grains  of  platinum 

in  air  (^=  17-05,  6 = 752*88). 

Hence  e;B  = 692*815,  AB=8*3175,  B = U4-0*2487  grain.  B ^2=  U4-0*2653  grain  in 
air  (^=18*7,  6=755*64). 

The  magnitude  of  the  differences  between  these  weights  is  very  remarkable,  con- 
sidering that  O,  M,  B are  in  a state  of  very  excellent  preservation,  V alone  exhibiting 
traces  of  rough  usage. 

Linear  dimensions  of  the  different  weights  in  inches. 


U.  V.  O.  M.  B. 

Axis  2-576  2-57  2-568  2-538  2-564 

Diameter  of  knob...  1-012  0-98  0-973  1-020  1-024 

Diameter  of  neck ...  0-359  0-383  0-391  

Diameter  at  d 1-43  1-416  1-391  1-387 

Diameter  at  e 1-445  1-43  1-424  1-389  

Diameter  at/  1-434  1-385  1-377 


The  above  comparison  shows  that  the  linear  dimensions  of  U were  very  sensibly 
larger  than  those  of  M or  B,  and  so  far  justifies  the  assumption  that  the  volume  of 
U was  larger  than  that  of  M or  B,  probably  not  less  than  that  of  V ; for  it  cannot  be 
supposed  that  the  weight  selected  as  the  standard  was  a bad  and  porous  casting 
like  O,  the  linear  dimensions  of  which  are  nearly  equal  to  those  of  V,  though  its 
volume  is  considerably  less  in  consequence  of  the  numerous  cavities  that  exist  in  it 
communicating  with  its  surface. 


DENSITIES  OF  THE  TROY  POUNDS  CONSTRUCTED  IN  1758. 


805 


If  U,  the  lost  standard,  be  supposed  to  have  the  same  density  as  V,  the  volume  of 
U at  0°  C.  will  be  equal  to  the  volume  of  706-676  grains  of  water  of  maximum  density, 

Sp  U — 0-00857  grain  in  air  (^=  18-68,  6=754-93). 

RS-U  — 0-00205  grain  in  air  (^=  18-74,  6 = 757-06). 

Sp  displaces  0-32544  grain,  U displaces  0-84646  grain  of  air.  Therefore 

Sp=U  — 0-52956  grain. 

RS  displaces  0-32629  grain,  U displaces  0-84865  grain  of  air.  Therefore 

RS=U— 0-52441  grain. 

The  density  of  V is  nearly  the  average  density  of  brass  or  bronze  weights,  as 
appears  by  the  following  list,  which  includes  all  the  determinations  of  densities  of 
such  weights  I have  been  able  to  find.  The  specific  gravities  of  the  Russian  weights 
and  of  some  others  marked  (K),  taken  from  the  second  volume  of  Kupffer’s  work, 
entitled  ‘Travaux  de  la  Commission  pour  fixer  les  Mesures  et  les  Poids  de  I’Empire 
de  Russie,’  are  reduced  from  13°-33  R.  to  the  specific  gravity  as  defined  by  Bessel,  by 
the  addition  of  0-002.  Those  marked  (M)  are  from  my  own  observations. 


Russian  lb.  No.  8 (K) 7-872 

Russian  lb.  No.  9 (K) 7-872 

Russian  lb.  No.  7 (K) 7-882 

Russian  lb.  No,  6 (K) 7-932 

Prussian  divided  pound  (K)  7‘952 

Russian  lb.  (K)  7*972 

G lb.  No.  21  (M)  7-974 

Russian  lb.  No.  5 (K) 7*992 

Schumacher’s  troy  pound  K 7*994 

59  lbs.  No.  9)  12  to  71  (K),  all  nearly  8'0 

Kilogramme,  Modena  Trans,  t.  xxv 8‘025 

Klaproth’s  kilogramme,  Berlin  Trans.  1825.  8-055 

G lb.  No.  5 (M)  8-06l 

G lb.  No.  16  (M) 8-073 

Russian  troy  pound  (K) 8-092 

G lb.  No.  25  (M)  8-101 

G lb.  No.  17  a (M) 8-117 

G lb.  No.  7 (M)  8-122 

G lb.  No.  28  (M)  8-126 

Kew  lb.  marked  7000  (M) 8-128 

Swedish  pound  (K) 8-132 

Kilogramme,  electro-gilt  (M) 8-133 

G lb.  No.  24  (M)  8-142 

Russian  lb.  No.  1 (K) 8-142 

Steinheil’s  divided  kilogramme,  Munich  Trans.  8-150 

G lb.  No.  23  (M)  8-151 

Mr.  Vandome’s  troy  pound  V,  1758  (M) 8-151 

G lb.  No.  30  (M)  8-153 

G lb.  No.  26  (M)  8-153 

G lb.  No.  27  CM)  8-162 

Russian  lb.  No.  (2)  (K) 8-162 

G lb.  No.  8 (M) 8-163 

Gib.  No.  29  (M) 8-186 

Russian  lb.  No.  3 (K) 8-192 

G lb.  No.  22  (M)  8-198 

Kew  Standard  lb.,  electro-gilt  (M)  8-204 

Schumacher’s  troy  pound  Sb  8-228 

Russian  lb.  No.  4 (K) 8-272 


G lb.  No.  10  (M) 8-283 

G lb.  No.  6 (M)  8-287 

G lb.  No,  18  (M)  8-303 

G lb.  No.  3 (M)  8-304 

Mr.  Barrow’s  lb.,  electro-gilt  (M)  8-310 

Bank  troy  pound  B,  1758  (M)  8-317 

G lb.  No.  12  (M)  8-319 

Kilogramme  (M) 8-320 

G lb,  not  numbered  (M)  8-320 

Exchequer  kilogramme  (M)  8-328 

Russian  divided  lb.  D (K) 8-332 

G lb.  No.  19  (M)  8-340 

G lb.  No.  2 (M)  8-341 

Mint  troy  pound  M,  1758  (M)  8-349 

G lb.  No.  14  (M)  8-349 

Exchequer  10  lb.,  electro-gilt  (M)  8-354 

G lb.  No.  15  (M)  8-.361 

G lb.  No.  1 (M)  8-361 

Gib.  No.  11  (M) 8-363 

G lb.  No.  4 (M)  8-365 

Weight  of  6400  grains  (M)  8-368 

Russian  lb.  M (K)  8-373 

Alchorne’s  troy  pound  O,  1758  (M) 8-403 

Mint  10  troy  ounces,  electro-gilt  (M)  ..... 8-414 

G lb.  No.  13  (M)  8-413 

Exchequer  10  troy  ounces,  electro-gilt  (M)  ...  8-460 

Electro-gilt  lb.  No.  35  (M)  8-470 

Electro-gilt  lb.  No.  32  (M)  8-470 

Electro-gilt  lb.  No,  33  (M)  8-479 

An  electro-gilt  lb.  (M)  8-481 

Electro-gilt  lb.  No.  36  (M)  8-496 

An  electro-gilt  lb.  (M)  8-507 

Russian  lb.  N (K)  8-508 

Electro-gilt  lb.  No.  34  (M)  8-512 

Electro-gilt  lb.  No.  31  (M)  8-514 

G lb.  No.  20  (M)  8-558 

G lb.  No.  17  b (M) 8-558 


5 N 2 


806  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


The  Commissioners  for  the  Restoration  of  the  Standards  of  Weight  and  Measure, 
in  their  Report  dated  December  21,  1841,  recommended  that  the  avoirdupois  pound 
of  7000  grains  be  adopted  instead  of  the  troy  pound  of  5760  grains,  as  the  new  Par- 
liamentary Standard  of  weight,  and  that  the  new  standard  and  four  copies  of  it  be 
constructed  of  platinum.  In  accordance  with  this  recommendation,  five  platinum 
weights  were  made  by  Mr.  Barrow,  a little  in  excess  of  7000  grains.  The  form  of 
these  pounds  is  that  of  a cylinder  nearly  1*35  inch  in  height  and  1*15  inch  in  diameter, 
with  a groove  round  it,  the  middle  of  which  is  about  0'34  inch  below  the  top  of  the 
cylinder,  for  insertion  of  the  prongs  of  a forked  lifter  of  ivory.  They  are  marked 
PS  1844  1 lb.;  PC  No.  1 1844  1 lb.;  PC  No.  2 1844  1 lb.;  PC  No.  3 1844  1 lb.;  PC 
No.  4 1844  1 lb.,  respectively. 

The  weight  of  7000  grains  might  have  been  formed  from  one  of  5760  grains,  by 
the  use  of  either  a decimal  or  a binary  system  of  weights.  In  either  case,  however, 
the  number  of  the  weights  to  be  compared  with  one  or  the  other  or  both  of  the 
weights  of  7000  grains  and  5760  grains  would  have  been  large,  and  the  errors  of  the 
comparisons  between  themselves  might  by  their  accumulation  sensibly  affect  the 
resulting  weight  of  7000  grains.  Moreover,  the  repeated  comparison  of  weights 
made  up  of  the  sum  of  several  others,  was  a very  troublesome  process  previous  to 
the  use  of  the  method  described  in  page  764,  which  had  not  been  thought  of  at  the 
time  the  weights  were  ordered.  These  two  evils  were  in  a great  measure  avoided  by 
the  use  of  a platinum  weight  T of  about  5760  grains,  or,  more  correctly,  very  nearly 
equal  to  Sp  or  RS,  and  of  the  following  series  of  auxiliary  weights,  also  of  platinum, 
and  all  constructed  by  Mr.  Barrow  : A,  B,  C,  D each  of  1240  grains  ; F of  800  grains  ; 
G of  440  grains ; II  of  360  grains ; K,  L,  M,  N each  of  80  grains ; R,  S each  of 
40  grains,  nearly.  The  platinum  of  which  the  five  lbs.,  T and  the  auxiliary  weights 
were  made,  was  prepared  by  Messrs.  Johnson  and  Cock. 

The  numbers  of  the  weights  of  each  denomination,  and  their  values,  are  given  by 
the  quotients  and  divisors  obtained  in  the  conversion  of  into  a continued 

fraction.  The  errors  of  these  weights  are  found  by  the  following  comparisons : — Sp 
and  RS  with  T;  T with  A-f-B-j-C-j-D-l-F ; each  of  the  weights  A,  B,  C,  D with 
F-fG;  F with  G-{-H  ; G with  each  of  the  weights  H-j-K,  H-j-L,  H-|-M,  H-fN; 
H with  K-f-L-fM-f-N-j-R  and  K-|-L-f-M-l-N-{-S ; each  of  the  weights  K,  L,  M,  N 
with  R-l-S.  Sp  and  RS,  instead  of  being  true  troy  pounds,  and  consequently  equal  to 
U in  a vacuum,  had  been  adjusted  so  as  to  appear  as  heavy  as  U nearly,  when  weighed 
in  air  of  ordinary  density,  and  are  therefore  lighter  than  U by  about  0'53  grain,  the 
weight  of  the  air  contained  in  a space  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  volume  of 
U and  that  of  Sp  or  RS.  A space  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  volume  of  7000 
grains  of  metal  of  the  density  of  U and  7000  grains  of  platinum,  contains  about  0*645 
grain  of  air.  Calling  this  Q,  PS  may  be  compared  with  each  of  the  weights  TH-A-fQ, 
T-l-B-j-Q,  T-j-C-j-Q,  T-l-D-)-Q.  In  order  to  determine  the  error  of  the  weight  of 
0*645  grain  with  the  greatest  precision,  ten  weights  Q of  0*645  grain  each,  so  accurately 


COMPARISONS  OF  THE  AUXILIARY  WEIGHTS  IN  1844. 


807 


adjusted  that  no  sensible  difference  could  be  detected  between  them,  a weight  V 
of  6-451  grains,  and  a weight  W of  12-901  grains,  all  of  platinum,  were  obtained 
from  Mr.  Barrow.  Then,  Y and  Z being  platinum  weights  of  20  grains  each  belonging 
to  the  two  Robinson’s  balances,  the  following  comparisons  became  possible: — each  of 
the  weights  R and  S with  Y+Z;  each  of  the  weights  Y and  Z with  W4-V+  each 
of  the  weights  Q;  W with  V+  sum  of  ten  weights  Q;  V with  the  sum  of  the  ten 
weights  Q.  In  comparing  PS  with  each  of  the  weights  T+A+Q,  T+B+Q,  T+C+Q, 
T+D  + Q,  the  weight  Q was  changed  at  the  end  of  every  four  comparisons,  and  thus 
each  of  the  ten  weights  Q used  in  turn  in  a series  of  forty  comparisons. 

The  following  comparisons  of  the  auxiliary  weights  with  Sp  and  RS,  and  with  each 
other,  were  made  for  the  purpose  of  finding  their  errors  preparatory  to  a more  accu- 
rate adjustment,  and  in  order  to  obtain  a series  of  weights  to  be  used  in  finding  the 
densities  of  T and  of  the  five  platinum  lbs.  of  7000  grains  each,  from  June  4,  1844,  to 
the  end  of  the  year.  In  the  comparisons  of  A-J-B+C-f  D+F  with  Sp  and  RS,  X and  Y 
denote  the  weights  of  the  two  detached  pans.  The  counterpoise  is  placed  in  the 
left-hand  pan.  The  numbers  in  each  column  are  the  readings  of  the  scale  in  the 
position  of  equilibrium  of  the  balance,  when  the  weight  at  the  head  of  the  column  is 
in  the  right-hand  pan.  In  these,  and  all  the  other  comparisons  of  weights  in  air,  the 
results  of  the  alternate  weighings  are  arranged  in  separate  columns. 


June  18,  1844. 

100  parts  = 

0*2208  grain. 

A+B+C+D+F+Y. 

Sp+X. 

Sp+Y. 

27*80 

25*30 

22*90 

22*50 

27*00 

26*10 

22*90 

21*90 

25*20 

24*05 

21*40 

22*05 

25*30 

24*60 

26*45 

26*50 

24*60 

24*40 

29*50 

27*15 

24*40 

23*50 

28*65 

28*50 

23*55 

22*75 

27*30 

28*50 

23*00 

23*00 

29-30 

28*90 

22*55 

22*20 

30*10 

29-65 

22*40 

21*90 

30*40 

29*75 

245*80 

237*80 

268*90 

265*40 

10(A  + B + C + D + F + Y)iil0(Sp  + X)  + 8*0  parts.  10(A  + B + C + D + F + X)£i:10(Sp  + Y)  + 

A-fB-f-C  + D + Fil:Sp  + 0*001 27  grain. 

June  12,  1844. 

100  parts  = 

0*2293  grain. 

RS+X. 

a+b+c+d+f+x. 

RS+Y. 

21*20 

20*70 

18*60 

19-60 

19*00 

21*10 

18*10 

20*20 

19-30 

21*60 

18*70 

20*00 

19*50 

20*80 

18*50 

20*00 

19-40 

21*30 

19-10 

19-35 

18*70 

20*80 

18*00 

19-85 

117*10 

126*30 

111*00 

119-00 

6(A  + B + C-|-D  + F + Y)£:6(RS  + X)-9-2  parts.  6(A  + B + C + D-|-F  + X)^6(RS  + Y)-8-0  parts. 

A + B + C + D + F:2:RS— 0*00329  grain. 


808  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


For  the  platinum  of  which  T and  the  auxiliary  weights  are  made  log  A=r32566 
by  Schumacher’s  Tables.  For  Sp  and  RS  log  A=:  1*32608,  by  the  same  tables.  The 
space  t^U— i^Sp  contains  0*53  grain  of  air  nearly.  Therefore  the  weight  of  Sp  or  RS 
is  nearly  5759*47  grains.  The  weight  of  A+B  + C+D  + F is  very  nearly  the  same. 
Hence  i;(A+B  + C-l-D  + B)  = 272*09,  t;Sp  = 27T84,  i;RS=271’84,  the  unit  of  volume 
being  the  volume  of  a grain  of  water  at  its  maximum  density.  Therefore 

v(A4-BH-C-|"D  + F)  is  larger  than  ^;Sp  or  t>RS  by  the  volume  of  0*25  grain  of 
•water,  or  0*00030  grain  of  air  of  ordinary  density. 

Hence  A + B + C-|-D  + F = Sp-l-0*00157  gi‘.  But  Sp  = U — 0*52956  gr.  There- 
fore A+B  + C+D-1-F=U- 0*52799  gr.  Also  A+B+C+D  + F=RS  — 0*00299  gr. 
But  RS=U  — 0*52441  gr.  Therefore  A-|-B-l-C-j-Dd-F=U — 0*52740  gr.  Giving  the 
former  value  twice  the  weight  of  the  latter, 

A-|-B+C-fD-fF=U- 0*52779  = 5759*47221  grains. 

In  the  following  comparisons  of  the  auxiliary  weights  with  each  other  the  lO^-inch 
balance  by  Robinson  was  used. 


1844. 

100  parts 

= 0-3593  grain. 

A. 

F+G. 

B. 

F+G. 

1*80 

1-75 

2-70 

2-75 

2-50 

2-35 

2*65 

3-05 

2-50 

2-85 

2-55 

2-90 

2-90 

3-25 

2-60 

3-05 

3*20 

3-15 

2-80 

2-70 

3-00 

3-05 

2-50 

3-25 

3-25 

3-15 

2-70 

3-05 

3-15 

3-05 

2-50 

3*25 

2-90 

2-85 

2-80 

3-20 

3-00 

2-90 

2-95 

3*30 

2-75 

2-55 

3-00 

3-35 

2*85 

2-85 

2-75 

3-30 

33-80 

33-75 

32-50 

37-15 

12A  = 12(F  + G)- 

0*05  part. 

12B=12(F  + G)  + 4*65  parts. 

A = F + G — 0*00001  grain. 

B=F  + G + 0*00138  grain. 

1844. 

100  parts 

= 0-3593  grain. 

c. 

F+G. 

D. 

F+G+0-004 

3-10 

3-00 

3-10 

3-20 

2-75 

3-10 

3-15 

3-15 

3-10 

2-85 

3-20 

3-00 

2-80 

3-00 

3-20 

3-15 

2-75 

2-90 

2-90 

3-10 

3-65 

3-65 

2-95 

2-95 

3-65 

3-65 

3-00 

3-05 

3-40 

2-90 

3-30 

3-55 

2-90 

2-90 

3-00 

3-30 

2-60 

3-10 

2-80 

2-90 

2*73 

2-95 

3*30 

3-20 

2-90 

3-00 

3-00 

3-15 

36-35 

37-00 

36-90 

37*70 

12C=12(F  + G)  + 0-65  part.  12D=12(F  + G + 0°004  gr.)  + 0‘8  part. 

C = F4-G  + 0*00020  grain.  D=F  + G + 0*00424  grain. 


COMPARISONS  OF  THE  AUXILIARY  WEIGHTS  IN  1844. 


June  8,  1844.  100  parts  =0*2855 grain. 


gr. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

F + O-OlO 

4*55 

G + H 

2*45 

F+ 0*020 

1*15 

G + H 

2*60 

F+0*010 

5*00 

G + H 

2*45 

F+ 0*020 

1*00 

G + H 

2*60 

F+O-OlO 

4*80 

G+H 

2*95 

F+0*020 

1*60 

G + H 

3*00 

F+0*010 

5*30 

G + H 

2*65 

F+ 0*020 

1*10 

G + H 

2*70 

F+0*010 

4*80 

G + H 

3*00 

F + 0*020 

1*45 

G + H 

2*75 

F + 0*015 

3*10 

G + H 

2*80 

F + 0*015 

3*50 

G + H 

2*95 

12F+0*18 

37*35 

12(G+H) 

32*90 

12F+0*18gr.=  12(G+H)-4*45  parts. 
F=G4-H  — 0*0l606  grain. 


June  8, 

1844. 

100  parts 

Scale. 

gr. 

Scale. 

G 

3*20 

H + K + 0*005 

2*97 

G 

3*10 

H + K + 0*004 

3*15 

G 

3*20 

H + K + 0*004 

3*30 

G 

3*15 

H + K + 0*004 

3*25 

G 

3*45 

H + K + 0-004 

3*25 

G 

3*15 

H + K + 0*004 

3*00 

G 

3*20 

H + K+0*004 

3*15 

G 

3*35 

H + K + 0*004 

3*30 

G 

3*20 

H + K + 0*004 

3*45 

G 

3*30 

H + K + 0*004 

3*00 

G 

3*10 

H + K + 0*004 

3*30 

G 

3*20 

H + K + 0*004 

3*60 

12G 

38*60 

12(H  + K)  + 0*049 

38*72 

12G=  12(H  + K)  + 0*049  gr.  + 0*12  pt. 

G=H  + K + 0*00411  grain. 

June  10 

1,  1844. 

100  parts 

Scale. 

gr. 

Scale. 

G 

2*85 

H + M + 0*003 

3*35 

G 

2*90 

H + M + 0*006 

2*30 

G 

2*85 

H + M 

4*70 

G 

3*00 

H+M  + 0*003 

3*45 

G 

2*95 

H + M + 0*003 

3*35 

G 

2*70 

H + M + 0-003 

3*10 

G 

2*60 

H + M + 0*004 

2*90 

G 

3*15 

H + M + 0-004 

.3*10 

G 

3*00 

H + M+ 0*004 

3*25 

G 

3*10 

H + M + 0*004 

3*05 

G 

3*05 

H + M + 0-004 

2*95 

G 

3*05 

H + M + 0-004 

3*15 

12G 

35*20 

12(H  + M)  + 0*042 

38*65 

0*2708  grain. 


Scale. 

gr. 

Scale. 

G 

3*60 

H + L+0-004 

3*55 

G 

3*45 

H + L + 0-004 

3*60 

G 

3*25 

H + L + 0-004 

4*05 

G 

3*40 

H + L + 0-004 

3*75 

G 

3*50 

H + L + 0-004 

4*00 

G 

3*30 

H + L + 0-004 

4*10 

G 

3*40 

H + L + 0-004 

4*15 

G 

3*60 

H + L + 0-006 

3*35 

G 

3*55 

H + L + 0*006 

3*25 

G 

3*40 

H + L + 0-006 

3*05 

G 

3*25 

H + L + 0-006 

2*95 

G 

3*00 

H + L+0-006 

2*85 

12G 

40*70 

12(H  + L)  + 0*058 

42*65 

12G=(H  + L)12  + 0*058  gr.+  1*95  pt. 
G=H  + L + 0*00527  grain. 


1*2708  grain. 


G 

Scale. 

2*65 

gr. 

H + N + 0*003 

Scale. 

2*65 

G 

2*70 

FI + N + 0*003 

3*25 

G 

3*20 

11  + N + 0*003 

3*25 

G 

3*30 

H + N+0-003 

3*20 

G 

2*85 

H + N+0-003 

3*20 

G 

3*50 

H + N + 0-003 

3*00 

G 

3*30 

H + N + 0-003 

3*65 

G 

3*55 

H + N + 0-003 

3*65 

G 

3*10 

H + N + 0-003 

3*25 

G 

3*60 

H + N-f  0*003 

3*60 

G 

3*30 

FI + N+ 0*003 

3-20 

G 

3*30 

H + N + 0-003 

3*30 

12G 

38*35 

12(H  + N)  + 0*0.36 

39*20 

12G  = 12(H+M)  + 0*042  gr.  + 3*45  pt. 
G = H + M + 0*00428  grain. 


12G  = 12(H  + N)  + 0*036  gr.  + 0*85  pt. 
G=  H + N + 0*00319  grain. 


809 


810  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND 


June  11,  1844. 


100  parts  =0'2535  grain. 


K..R=K  + L + M+N+R.  K..S=K  + L + M+N  + S. 


Scale. 

gr.  Scale. 

Scale. 

gr- 

Scale. 

H 2*90 

K..R 

3*30 

H 

2*70 

K..S  +0*003 

3*00 

H 2*70 

K..R 

3*30 

H 

2*90 

K..S  +0*005 

2*00 

H 2*70 

K..R 

3*45 

H 

2*85 

K..S  +0*004 

2*40 

H 2*90 

R..R 

3*30 

H 

2*80 

K..S 

4*05 

H 2*60 

K..R 

3*30 

H 

2*75 

K..S 

3*90 

H 2*75 

K..R 

3*25 

H 

2*35 

K..S  +0*006 

1*50 

H 2*65 

K..R 

3*10 

H 

2*30 

K..S  +0*003 

2*50 

H 2*50 

K..R 

3*10 

H 

2*70 

K..S  +0*003 

2*60 

H 2*60 

K..R 

+ 0*003  2*20 

H 

2*80 

K..S  +0*003 

3*00 

H 2*70 

K..R 

+ 0*003  2*20 

H 

3*05 

K..S  +0*003 

2*70 

H 2*70 

K..R 

+ 0*003  2*35 

H 

3*00 

K..S  +0*003 

2*80 

H 2*70 

K..R 

+ 0*003  2*30 

H 

2*95 

K..S  +0*003 

2*60 

12H  32*40 

12(K..R)  + 0*012  35*15 

12H 

33*15 

12(K..S)  + 0*036 

33*05 

12H=12(K..R)  + 0*012gr.  + 2*75pt. 

12H  = 12K..S + 0*036  gr.-0*10 

pt. 

H = K + L+M  + N +R  + 0*00158  grain. 

H 

= K + L + M + N + S+0*00298  grain. 

June  19,  1844. 

100  parts 

= 0*1198  grain. 

gi’- 

Scale. 

Scale. 

gr* 

Scale. 

Scale. 

K 

3*20 

R + S 2*15 

L 

5*70 

R + S 

3*10 

K 

3*80 

R + S 2*80 

L + 0*003 

3*00 

R + S 

3*15 

K + 0*002 

2*45 

R + S 2*90 

L + 

5*20 

R + S 

2*65 

K + 0*002 

2*15 

R + S 2*60 

L + 0*002 

2*85 

R + S 

2*20 

K 

3*90 

R + S 2*90 

L + 0*002 

3*20 

R + S 

2*80 

K + 0*002 

2*00 

R + S 2*60 

L 

4*70 

R + S 

2*70 

K 

3*85 

R+S  3*10 

L + 0*004 

1*40 

R + S 

2*40 

K + 0*002 

2*45 

R + S 2*85 

L 

4*60 

R+S 

2*30 

K 

3*80 

R+S  3*00 

L + 0*002 

3*00 

R + S 

2*60 

K + 0*002 

2*35 

R + S 2*70 

L + 0*004 

1*45 

R + S 

2*20 

K 

4*20 

R + S 3*05 

L+0-004 

2*50 

R + S 

3*55 

K + 0*002 

2*45 

R+S  2*80 

L + 0*004 

2*50 

R + S 

3*30 

12K  + 0*012 

36*60  12(R  + S)  33*45 

12L  + 0*025 

40*10 

12(R  + S) 

32*95 

12K  + 0*012gr.=  12(R  + S)  — 3*15  pt. 

12L  + 0*025  gr.= 

12(R  + S)-7*15pt. 

K = R + S — 0*00131  grain. 

L= 

R + S- 

0*00280  grain, 

June  19,  1844. 

100  parts = 

= 0*1198  grain 

gr* 

Scale. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

M 

4*55 

R + S 3*65 

N 

3*15 

R + S 

3*00 

M+ 0*002 

2*75 

R + S 3*60 

N 

3*30 

R + S 

3*00 

M 

4*65 

R + S 4*00 

N 

3*50 

R + S 

3*10 

M + 0*002 

2*60 

R + S 2*90 

N 

3*10 

R + S 

3*10 

M 

4*00 

R + S 3*20 

N 

3*55 

R + S 

3*20 

M + 0*002 

2-40 

R + S 2*90 

N 

3*20 

R + S 

2*80 

M 

4*10 

R + S 3*10 

N 

3*40 

R + S 

3*30 

M + 0-003 

1*60 

R + S 2*95 

N 

2*80 

R + S 

3*20 

IVI 

4*00 

R + S 2*90 

N 

3*30 

R + S 

2*80 

M + 0*003 

1*40 

R + S 2*85 

N 

2*95 

R + S 

2*95 

M 

4*00 

R + S 2*90 

N 

2*90 

R + S 

2*85 

M + 0-003 

1*60 

R + S 2*70 

N 

3*10 

R + S 

2*80 

12M+0-015 

37*65 

12(R  + S)  37*65 

12N  ; 

38*25 

12(R  + S>  : 

36*10 

12M+ 0-015  gr.=  12(11 + S) 
M = R -j-  S — 0*00125  grain. 


12N=12(R  + S)  + 2*15pt. 
N=R  + S + 0*00022  grair- 


VALUES  OF  THE  AUXILIARY  WEIGHTS  IN  1844. 


811 


T 

= 

5759-48815 

A+B+C+D+F 

5769-47221 

A 

= F + G 

— 

0-00001 

B 

= F + G 

+ 

0-00138 

C 

= F+G 

+ 

0-00020 

D 

= F + G 

+ 

0-00424 

F 

= G + H 

— 

0-01606 

G 

= H + K 

+ 

0-00411 

G 

= H + L 

+ 

0-00527 

G 

= H + M 

+ 

0-00428 

G 

= H + N 

+ 

0-00319 

H 

= K+L+M+N+R 

+ 

0-00158 

H 

= K+L+M+N+S 

+ 

0-00298 

K 

= R + S 

— 

0-00131 

L 

= R + S 

— 

0-00280 

M 

= R + S 

— 

0-00125 

N 

= R + S 

+ 

0-00022 

A+B+C+D 

= 4F+4G 

+ 

0-00581 

4F 

= 4G  + 4H 

— 

0-06424 

4G 

= 4H  + K + L + M+N 

+ 

0-01685 

2H 

= 2(K  + L + M + N)  + R + S 

+ 

0-00456 

K+L+M+N 

= 4(R+S) 

— 

0-00514 

4(K  + L + M + N) 

= 16(R  + S) 

— 

0-02056 

4H 

= 4(K  + L + M + N)  + 2(R  + S) 

+ 

0-00912 

4G 

= 4H  + K + L + M+N 

+ 

0-01685 

4F 

= 4G  + 4H 

— 

0-06424 

5760  grains 

= A+B+C+D+F 

+ 

0-52779 

4H 

= 18(R  + S1 

— 

0-01144 

4G 

= 22(R  + S) 

+ 

0-00027 

4F 

= 40(R  + S) 

— 

0-07541 

4F  + 4G 

= 62(R  + S) 

— 

0-07514 

A+B+C+D 

=62(R  + S) 

— 

0-06933 

A+B+C+D+F 

= 72(R  + S) 

— 

0-08818 

72(R  + S) 

= 

5759-56039 

18(R  + S) 

= 

1439-89010 

40(R+S) 

= 

3199-75577 

10(R  + S) 

= 

799-93894 

62(R  + S) 

4959-62143 

22(R  + S) 

= 

1759-86567 

A+B+C+D 

= 

4959-55210 

4F  + 4G 

= 

4959-54629 

F + G 

= 

1239-88657 

Values  of  the  auxiliary  weights  from 

gr- 

A = 1239-88656 
B = 1239-88795 
C = 1239-88677 
D = 1239-89081 
F = 799-92009 

G = 439-96648 

H = 359-96966 


June  4,  1844,  to  the  end  of  the  year. 

gr. 

K = 79-99258 
L = 79-99109 
M = 79-99264 
N = 79-99411 
R = 39-99624 
S = 39-99764 


In  January  1845  the  auxiliary  weights  were  adjusted  so  as  to  reduce  still  further 
the  differences  between  the  sums  of  the  weights  compared  with  each  other. 


5 o 


MDCCCLVI. 


812  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Observations  for  finding  the  density  ofT. 
T weighed  in  air. 


; 22,  1844. 

100  parts  = 

0-19917  grain. 

Sp+0-02gr.+Y. 

T+X. 

Sp.+0-02  gr.+X. 

T+Y. 

14-20 

13-35 

20-20 

19-55 

15-85 

14-70 

21-40 

21-40 

16-25 

14-35 

22-00 

22-10 

16-10 

14-40 

23-00 

22-30 

15-50 

13-80 

23-50 

22-40 

15-30 

13-00 

23-10 

20-80 

14-10 

12-90 

21-85 

21-60 

14-55 

12-65 

22-35 

21-00 

13-90 

12-00 

21-95 

21-30 

14-10 

12-60 

22-10 

21-90 

13-70 

11-90 

22-70 

21-95 

163-55 

145-65 

244-15 

236-30 

ll(Sp-|-0-02gr.+  Y):ii: 

11(T-1-X)-|- 17-9  parts.  ll(Sp  + 0-02  gr.-|-X)£l 
T Sp-h 0-01767  grain. 

ll(T+Y)  + 7' 

1844. 

100  parts  = 

:0-1456  grain. 

T. 

RS+0-01  gr. 

22-10 

22-20 

23-10 

24-85 

26-00 

24-55 

29-45 

26-70 

29-20 

28-10 

28-90 

27-70 

30-10 

26-90 

28-60 

27-80 

29-70 

27-65 

30-20 

29-07 

277-35' 

265-52 

10Ti::10(RS  + 0-01  gr,)  + 11-83  parts. 

T£i:RS  + 0-01172  grain. 

Foi-T,  by  Schumacher’s  Tables,  log- A=  r32566.  For  Sp  and  RS,  log  A=  1-32608 
by  the  same  Tables.  The  space  v\] — t;Sp  contains  O'oS  grain  of  air  nearly.  There- 
fore the  weight  of  Sp  is  nearly  5759-47  grains,  and  that  of  T nearly  5759-49  grains. 
Hence  t;T=27T63,  z;Sp  = 27T37,  fRS=27T37.  Therefore  vT  is  larger  than  vSp  or 
i;RS,  by  the  volume  of  0-26  grain  of  water,  or  0-00031  grain  of  air  of  ordinary  density. 


gr- 


Hence 

T 

= Sp  +0-01798. 

But 

Sp 

= U —0-52956. 

Therefore 

T 

= U -0-51158. 

Also 

T 

= RS+0-01203. 

But 

RS 

= U —0-52441. 

Therefore 

T 

= U —0-51238. 

Giving  the  former  value  twice  the  weight  of  the  latter, 

T=U  — 0-51 185  grain  = 5759-48815  grains. 

In  the  observations  for  finding  the  apparent  weight  of  T in  water,  the  same  pro- 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  T. 


813 


cess  was  followed  as  in  finding  the  density  of  V.  The  thermometers  H,  P were 
suspended  in  the  water  with  their  bulbs  in  a horizontal  plane  through  the  middle 
of  T.  t denotes  the  temperature  of  the  air  in  centesimal  degrees ; h the  height  of 
the  mercury  in  the  barometer  in  millimetres,  reduced  to  0°  C.;  100  parts  =0'220 
grain. 

July  13,  1854.  T and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

18*30 

19-40 

0*00 

20*45 

18*20 

19*30 

0*00 

20*20 

18*20 

19*10 

0*00 

20*50 

18*10 

19-05 

0*00 

18*80 

18*10 

19-05 

0*00 

22*50 

18*10 

19-00 

0-00 

20*15 

18*10 

19-00 

0*00 

19-60 

18-10 

19-00 

0*00 

19-70 

18*05 

19-00 

O'OO 

19-30 

18*05 

19-00 

0*00 

20*95 

18*13 

19-09 

0*00 

20*21 

Hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

A -t- B -f  C -h  D + G -f- K -H  (8) -h  0*44 

Scale. 

20*25 

Air. 

+ 0*44 
+ 0*48 

20*25 

48*40 

<=18*2,  6=760*21. 

+ 0*40 

12*20 

+ 0*40 

10*05 

+ 0*40 

3*00 

+ 0*4267 

19*1 

T in  water  (^=  18*27)  — A + B-j-C-|-D-l-G-l-K-l-(8)-f- 0*4291  grain  in  air  (<=18*2,  6=760*21). 
July  15,  1844.  T and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


H. 

P. 

gr. 

Scale. 

17-90 

18*65 

0*04 

21*10 

18*00 

18*90 

0*04 

24*90 

18*02 

18*95 

0*04 

25*15 

18*00 

19-00 

0*03 

23*55 

18*05 

19-00 

0*02 

22*25 

18*00 

19-00 

0*02 

22*00 

18*15 

19-10 

0*01 

19-80 

18*20 

19-10 

0*01 

19-90 

18*20 

19-10 

0*01 

19-95 

18*06 

18*98 

0*244 

22*07 

^ Hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 

gr* 

A + B + C + D + G + K + (8)  + 0*42 

Scale. 

15*30 

Air. 

+ 0*43 
+ 0*44 
+ 0*44 
+ 0*46 

16*65 

18*70 

18*85 

21*90 

<=18*4,  6=757-77. 

+ 0*44 

17-07 

+ 0*46 

28*60 

+ 0*46 

26*70 

+ 0*46 

26*70 

+ 0*46 

29*95 

+ 0*447 

22*04 

T in  water  (<=18*18)£!:A  + B-|-C-l-D-)-G  + K-h(8)-l- 0*4227 grain  in  air  (<=18*4,  6=767‘77)- 

5 o 2 


814  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


July  29,  1844,  T and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


H. 

p. 

gr- 

Scale. 

19*00 

19*95 

0*86 

19*5 

0*84 

17*0 

0*88 

23*0 

19*00 

19*95 

0*84 

16*5 

0*88 

22*4 

19*00 

19*90 

0*88 

23*3 

0*84 

15*5 

0*88 

25*0 

0*84 

16*2 

0*88 

23*0 

19*00 

19*90 

0*84 

17*8 

0*88 

24*1 

19*00 

19*92 

0*8617 

20*27 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

A + BH-C  + D“|-G“1~K-|-(8)-|”  1 *32 

19*6 

1*32 

20*2 

Air. 

1*32 

21*5 

II 

O 

II 

1*32 

21*4 

1*32 

21*0 

1*32 

21*0 

1^ 

20*78 

T in  water  (<=19‘ll)£!:A-fB-|-C-|-D-|-G-|-K-|- (8)-)- 0*4572  grain  in  air  (f=20*4,  6=761*17). 
August  1,  1844.  T and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

0*86 

20*8 

0*85 

18*5 

0*86 

19*5 

0*86 

21*4 

0*85 

20*4 

18*00 

18*80 

0*85 

17*3 

0*86 

21*0 

0*85 

15*1 

0*86 

21*7 

0*86 

22*6 

0*86 

22*8 

17*95 

18*75 

0*85 

20*8 

17*98 

18*78 

0*8567 

20*16 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

A-fB  + C-t-D-hG-fK  + (8)-f  1*28 

19-5 

1*28 

19*8 

Air. 

1*28 

20*0 

<=18*4,  6= 

754*70. 

1*28 

20*5 

1*28 

20*6 

1*28 

19*6 

1*28 

19*5 

1*28 

19*93 

T in  water  (<=18*04)£i:A-fB4-C-j-D-|-G-l-K  4-8-1-0*4238  grain  in  air  (^=18*4,  6=754*70). 


Apparent  weight  of  T in  water,  weighed  with 


platinum  weights. 


Water. 

Apparent  weight 

t. 

gr- 

18*27 

5487*9398 

18*18 

5487*9334 

19*11 

5487*9679 

18*04 

5487*9345 

T.  Air. 


t. 

1. 

18*2 

760*21 

18*4 

757*77 

20*4 

761*17 

18*4 

754*70 

COMPARISON  OF  T WITH  Sp  AND  RS. 


815 


The  resulting  values  of  AT  and  log  AT  are; 


AT. 

log  AT. 

21-1661 

1-325642 

21-1661 

1-325641 

21-16.56 

1-325631 

21-1667 

1-325654 

Mean  

21-1661 

1-325642 

] 0— -log  AT 

8-674358 

T (reduced) 

5759-471 

3-760383 

vT 

272-108 

2-434741 

Hence  the  volume  of  T at  0°  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  272' 108  grains  of  water  at 
its  maximum  density. 

The  resulting  values  of  log  AT  by  Schumacher’s  Tables  are : — 


log  AT. 
1-325653 
1-325651 
1-325642 
1-325664 

Mean  log  AT 

1-325664 

10  — log  AT 

8-674336 

T (reduced) 

5759-471 

3-760383 

vT 

272-094 

2-434719 

Hence,  using  Schumacher’s  Tables,  the  volume  of  T at  0°  is  equal  to  the  volume 
of  272*094  grains  of  water  at  its  maximum  density. 

Comparison  ofT  with  Sp  and  RS. 

In  December  1844  T was  reduced  till  its  weight  was  very  nearly  equal  to  that  of 
Sp,  and  afterwards  compared  with  Sp  and  RS.  The  weights  of  the  two  scale-pans 
are  denoted  by  X and  Y.  The  thermometers  C,  D were  suspended  in  the  balance 
case  with  their  bulbs  in  a horizontal  plane  passing  through  the  middle  of  the  weights. 
F is  the  reading  of  Ernst’s  barometer,  E that  of  the  attached  thermometer.  The 
comparisons  were  made  in  a cellar  under  the  north  side  of  the  Mineralogical  Museum 
in  Cambridge.  The  balance  was  placed  upon  a thick  stone  slab  forming  the  sill  of 
a recess  containing  a window  so  situated,  that  the  lowest  part  of  the  window  was 
considerably  higher  than  the  top  of  the  balance  case. 


January  15,  1845. 

T+X. 

Sp+Y. 

100  parts  =0-16949  grain. 

T+Y. 

Sp+X. 

17-14 

15-95 

D=  9-93 

18-50 

17-70 

18-27 

16-50 

C=  9-90 

19-15 

18-31 

18-82 

17-97 

F=  754-8 

19-00 

18-50 

19-44 

17-56 

E=  7-7 

18-53 

18-66 

20-17 

18-01 

18-45 

18-31 

93-84 

85-99 

93-63 

91-48 

5(T-fX)£t5(Sp-|-Y)-|-7'85  parts.  5(T-|- Y)£b5(Sp-|-X)  + 2'15  parts. 

10T^10Sp  + 0"Ol695  grain  in  air  (<=9*91?  i=754‘30). 


816  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


February  21,  1845.  100  parts  =0'17396  grain. 


Sp+X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  Sp+X. 

Sp+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  Sp+Y. 

24*76 

25*00 

23*77 

21*20 

25*05 

25*21 

22*87 

20*22 

25*32 

25*26 

22*61 

18*76 

24*28 

22*67 

D=  6*95 

18*37 

18*15 

24*60 

23*76 

C=  7-0 

20*40 

17-82 

21*35 

20*68 

F=  759-5 

17-37 

17-40 

19-43 

22*91 

E=  9-3 

19*55 

18*06 

21*52 

20*17 

21*90 

19-68 

20*72 

22*40 

20*70 

19-53 

20*35 

19-80 

21*38 

20*95 

227-38 

227-86 

208*92 

191-77 

20(T  + Y):il20(Sp  + X)  — 0*48  part. 

20(T+X)£i:20(Sp  + Y)  + 17-15  parts. 

40Ti!:40Sp  + 0*02900  grain  in  air 

(<=6*94,  ^<=758*80). 

February  26,  1845. 

T+X. 

Sp+Y. 

100  parts  =0*17156  grain. 

T+Y. 

Sp+X. 

21*48 

20*46 

22*62 

22*62 

21*97 

21*83 

22*83 

23*45 

22*51 

23*20 

D=  6*30 

23*18 

23*52 

23*00 

21*98 

C=  6*35 

22-50 

22*15 

23*22 

22*62 

6=752*41 

22*71 

22*95 

23*30 

23*63 

22*87 

22*67 

24*21 

24*62 

22*45 

22*46 

24*92 

24*48 

22*92 

22*68 

184*61 

182*82 

182*08 

182*50 

8(T  + X)£h8(Sp  + Y)  + l-79  part.  8(T+ Y):2:8(Sp+X)-0-42  part. 

l6Td^l6Sp  + 0"00235  grain  in  air  (^=6*28,  &=752*41). 


July  26,  1845.  100  parts  =0*33860  grain. 


T+Y. 

Sp+X. 

T+X. 

Sp+Y. 

19-88 

18*16 

18*25 

18*41 

19*32 

18*97 

18*32 

18*56 

19-27 

19-06 

18*31 

17-90 

19-70 

18*55 

18*26 

18*48 

19*51 

19*16 

D=  17-5 

18*30 

17-75 

19-63 

18*88 

c=  17-5 

17*70 

18*10 

19-36 

20*03 

F = 761*5 

17-75 

17-96 

19-00 

19-31 

E=  18 

18*38 

18*26 

19*56 

18*75 

17-91 

18*15 

19-12 

18*72 

17-17 

18*24 

18*90 

18*67 

17-08 

17-43 

19-00 

18*24 

17-33 

17-16 

232-25 

226*50 

214*76 

216*40 

12(T+ Y)£!:12(Sp  + X)  + 5*75  parts.  12(T+X)£i:12(Sp  + Y)  — 1*64  part. 

24T£!:24Sp  + 0*0 1392  grain  in  air  («=17*53,  b=759-79). 


COMPARISONS  OF  T WITH  Sp  AND  RS. 


August  16,  1845. 

100  parts  =0-27581  grain. 

Sp+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  Sp+Y. 

Sp+X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  Sp+X. 

19-22 

20-30 

17-87 

19-50 

19-16 

20-15 

20-02 

18-36 

20-67 

20-52 

20-04 

17-82 

21-27 

22-02 

20-35 

17-14 

19-11 

20-51 

20-30 

17-51 

21-20 

20-54 

D=  15-9 

20-29 

17-32 

21-32 

21-60 

C=  15-9 

19-34 

17-77 

20-27 

19-69 

F =760*2 

19-65 

17-61 

18-31 

20-31 

E=  15-9 

19-77 

17-29 

20*07 

20-84 

20-77 

19-98 

21-49 

20-75 

18-77 

16-79 

19-69 

19-84 

17-79 

18-54 

19-82 

19-82 

19-80 

17-14 

17-45 

19-36 

19-77 

19-47 

279-05 

286-25 

274-53 

252-24 

28(T  + X)=2:28(Sp  + Y)  -7-20  parts. 

28(T+Y):Ci:28( Sp  + X) + 22*29  parts. 

56T£i:56Sp  + 0-04162  grain  in  air  (t- 

= 15-91,  6=758-70). 

August  18,  1845. 

100  parts  =0-27959  grain. 

Sp+X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  Sp+X. 

Sp+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  Sp+Y. 

18-85 

18-34 

19-94 

19-42 

19-90 

20-49 

18-16 

19-39 

20-05 

18-17 

19-17 

21-21 

20-27 

20-67 

D=  15-92 

19-86 

18-82 

20-32 

18-66 

C=  15-9 

18-99 

19-36 

20-35 

20-12 

F = 756-5 

18-50 

20-49 

20-61 

19-95 

E=  16 

20*02 

I8-56 

21*02 

19-24 

18-76 

18-61 

21-39 

20-99 

19-01 

18-37 

20-96 

20-00 

17-81 

17-92 

203-72 

196-63 

190-22 

192-15 

20(T  + Y):£i20(Sp  + X)  + 7-09  parts. 

20(T  + X)ii20(Sp  + Y)-l-93  part. 

40T£i40Sp  + 0*01443  grain  in  air  (t- 

= 15*93,  6=754-99). 

August  19,  1845. 

100  parts  =0*27204  grain. 

Sp+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  Sp+Y. 

Sp+X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  Sp+X. 

19-56 

21-19 

18-19 

18-54 

18-91 

20-79 

D=  15-55 

20-95 

19-95 

20-93 

20-25 

C=  15-6 

20-83 

18-15 

18-78 

21-25 

F = 740-7 

20-68 

17-86 

19-12 

21-45 

E=  15-5 

20-60 

18-50 

97-30 

104*93 

101-25 

93-00 

10(T  + X)£hl0(Sp  + A)  — 7'63  parts.  10(T  + Y)i!:10(Sp  + X)+8'25  parts. 

20T:;i20Sp  + 0’00l69  grain  in  air  (<=15*6,  6=739*29). 


August  27,  1845.  100  parts  =0"2686l  grain. 


Sp+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  Sp+Y. 

Sp+X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  Sp+X. 

24-20 

22-27 

22*24 

23-45 

24-34 

21-01 

22-10 

22-47 

24-66 

22-40 

22-06 

23-00 

24*22 

22-32 

D=  14-93 

21-96 

22-37 

24-15 

22-32 

C=  14-93 

21-67 

22-61 

23-86 

22-17 

F =766-1 

22-27 

22-30 

25-50 

21-07 

E=  15 

22-57 

22-82 

23-40 

21*67 

22-02 

22-40 

23-21 

21-32 

21-69 

23-12 

23-51 

21-16 

22-17 

21-94 

241-05 

217-71 

220-75 

226-48 

20(T  + X)£i20(Sp  + Y)  + 23-34.  parts.  20(T  + Y)£h20(Sp  + X)-5-73  parts. 

40T£i:40Sp  + 0*04730  grain  in  air  (<=14-95,  ^=764-69). 


818  PROF.  vy.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


August  29,  1845. 

100  parts  =0-26700  grain. 

Sp+X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  Sp+X. 

Sp+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  Sp+Y. 

24-67 

25-17 

24-85 

24-67 

25-64 

24-77 

26-95 

24-15 

25-24 

25-62 

24-85 

24-82 

25-15 

24-76 

D=  14-55  26-62 

23-97 

25-19 

24-80 

C=  14-57  25-27 

23-76 

25-34 

26-70 

F=771-95  25-31 

23-70 

25-74 

24-74 

E=  15  23-99 

23-51 

25-25 

26-29 

25-86 

22-35 

25-35 

25-70 

24-27 

23-52 

25-10 

24-54 

25-44 

23-35 

252-67 

253-09 

253-41 

237-80 

20(T  + Y)£b20(Sp  + X)-0-42part. 

20(T  + X)£i:20(Sp  + Y)  + 15'6l  parts. 

40T£i40Sp  + 0-04056  grain  in  air  (<=14-58,  5=770-53). 

January  I6,  1845. 

100  parts  =0-16949  grain. 

T+Y. 

RS+X. 

T+X. 

RS+Y. 

16-47 

17-70 

18-05 

20-75 

17-90 

20-06 

D=  9-03  18-46 

20-62 

17-31 

21-00 

C=  9-10  18-90 

20-51 

18-54 

21-47 

F = 764-0  18-55 

21-95 

18-35 

22-67 

£=  8 19-41 

21-99 

88-57 

102-90 

93-37 

105-82 

5(T  + Y)£i5(RS  + X)  — 14-33  parts. 

5(T  + X):<i:5(RS  + Y)  — 12-45  parts. 

10T£i:10RS— 0-04539  grain  in  air  (<=9-05,  5=763-46). 

July  28,  1845. 

100  parts  =0-33720  grain. 

T+X. 

RS+Y. 

T+Y. 

RS+X. 

19-37 

21-07 

18-66 

19-03 

19-58 

21-90 

18-95 

19-59 

20-25 

22-20 

18-46 

19-78 

19-95 

22-22 

18-84 

19-70 

20-10 

21-50 

D=  16-95  18-67 

19-65 

19-66 

22-05 

C=  17-0  18-47 

19-78 

18-77 

21-27 

F=755-60  18-97 

19-46 

18-85 

20-68 

E=  17-2  18-20 

18-70 

19-08 

19-51 

18-90 

19-20 

18-71 

20-52 

18-55 

19-82 

18-92 

20-52 

18-33 

19-60 

19-26 

20-40 

18-72 

19-60 

232-50 

253-84 

223-72 

233-91 

12(T  + X)£!:  12(RS  + Y)— 21-34  parts. 

12(T  + Y)iil2(RS  + X)-10-19  parts. 

24T=ii=24RS  — 0-10632 

grain  in  air  (<=17-01,  5=753-95). 

August  14,  1845. 

100  parts  =0-29755  grain. 

RS+X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  RS+X. 

RS+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  RS+Y, 

20-51 

22-76 

19-25 

23-77 

20-50 

23-11 

19-90 

23-99 

19-95 

21-97 

18-75 

23-57 

20-70 

21-46 

18-56 

22-80 

20-57 

22-55 

D=  15-95  18-50 

22-27 

19-70 

21-47 

C=  15-95  20-84 

24-35 

21-67 

23-47 

F=760-85  18-77 

22-21 

20-54 

23-25 

E=  15-9  18-17 

23-31 

20-95 

23-74 

17-8O 

22-99 

21-10 

22-84 

18-37 

22-71 

21-34 

23-75 

17-91 

23-35 

227-53 

250-37 

206-82 

255-32 

22(T  + Y)£b22(RS  + X)-22-84  parts. 

22(T  + X)£2:22(RS  + Y)  — 48-5  parts. 

44T:<i:44RS  — 0-21227  grain  in  air  (<=15-96,  5=759-34). 

COMPARISON  OF  T WITH  Sp  AND  RS.  819 

August  15,  1845.  100  parts  =0*27921  grain. 


RS+X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  RS+X. 

RS+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  RS+Y. 

18*05 

20*30 

15*70 

18*89 

18*64 

21*87 

14*89 

20*05 

18*67 

21*75 

16*06 

19*79 

16*41 

19*47 

16*39 

20  05 

16*96 

20*75 

D= 

16*25 

16*66 

19-85 

16*59 

20*59 

C= 

16*30 

17-00 

19-72 

16*46 

20-04 

F= 

756*9 

18*81 

21*60 

17-17 

20*10 

E= 

16 

16*48 

21*62 

17-79 

21*00 

17*60 

20*47 

17-75 

19*79 

17-94 

20*85 

18*21 

20*53 

15*22 

17-54 

192*70 

226*19 

182*75 

220*43 

22(T  + Y)£!:22(RS  + X)- 33*49  parts.  22(T  + X)ii:22(RS  + Y)- 37*68  parts. 

44T£i44RS-0*19871  grain  in  air  (<=l6*29,  6=755*39). 


1845. 

t. 

h. 

gr- 

January 

15. 

9-91 

754*30 

10T=2:  lOSp  +0*01695 

February  21. 

6*94 

758*80 

40T^  40Sp  +0*02900 

February  26. 

6*28 

752*41 

l6T4i  l6Sp  +0*00235 

Julv 

26. 

17*53 

759*79 

24T:^^=  24Sp  +0*01392 

August 

16. 

15*91 

758*70 

56T—  56Sp  +0*04162 

August 

18. 

15*93 

754*99 

40T:^i  40Sp  +0*01443 

August 

19. 

15*6 

739*29 

20T£!:  20Sp  +0-00169 

August 

27. 

14*95 

764*69 

40T:£t  40Sp  +0*04730 

August 

29. 

14*58 

Ti^-hZ 

40T£i:  40Sp  +0*04056 
286T:^=286Sp  +0*20782 

In 

air  (<=13*74,  h- 

= 758*91) 

Sp  +0*00073 

January 

16. 

t. 

9*05 

h. 

763*46 

gr. 

10T£!:  lORS  — 0*04539 

July 

28. 

17*01 

753*95 

24T£!:  24eS  — 0*10632 

August 

14. 

15*96 

759-34 

44T£i:  44RS  — 0*21227 

August 

15. 

16*29 

1hh-Z^ 

44T£i  44RS  — 0*19871 

122Tiil22RS- 0*56269 

In  1 

air  (<=15*72,  h— 

757-19) 

T:Oz  RS-0*0046l 

Since  ASp  was  computed  by  means  of  Schumacher’s  Tables,  we  must  employ  the 
value  of  AT  obtained  by  means  of  the  same  Tables  in  reducing  the  comparisons  of 
T with  Sp  and  RS.  By  these  Tables  log  A=T32566  for  T,  and  log  A=1 ‘32608  for 
Sp  and  RS. 

T£hSp+0-00073  grain  in  air  (^=1374,  6=758-91). 

T displaces  0-33356  grain  of  air,  Sp  displaces  0-33324  grain  of  air.  Therefore 

T=Sp+0-00105  grain. 

T:2iRS— 0 00461  grain  in  air  (^=15-72,  6 = 757'19). 

T displaces  0-33037  grain  of  air,  RS  displaces  0-33005  grain  of  air.  Therefore 

T=RS — 0-00429  grain. 

If  we  suppose  U to  have  had  the  same  density  as  V,  Sp=U— 0-52956  grain, 
and  RS=U— 0-52441  grain.  The  former  gives  T=U— 0-52851  grain,  the  latter 
T=U— 0-52870.  Mean,  giving  to  the  former  twice  the  weight  of  the  latter,  because 

5 p 


MDCCCLVI. 


820  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

the  number  of  comparisons  of  Sp  with  U,  and  of  T with  Sp  is  about  twice  as  large  as 
the  number  of  comparisons  of  RS  with  U,  and  T with  RS, 

T=U— 0-52857  grain  =5759-47143  grains. 

During  the  comparisons  of  Sp  and  RS  with  U in  Somerset  House,  the  mean  value 
of  t was  I8-7,  and  that  of  b was  755-64. 

T displaced  0-32605  grain  of  air,  U displaced  0-84717  grain  of  air. 

Hence  T^^U— 0-00745  grain  in  air  (^=18-7,  6=755-64)  in  Somerset  House. 


Comparisons  of  the  auxiliary  weights  in  January  and  February  1845. 

The  comparisons  of  the  auxiliary  weights  among  each  other,  after  their  second 
adjustment,  were  made  with  ray  10|^-inch  Robinson.  The  comparisons  of 
A+B+C+H-1-F  with  T were  made  with  Babrow’s  balance. 

February  22  and  24,  1845.  100  parts  =0*17274  grain. 

S=A  + B + C + D + F. 


T+X. 

S+Y. 

T+Y. 

S+X, 

22*00 

20*06 

19*16 

20*65 

21*05 

29-37 

21*52 

21*50 

22*16 

20*50 

23*17 

22*73 

21*46 

20*52 

23*86 

21*00 

22*73 

21*21 

20*88 

20*47 

22*71 

21*31 

21*60 

20*67 

23*21 

21*32 

20*93 

21*10 

23*53 

21*68 

21*20 

21*67 

23*68 

21*50 

22*50 

21*40 

24*05 

22*00 

21*61 

21*77 

23*27 

21*23 

21*65 

21*26 

249*85 

231*70 

238*08 

234*22 

11(T  + X)  = 11(S  + Y)  + 18*15  parts.  ll(T  + Y}=ll(S  + X)  + 3*86  parts. 

T=A  + B + C + D+F+0*00173  grain. 

Jan.  29,  Feb.  5 and  6,  1845.  100  parts  =0*3063  grain. 


A,  F+G. 

F+G,  A. 

B,  F+G. 

F+G,  B. 

1*80 

2*29 

3*35 

3*15 

1*95 

2-28 

3*46 

3*01 

2*45 

2*57 

3*20 

2*65 

2*75 

3*75 

3*35 

2*85 

3-00 

3*59 

3*90 

3*05 

3*39 

3*35 

4*14 

2*85 

2-97 

2*50 

3*66 

1*69 

2*05 

2*30 

2*73 

1*80 

2*65 

2*50 

3*41 

1*76 

1*94 

2*51 

2*50 

2*13 

2*21 

1*93 

2-60 

1*28 

2*29 

2*86 

3*00 

2*09 

2*20 

2*69 

2*88 

1*95 

2*55 

2*73 

3*00 

1*75 

2*71 

3*44 

3*18 

2*80 

2*71 

3*56 

3*08 

2*15 

2*66 

2*86 

3*16 

2*65 

42*28 

47*71 

54*60 

39*61 

A=F  + G 

— 0*00049  grain. 

B=F  + G + 0*00135  grain. 

THIRD  COMPARISON  OF  AUXILIARY  WEIGHTS  IN  1845. 


821 


C,  F+G. 

F+G,  C. 

D,  F+G. 

F + G,  D. 

2*65 

1*70 

2*45 

1*90 

3*90 

2*95 

3*36 

2*76 

3*52 

2*38 

3*17 

3*04 

3*45 

2*20 

3*55 

2*41 

4*01 

2*91 

4*15 

2-90 

4*40 

2*85 

3*99 

2*50 

3*75 

1*65 

3*23 

1*88 

3*00 

1*96 

2*58 

2*40 

.3*54 

1*69 

3*08 

1*79 

2*73 

1*60 

2*38 

1*95 

2*80 

1*23 

2*40 

1*66 

3*50 

1*56 

2*80 

2*00 

3*08 

1'69 

2*59 

2*25 

.3*05 

2*33 

2*80 

2*75 

3*35 

2*51 

3*03 

2*70 

3*41 

2*21 

3*00 

2*88 

3*18 

2*44 

2*90 

2*40 

57*32 

35*86 

51*46 

40*17 

C=F+G  + 0*00193  grain. 

D=F+G  + 0*00102  grain. 

, 29,  1845. 

100  parts  =0*27082  grain. 

F,  G+H. 

G+H,  F. 

2*64 

2*85 

2*69 

2*97 

2*30 

2*86 

2*55 

2*82 

2*36 

2*91 

2*51 

3*07 

2*27 

2*77 

2*16 

2*59 

2*72 

2*75 

2*52 

3*46 

2*41 

3*39 

2*59 

2*87 

29*72 

35*31 

F=G  + H-0*00063 

grain. 

100  parts  =0*25016 

grain. 

G,  H+K. 

H+K,  G. 

G,  H+L. 

H+L,  G. 

4*65 

3*00 

5*10 

2*60 

4*67 

3*34 

5*22 

2*67 

3*30 

. 1*94 

3*72 

1*34 

3*85 

2*76 

4*40 

2*17 

3*87 

2*85 

4*52 

2*32 

3*99 

3*01 

4*66 

2*44 

3*47 

2*15 

3*85 

1*82 

3*51 

2*45 

3*89 

1*77 

3*35 

2*05 

3*89 

1*66 

3*49 

2*45 

3*87 

1*86 

38*15 

26*00 

43*12 

20*65 

G = H + K + 0*00152  grain.  G=H-1-L  4- 0*00281  grain. 


5 p 2 


822  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


G,  H+M. 

H+M,  G. 

G,  H+N. 

H+N,  G. 

4-70 

3-20 

4-35 

3-65 

4-45 

3-22 

4-29 

3-80 

2-95 

2-02 

2-57 

2-27 

3-67 

2-70 

3-32 

3-00 

3-77 

2-80 

3-40 

3-06 

3-77 

3-00 

3-47 

3-15 

3-40 

2-30 

3-00 

2-56 

3*45 

2-35 

3-10 

2-55 

3-32 

2-12 

3-07 

2-47 

3-54 

2-45 

3-15 

2-60 

37-02 

26-16 

33-72 

29-11 

G=H  + M + 0-00136  grain. 

G=H  + N + 0-00058  grain. 

Jan.  25,  Feb.  7. 

100  parts  : 

= 0-251256  grain. 

H,  K+L+M+N+R. 

K+L+M+N+R,  H. 

H,  K+L+M+N+S. 

K+L+M+N+S,  H. 

3-55 

3-85 

3-70 

3-95 

3-40 

3-80 

3-55 

3-70 

3-80 

2-70 

3-65 

3-80 

3*50 

3-80 

3-50 

3-70 

3-60 

3-70 

3-65. 

3'80 

3*80 

3-70 

3-60 

3-70 

3-76 

3-31 

3-77 

3-30 

4-32 

3-61 

4-00 

3-37 

3-95 

3-52 

3-60 

3-32 

3-75 

3-29 

3-65 

3-16 

4-02 

3-42 

4-02 

3-31 

4-10 

3-62 

4-01 

3-71 

3-90 

3-42 

3-86 

3-15 

3-60 

3-10 

3-52 

3-25 

3-74 

3-50 

3-74 

3-51 

3-79 

3-12 

3-72 

3-05 

2-71 

2-27 

2-62 

2-26 

63-29 

57-73 

62-16 

58-02 

H — KH-L  + M + N + R + 0-00034  grain. 

H=K  + L + M + N + S + 0-00030  grain 

January  25,  and  February  7-  100  parts 

= 0-26560  grain. 

K,  R+S. 

R+S,  K. 

L,  R+S. 

R+S,  L. 

3-45 

3-80 

2-80 

4-00 

3-25 

3-30 

2-70 

3-70 

3-20 

3-30 

2-75 

3-80 

3-10 

2-90 

2-70 

3-30 

3-00 

3-30 

2-75 

3-70 

3-20 

3-15 

2-70 

3-70 

2-00 

2-05 

1-45 

2-62 

2-75 

2-95 

2-30 

3-37 

3-22 

3-20 

2-55 

3-81 

2-90 

3-00 

2-32 

3-60 

2-99 

3-17 

2-37 

3-66 

2-99 

3-22 

2-40 

. 3-77 

36  05 

37-34 

29-79 

43-02 

K::>:R  + 8- 

0-00014  grain. 

L=R+S- 

0-00146  grain. 

THIRD  COMPARISON  OF  AUXILIARY  WEIGHTS  IN  1845. 


823 


M,  R+S. 

R+S,  M. 

3-50 

3-25 

3-30 

3-20 

3-20 

3-20 

3-10 

2-95 

3-20 

3-40 

3-30 

3-15 

2-07 

2-05 

2-96 

2-69 

3-20 

3-35 

2-92 

3-05 

3-07 

3-10 

2-96 

3-12 

36-78 

36-51 

M=R  + S + O’OOOOS  grain. 


N,  R+S. 

R+S,  N. 

3-70 

2-95 

3-50 

2-95 

3-50 

2-80 

2-90 

2-70 

3-50 

2-90 

3-50 

2-90 

2-31 

1-75 

3-17 

2-64 

3-47 

2-90 

3-26 

2-64 

3-41 

2-66 

3-36 

2-77 

39-58 

32-56 

N=R  + S + 0’00078  grain. 


T=A+B+C+D+F 

+ 0-00173 

A=F+G 

— 0-00049 

B =F+G 

+ 0-00135 

C =F+G 

+ 0-00193 

D = F + G 

+ 0-00102 

F =G  + H 

-0-00063 

G=H  + K 

+ 0-00152 

G=H  + L 

+ 0-00281 

G=H  + M 

+ 0-00136 

G=H  + N 

+ 0-00058 

H=K+L+M+N+R 

+ 0-00034 

H=K+L+M+N+S 

+ 0-00030 

K = R + S 

— 0-00014 

L=:R  + S 

-0-00146 

M=R  + S 

+ 0-00003 

N = R + S 

+ 0-00078 

gr. 

A + B + C + D=4F  + 4G 

+ 0-00381 

4G  = 4H  + K + L + M + N 

+ 0-00627 

2H=:2(K  + L + M + N)  + R+S  +0-00064 
K + L + M + N=4(R  + S)  -0-00079 

4(K  + L + M + N)=16(R+S)  -0-00316 

4H=4(K  + L+M  + N)  + 2(R  + S)  +0-00128 
4G=4H  + K + L + M + N +0-00627 

4F  = 4G  + 4H  —0-00252 

A + B + C + D=4F+4G  +0-00381 

T=A  + B + C + D + F +0-00173 

4H=18(R  + S)  —0-00188 

4G=:22(R  + S)  +0-00360 

4F  = 40(R  + S)  -0-00080 

4F+4G=62(R  + S)  +0-00280 

A + B + C + D=:62(R  + S)  +0-00661 

T=72(R  + S)  +0-00814 


T 

— 

grams. 

5759*47143 

72(R  + S) 

5759-46329 

18(R  + S) 

= 

1439-86582 

40(R  + S) 

= 

3199-70183 

10(R  + S) 

799*92546 

62(R  + S) 

= 

4959-53783 

22(R+S) 

= 

1759-83601 

A+B+C+D 

= 

4959-54444 

4F+4G 

= 

4959-54063 

F+G 

= 

1239-88516 

824  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


A 

— 

grains. 

1239-88467 

B 

= 

1239-88651 

C 

= 

1239-88709 

D 

1239'88618 

F 

= 

799-92526 

G 

= 

499-95990 

H 

= 

359-96598 

K 

= 

79-99241 

L 

= 

79-99109 

M 

79-99258 

N 

79-99333 

R 

■=. 

39-99625 

S 

= 

39-99629 

In  the  summer  of  1845,  after  the  adjustment  and  comparison  of  PS  200  times  with 
T4-0'645  grain  together  with  each  of  the  weights  A,  B,  C,  D in  succession,  the  com- 
parisons of  the  auxiliary  weights  with  each  other  and  with  T presented  some  unac- 
countable discordances.  By  a most  troublesome  repetition  of  the  weighings  with 
different  combinations  of  the  weights,  it  became  evident  that  A,  C,  F were  subject  to 
a very  sensible  fluctuation.  This  was  at  last  found  to  be  due  to  the  circumstance 
that  the  platinum  of  which  they  were  made  had  been  very  badly  prepared,  and  con- 
tained cavities  filled  with  a substance  which  attracted  moisture  from  the  air.  In 
order  to  remove  this  injurious  matter,  they  were  digested  in  boiling  water  and  then 
placed  in  a platinum  capsule  over  a spirit-lamp,  the  heat  of  which  caused  a brown 
liquid  to  escape  from  the  openings  in  their  surfaces.  After  repeating  this  process 
several  times  till  the  coloured  liquid  ceased  to  appear,  and  till  it  was  supposed  that 
the  whole  of  the  deliquescent  substance  was  removed,  it  was  found  that  A,  C and  F 
had  lost  0'04  grain,  O'OSl  grain,  and  0‘04  grain  respectively.  It  now  became  obvious 
that  all  the  weighings  into  which  either  A,  B or  F entered,  must  be  repeated.  This 
involved  the  rejection  of  the  observations  for  determining  the  weight  of  PS,  and  the 
comparison  of  PS  with  the  kilogramme,  as  well  as  those  for  comparing  the  auxiliary 
weights  themselves.  The  weights  lost  by  A,  C,  F were  made  up  by  the  addition  of 
bits  of  wire.  In  the  following  comparisons  A denotes  the  weight  marked  A-1-0’04 
grain,  C the  weight  marked  C+0’031  grain,  F the  weight  marked  F-1-0'04  grain. 


June  26,  1846.  100  parts  =0*26694  grain. 

S=A  + B + C + D-|-F. 


S+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  S+Y. 

S + X,  T+Y. 

T+Y,  S+X. 

19-97 

19-80 

18-00 

18-24 

20-04 

19-40 

17-44 

18-30 

20-57 

18-66 

17-60 

18-54 

20-41 

18-89 

17-95 

18-61 

19-75 

18-65 

17-90 

17-96 

19-96 

19-55 

17-82 

18-60 

19-99 

18-80 

17-27 

18-16 

18-92 

18-52 

17-17 

18-41 

18-41 

18-59 

18-27 

18-14 

18-94 

17-22 

17-60 

18-29 

196-96 

188-08 

177-02 

183-25 

20(T+X)=20(S  + Y)  + 8-88  parts  20(T  + Y)=20(S  + X)-6-23  parts. 

40T=  40( A + B + C + D + F) -h  0-00708  grain. 


THIRD  COMPARISON  OF  AUXILIARY  WEIGHTS  IN  1846. 


825 


July  1.  100  parts 


S+Y,  T+X. 

T+X,  S+Y. 

17*61 

18*09 

17*67 

17*87 

16*95 

17*81 

17*09 

17*47 

17*04 

17*49 

17*06 

17*59 

16*82 

17*36 

16*79 

17*70 

17*15 

17*19 

16*81 

17*01 

170*99 

175*58 

0*26965  grain. 


S+X,T+Y. 

T+Y,  S+X. 

15*67 

16*70 

16*17 

16*99 

16*01 

15*85 

15*55 

16*96 

16*19 

16*89 

16*15 

16*07 

15*52 

16*00 

15*47 

16*46 

15*40 

16*80 

15*90 

15*99 

158*03 

164*71 

20(T+X)=20(S  + Y)  — 4*59  parts.  20(T  + Y)=20(S  + X)— 6*68  parts. 

40T=40(A  + B + C + D + F)-0*03039  grain. 

T=  A + B + C+D  + F— 0*00029  grain. 


June  25,  July  3,  4,  6,  1846.  100  parts  =0*49505  grain. 


A.  F+G. 

F+G,  A. 

B,  F+G. 

F+G,  B. 

3*52 

3*95 

3*34 

3*92 

3*12 

3*77 

3*07 

3*60 

2*67 

2*70 

2*72 

2*92 

2*67 

3*44 

2*75 

3*26 

2*92 

3*22 

2*97 

2*71 

2*70 

3*44 

2*57 

3*47 

3*25 

3*74 

2*96 

3*57 

2*97 

3*44 

.3*07 

3*46 

2*84 

3*67 

2*79 

3*52 

2*79 

3*39 

2*79 

3*41 

2*87 

3*37 

2*95 

3*44 

2*61 

3*19 

2*47 

3*22 

2*50 

2*89 

2*26 

3*27 

2*46 

3*00 

2*29 

.3*00 

2*54 

2*98 

2*47 

3*15 

2*82 

3*32 

2*61 

3*39 

2*95 

3*61 

2*86 

3*67 

2*75 

3*42 

3*22 

4*00 

2*74 

4*16 

2*96 

4*09 

2*74 

3*67 

3*06 

4*12 

2*99 

3*80 

2*66 

4*04 

2*79 

4*00 

2*69 

3*75 

62*21 

76*17 

61*53 

76*98 

A=F  + G 

— 0*00157  grain. 

B=F+G 

— 0*00174  grain. 

826  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND 


June  25,  July  3,  4,  6,  1846.  100  parts  =0-49505  grain. 


C,  F+G. 

F+G,  C. 

D,  F+G. 

F+G,  D. 

3-21 

3-94 

3-05 

3-77 

3-05 

3-87 

3-02 

3-56 

2-70 

2-90 

2-72 

2-89 

2-80 

2-97 

2-69 

2-92 

3-12 

3-29 

3-10 

3-21 

2-52 

3-46 

2-85 

3-51 

2-89 

3-70 

3-02 

3-97 

2-92 

3-20 

2-91 

3-16 

2*55 

3-44 

2-75 

3-12 

2-70 

3-42 

2-90 

3-47 

2*82 

3-60 

2-84 

3-57 

2-35 

3-59 

2-10 

3-31 

2-67 

3-05 

2-27 

3-35 

2-16 

3-24 

2-65 

3-26 

2-50 

3-12 

2-32 

3-35 

2-50 

3-11 

2-54 

3-55 

2-77 

3-61 

2-67 

4-01 

2-97 

3-84 

2-62 

3-75 

2-62 

3-70 

2-35 

3-70 

2-51 

3-67 

2-56 

3-91 

2-86 

3-80 

2-46 

3-71 

2-86 

3-75 

2-45 

3-49 

60-05 

76-27 

58-84 

76-54 

C=F+G- 

0-00182  grain. 

D=F+G 

— 0-00199  grain. 

June  25,  July  3,  4,  5,  6,  1846.  100  parts  =0*42553  grain. 


F,  G+H. 

G+H,  F. 

4-72 

4-07 

4-60 

4-02 

5-05 

4-19 

4-05 

3-96 

3-95 

3-32 

3-99 

3-37 

3-82 

3-45 

3-20 

3-17 

3-55 

3-32 

3-45 

3-04 

4-01 

3-60 

4-10 

3-57 

4-14 

3-55 

4-17 

3-39 

4-17 

3-77 

4-46 

3-56 

4-24 

3-52 

4-19 

3-29 

4-15 

3-60 

4-07 

3-44 

4-09 

3-31 

4-37 

3-46 

4-44 

3-67 

4-49 

3-31 

4-40 

3-02 

4-30 

3-80 

4-40 

3-50 

4-45 

3-34 

4-11 

3-64 

4-54 

3-32 

4-17 

3-12 

129-84 

108-69 

F=G  + H + 0’00145  grain. 


THIRD  COMPARISON  OF  AUXILIARY  WEIGHTS. 


827 


The  relations  between  G,  H,  K,  L,  M,  N,  R,  S are  given  by  the  observations  of 
1845. 


T =A  + B + C + D + F 

gr- 

— 0-00029 

A =:F-fG 

— 0-00157 

B =F  + G 

— 0-00174 

C =:F+G 

— 0-00182 

D=F  + G 

-0-00199 

F ==G  + H 

+ 0-00145 

G=H  + K 

+ 0-00152 

G =H  + L 

+ 0-00281 

G=H  + M 

+ 0-00136 

G = H + N 

+ 0-00058 

H=K+L+M+N+R 

+ 0-00034 

H=K+L+M+N+S 

+ 0-00030 

K=R  + S 

— 0-00014 

L =R  + S 

— 0-00146 

M=R  + S 

+ 0-00003 

N=R+S 

+ 0-00078 

A + B + C + D =4F+4G 

-0-00712 

4G  =4H  + K + L + M + N +0-00627 

2H  =2(K  + L + M+N)  + R + S +0-00064 

K + L + M + N =4R  + 4S 

— 0-00079 

4(K  + L+M  + N)= 

l6(R  + S)-0-003l6 

4H  =4(K  + L + M + N)+  2(R  + S)  + 0-00128 

4H  = 

18(R  + S)-0-00188 

K+L+M+N  = 

4(R  + S)-0-00079 

4G  =4H  + K + L + M + N +0-00627 

4G  = 

22(R  + S)  + 0-00360 

4H  = 

18(R  + S)-0-00188 

4G  + 4H  = 

40(R  + S)  + 0-00172 

4F  =4G  + 4H 

+ 0-00580 

4F  = 

40(R  + S)  + 0-00752 

4G  = 

22(R  + S)  + 0-00360 

4F  + 4G  = 

62(R  + S)  + 0-01112 

A+B+C+D  = 

62(R  + S)  + 0-00400 

F = 

10(R  + S)  + 0-00188 

A+B+C+D+F= 

72(R  + S)  + 0-00588 

T = 

72(R  + S)  + 0-00559 

grains. 

T 

= 

5759-47143 

72(R+S) 

= 

5759-46584 

18(R  + S) 

= 

1439-86646 

40(R  + S) 

= 

3199-70324 

10(R  + S) 

799-92581 

62(R  + S) 

= 

4959-54003 

22(R  + S) 

1759-83678 

A+B+C+D 

4959-54403 

4F  + 4G 

== 

4959-55115 

F+G 

1239-88779 

A 

1239-88622 

B 

= 

1239-88605 

C 

= 

1239-88597 

D 

1239-88580 

F 

= 

799-92769 

G 

439-96009 

H 

359-96614 

K 

79-99244 

L 

79-99112 

M 

79-99261 

N 

79-99336 

R 

= 

39-99627 

S 

= 

39-99631 

5 Q 


MDCCCLVI. 


828  PKOF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


In  the  observations  for  finding-  specific  gravities  made  after  June  1846,  A,  C,  F 
were  used  without  the  bits  of  wire  added  to  jnake  up  their  loss  of  weight.  Their  values 
were,  therefore, — 

grains. 

A =1239*84622 

C =1239*85497 

F = 799*88769 

Y,  Z are  weights  of  19-998  grains  each,  W a weight  of  12*901  grains,  V a weight 
of  6*451  grains,  Q the  mean  of  the  ten  weights  of  0*645  grain  nearly. 


August  22,  1845,  January  17,  1846. 


Y+Z,  R. 

R,  Y+Z. 

3*69 

3*49 

3*50 

3*40 

3*57 

3*42 

3*50 

3*44 

3*56 

3*42 

3*55 

3*34 

2D37 

20*51 

100  parts  =0*4065  grain. 


Y+Z,  S. 

S,  Y+Z, 

3*61 

3*54 

3*47 

3*45 

3*50 

3*37 

3*52 

3*39 

3*56 

3*40 

3*47 

3*36 

21*13 

20*51 

Y + Z=S  + 0*00021  grain 
Y + Z = 39*99654  grains. 


Y + Z = R + 0*00029  grain. 

10(R  + S)=799*92581  grains, 


In  the  following  comparisons  of  W+V  + Q with  Y and  Z,  the  Q was  changed  at 
the  end  of  each  weighing,  so  that  each  Q was  weighed  eight  times  with  W+V. 

August  22,  1845,  January  17,  1846.  100  parts  =0*3992  grain. 


W+V+Q,  Y. 

Y,  W+V+Q. 

W+V+Q,  Z. 

Z,  W+V+Q. 

3*02 

3*91 

3*17 

3*85 

3*10 

3*92 

3*32 

3*70 

3*10 

3*96 

3*27 

3*76 

3*11 

3*94 

3*35 

3*75 

3*16 

4*07 

3*35 

3*67 

3*05 

4*05 

3*31 

3*79 

3*20 

4*01 

3*31 

3*62 

3*10 

4*06 

3*22 

3*67 

3*17 

4*00 

2*82 

3*57 

3*20 

3*97 

3*25 

3*67 

3*01 

3*80 

3*19 

3*71 

2*88 

3*86 

3*22 

3*69 

2*91 

3*85 

3*23 

3*62 

2*97 

3*81 

3*20 

3*59 

3*01 

3*81 

3*25 

3*61 

3*08 

3*87 

3*20 

3*56 

2*97 

3*84 

3*22 

3*67 

2*98 

3*86 

3-23 

3*64 

3*04 

3*83 

3*27 

3*59 

3*07 

3*80 

3*28 

3*70 

61*13 

78*22 

64*66 

73*43 

W + V + Q=Y- 

-0*001705  grain. 

W+V+Q=Z 

— 0*000875  grain, 

THIRD  COMPARISON  OF  AUXILIARY  WEIGHTS. 


829 


August  22,  1845,  Jan.  17,  1846.  100  parts  =0'4096  grain. 


W,  V+lOQ. 

V+lOQ,  W. 

V,  lOQ. 

lOQ,  V. 

3*29 

3*65 

3*45 

3*62 

3*30 

3*56 

3*42 

3*47 

3*29 

3*56 

3*37 

3*41 

3*32 

3*61 

3*44 

3*38 

3*25 

3*60 

3*45 

3*46 

3*30 

3*59 

3*37 

3*50 

19*75 

21*57 

20*50 

20*84 

2V-|-20Q= 

2VV  + 0*00124  grain. 

40Q=  4 V + 0*00046  grain. 

gr- 

Y + Z 

= 39*99654 

2W  + 2V  + 2Q 

= Y + Z-  0*00258 

2V  + 20Q 

= 2W  + 0*00124 

40Q 

= 4V  + 0*00046 

62Q 

= 39*99566 

Q 

= 0*64509 

Let  (64),  (32),  (16),  (8),  (4),  (2),  (1)  denote  platinum  weights  belonging  to  Bar- 
row’s  balance,  2J  the  sum  of  two  platinum  grain  weights  belonging  to  Robinson’s 
balances,  G a brass  grain  weight. 


April  11,  1845.  100  parts  =0*29261  grain. 


K, 

r64)+(i6) 

2*47 

(64)  + (l6),K 

4*82 

L, 

(64)  + (i6) 

1*88 

(64)  + (l6),  L 

5*45 

M, 

(64)  + (16) 

2*44 

(64)  + (l6j,  M 

4*80 

N, 

(64)  + (16) 

2*70 

(64)  + (l6),  N 

4*35 

R + S, 

(64)  + (i6) 

2*32 

(64)  + (l6),  R + S 

4*85 

K, 

(64)  + (l6) 

2*30 

(64)  + (l6),  K 

4*65 

L, 

(64)  + (l6) 

1*80 

(64)  + (l6),  L 

5*32 

M, 

(64)  + (l6) 

2*42 

(64)  + (l6),  M 

4*60 

N, 

(64)  + (l6) 

2*65 

(64)  + (l6),  N 

4*29 

K + S,  (64^  + (16^ 

2*35 

(64)  + (l6),  R + S 

4*61 

23*33 

47*74 

gr- 


5[(64)  + (l6)] 

= K + L + M + N + R + S+  0*01786 

K+L+M+N 

= 4(R  + S) 

- 0*00079 

K + L + M + N + R + S=5(R  + S) 

— 0*00079 

5(R  + S) 

= 

399*96290 

K+L+M+N+R+S= 

399*96211 

5[(64)  + (l6)] 

399*97997 

(64)  + (l6) 

“ 

79*99599 

1845. 

100  parts  =0*29485  grain. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

R,  (32)  + (8) 

2*310 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3*675 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

2*640 

(32)  + (8),  S 

3*650 

R,  (32)  + (8) 

2*550 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3*675 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

2*675 

(32)  + (8),  S 

3*650 

R,  (32)+(8) 

2*775 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3*725 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

2*860 

(32)  + (8),  S 

3*875 

R,  (32)  + (8) 

2*660 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3*790 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

2*825 

(32)  + (8),  S 

3*790 

21*295 

29*830 

16[(32)  + (8)]  = 8(R-1-S)  + 0*02517  grain. 


5 Q 2 


830  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


January  19,  1846. 

100  parts  =0-40140 

grain. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

R,  (32)  + (8) 

3-300 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3-975 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

3-362 

(32)  + (8),  S 

3-875 

R,  (32)  + (8) 

3-300 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3-950 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

3-362 

(32)  + (8),  S 

3-875 

R,  (32)  + (8) 

3-200 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3-925 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

3-287 

(.32)  + (8),  S 

3-825 

R,  (32)  + (8) 

3-175 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3-900 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

3-275 

(32)  + (8),  S 

3-862 

R,  (32)  + (8) 

3-212 

(32)  + (8),  R 

3-812 

S,  (32)  + (8) 

3-375 

(32)  + (8),  S 

3-800 

32-848 

Kr. 

38-799 

36[(32)  + (8)]  = 18(R  + S)+  0-04906 

2[(32)  + (8)]=  R + S 

+ 0-00273 

R + S = 

79-99258 

2[(32)  + (8)]  = 

79-99531 

(32)  + (8)  = 

39-99765 

January  19,  1846. 

100  parts  =0-40140 

grain. 

(64),  (32)+(16)  + (8)+(4)+(2)+2J.  (32)+(16)+(8)+(4)  + (2)+2J,  (64). 

.3-487 

3-375 

3-512 

3-462 

3-750 

3-525 

.3-837 

3-487 

3-800 

3-562 

18-386 

17-411 

(32)  + (l6)  + (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 2J= 

(64)  — 0-00038  grain. 

(32),  (16)+(8)+(4)  + (2)+2J.  (i6)  + (8)  + (4)+(2)+2J,  (32). 

3-.325 

3-450 

3-437 

3-537 

3-512 

3-537 

3-625 

3-550 

3-587 

3-637 

17-486 

17-711 

(16)  + (8) + (4)  + (2)  + 2J=(32)  + 0-00009  grain. 

(16),  (8)+(4)+(2)+2J.  (8)  + (4)+(2)+2J,  (16). 

(8),  (4)+(2)+2J. 

(4J  + ^2)+2J,  ^8). 

.3-525 

3-225 

3-437 

3-275 

3-512 

.3-375 

3-500 

3-300 

.3-662 

3-350 

3-587 

3-425 

3-625 

3-350 

3-612 

3-475 

3-687 

3-437 

3-625 

3-500 

18-011 

16-737 

17-761 

16-975 

(8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 2J=(16)  — 0-00051  grain. 

(4)  + (2)4-2J=(8)- 

0-00032  grain. 

.January  l6,  1845. 

100  parts  =0-4096  : 

grain. 

(4),  (2)+2J. 

(2)+2J,  (4). 

(2),  2J. 

2J,  (2). 

.3-312 

3-212 

3-287 

3-387 

.3-412 

3-425 

3-337 

3-450 

3-612 

3-425 

3-325 

3-487 

3-587 

3-412 

3-312 

3-537 

.3-562 

3-500 

3-387 

3-512 

17-485 

16-974 

16-648 

17-373 

(2)  + 2J=(4)- 

-0-00021  grain. 

2J= (2)  .f.  0-00030  grain. 

OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  No.  1. 


83  i 


March  20,  1845.  100  parts  =0"29485  grain. 


(2),  (1)+G.  (1)+G,  (2). 

(1),G. 

G,  (1). 

2*98 

3*46 

2*80 

3*65 

3*10 

3*57 

2*75 

3*72 

3*12 

3*67 

3*02 

3*72 

9*20 

10*70 

8*57 

11*09 

(1)  + G= 

:(2)  + 0'00074  grain. 

G=(l)  + 0*00124 

grain. 

Hence  2(1)=(2)— 0*00050  grain. 


Hence 


gr. 


2J 

= (2) 

+ 0*00030 

2J  + (2) 

= (4) 

— 0*00021 

2J  + (2)  + (4) 

= (8) 

- 0*00032 

2J  + (2)  + (4)  + (8) 

= (I6) 

— 0*00051 

2J  + (2)  + (4)  + (8)  + (16) 

= (32) 

+ 0*00009 

2j  + (2)  + (4)  + (8)  + (l6)  + (32) 

=(64) 

— 0*00038 

2J 

= (2) 

+ 0*00030 

4J 

= (4) 

+ 0*00009 

8J 

-(8) 

+ 0*00007 

16J 

= (16) 

— 0*00005 

32J 

= (32) 

+ 0*00050 

64J 

= (64) 

+ 0*00053 

80J 

= (64)  + (l6)  + 0*00048=79*99647 

40J 

= (32)  + (8)  + 0*00057 

= 39*99822 

Mean. 80J— 79*99646 

649=63*99717 

(64) 

= 63*99664 

329=31*99858 

(32) 

= 31*99808 

169=15*99929 

(16) 

= 15*99934 

89=  7*99965 

(8) 

= 7*99938 

49=  3*99982 

(4) 

= 3*99973 

29=  1*99991 

(2) 

= 1*99961 

9=  0*99996 

(1) 

= 0*99936 

Ohservatlons  for  finding  the  density  of  VC  No.  1. 

Weighing  of  PC  No.  1 in  air. 

August  12,  1844.  100  parts  =0*2564  grain. 


PC. 

T-j-B-t-0'67  grain. 

19*00 

20*80 

21*65 

21*00 

21*30 

21*50 

20*70 

20*50 

20*50 

20*80 

21  *.35 

20*93 

21*95 

20*40 

20*35 

18*90 

19*80 

19*00 

19*30 

18*60 

18*93 

17*60 

18*20 

17*70 

18*10 

17*60 

18*00 

16*85 

17*30 

16*95 

17*60 

16*90 

17*43 

16-50 

17*40 

16*85 

17*13 

17*00 

18*10 

17*30 

384*55 

373*70 

832  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

PC  No.  l-T+B  + 0-6714  gr.  T=5759-4881  gr.,  B=1239-8880  gr.  Therefore 
PC  No.  1 £!:  7000-0475  grains. 

For  PC  No.  1,  log  A=  1-32566.  For  T+B+0-6714,  log  A=  1-32560. 

Hence  vPC  No.  1=330-70,  ^;(T+B^-0-67l4  gr.)  = 330-72.  ^;PC  No.  1 is  less  than 
p(T+B  + 0-6714)  by  the  volume  of  0-02  grain  of  water,  or  of  0-00002  grain  of  air  of 
ordinary  density.  Hence 

PC  No.  1 =7000-0475  grains. 


100  parts  = 

0*26  grain. 

PC  No.  1 and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand 

pan. 

H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

16*95 

17-65 

0*12 

19-4 

16*9 

17-6 

0*12 

19-9 

16*9 

17*65 

0*12 

20*1 

16*9 

17*6 

0*12 

20*8 

16*8 

17*55 

0*12 

21*2 

16*8 

17-5 

0*12 

21*5 

16*8 

17*45 

0*12 

19-1 

16*8 

17*5 

0*12 

19-0 

16*75 

17-45 

0*12 

19*4 

16*75 

17-45 

0*12 

20*0 

16*835 

17-53 

0*120 

20-04 

Hook  in  water.  In 

right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

T + F + K + (l6)  + (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0*68 

27-4 

0*66 

20*4 

0*66 

20*4 

0*66 

19*3 

0*66 

l6*0 

Air. 

0*66 

14*0 

(f=  17-0 

, 6=754*76. 

0*68 

22*0 

0*68 

22*5 

0*66 

19-2 

0*66 

19-2 

0*66 

16*5 

0*68 

23*0 

0*68 

26*2 

0*6677 

20*47 

PC  No.  1 in  water  (it=l6-95)iiT  + F + K + (l6)  + (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-5466  gr.  in  air  C=17-0,  i=754-76). 


July  22,  1844.  100  parts  =0*26  grain. 


PC  No.  1 and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand 

pan. 

H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

0*04 

22*0 

0*04 

22*0 

0*08 

41*6 

0*00 

15*7 

0*04 

22*5 

19-4 

20*4 

0*00 

13*0 

0*00 

7-9 

0*00 

15*5 

0*04 

32*8 

0*04 

21*5 

0*00 

12*5 

0*00 

12*5 

19'4 

20*4 

0*0233 

19*96 

OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  No.  1. 


833 


Hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T + F + K-|-(l6)-f-(8)  + (4)  + ('2)  + 0-72  28-5 

0”68  7-5 

0-70  15-0 

0-71  21-6 

Air.  0-70  18-0 

<=20-0,  &=765-83.  0-72  26-3 

0*68  13*5 

0'72  23-0 

' 0-72  33-0 

0-68  9-0 


0-703  19-54 


PC  No.  1 in  water  (#=19-54)£2:T  + F+K  + (l6)  + (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-6811  gr.  in  air  (^=20-0,  6=765-83). 


July  25,  1844.  100  parts  =0-26  grain. 


PC  No.  1 and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 

H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

21-03 

22-15 

0-20 

36-5 

21-0 

22-10 

0-16 

24-8 

0-12 

11-0 

0-16 

22-5 

0-14 

18-5 

21-0 

22-15 

0-16 

24-4 

21-0 

22-1 

0-12 

9-0 

0-14 

18-0 

21-0 

22-1 

0-12 

13-0 

0-16 

22-5 

21-0 

22-1 

0-15 

20-4 

21-0 

22-05 

0-15 

19-5 

20-95 

22-0 

0-15 

19-7 

20-9 

22-0 

0-15 

20-1 

20-99 

22-08 

0-1486 

19-99 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr.  Scale. 

T+F+K  + (16)-F(8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-98  28-3 

0-94  15-7 

0-96  18-0 

0-98  25-6 

0-94  15-5 

0-96  20-4 

0-98  23-4 

0-94  13-2 

0-98  25-5 

0-94  13-4 

0-96  19-5 

0-98  28-5 

0-94  13-1 

0-96  18-8 


0-960  99-99 


PC  No.  1 in  water  (^=21-15):!lT-t- F + K-l-(l6)  + (8)-f  (4)  + (2)  + 0-8114  gr.  in  air  (#=21-6,  6=761-37). 


834  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND, 


August  2,  1844, 


100  parts  =0‘26  grain. 


PC  No.  1 and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 

H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

0-33 

19-2 

17*9 

18-6 

0-35 

20-0 

0-35 

20-2 

17-8 

18-5 

0-35 

20-5 

0-33 

19-0 

17-6 

18-4 

0-35 

20-1 

17-6 

18-4 

0-35 

18-2 

0-37 

20-6 

17*5 

18-35 

0-37 

21-0 

0-37 

25-6 

17''5 

18-25 

0-37 

24-4 

17-4 

18-2 

0-33 

18-1 

0-33 

14-0 

0-33 

10-8 

0-33 

8-2 

0-37 

24-5 

17-61 

18-39 

0-3487 

19-02 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

T + F + K + (16)  + (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-94 

23-1 

0-90 

11-0 

0-94 

16-5 

0-96 

22-4 

Air. 

0-94 

22-6 

^=18-5, 

5=746-12. 

0-94 

21-2 

0-96 

25-0 

0-92 

17-5 

0-96 

20-4 

0-96 

20-0 

0-942 

19-97 

, 1 in  water  (^=17'68)£; 

:T  + F + K + (16)  + (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-5908  gr.  in  air  (<=18-5,  5= 

Apparent  weight  of  PC  No.  1 in  water  weighed  with 

platinum  weights 

Water. 

Apparent  weight  of  PC  No.  1. 

Air. 

t. 

gr- 

t. 

b. 

16-95 

6669-9457 

17-0 

754-76 

19-54 

6670-0802 

20-0 

765-83 

21-15 

6670-2105 

21-6 

761-37 

17-68 

6669-9899 

18-5 

746-12 

resulting  values  of  APC  No.  1 and 

log  APC  No.  1 are, — 

APC  No.  1. 

log  APC  No.  1. 

21-1664 

1-325647 

21-1662 

1-325644 

21-1687 

1-325695 

21-1673 

1-325666 

Mean  

21-16715 

1-325663 

10—  log  A, 

8-674337 

PC  No.  1 (reduced) 

7000-004 

3-845098 

vPC  No.  1 

330-701 

2-519435 

OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  NO.  2. 


835 


Observations  for  finding  the  density  o/’PC  No.  2. 


Weighing  of  PC  No.  2 in  air. 

August  13,  1844.  100  parts  =0*2432  grain. 


PC. 

T+B+0-653gr. 

20*20 

19-90 

21*30 

20*80 

21*40 

21*50 

22*30 

22*40 

22*80 

24*40 

22*85 

22*45 

22*95 

22*85 

23*80 

23*15 

24*00 

23*10 

24*35 

24*35 

21*47 

19*85 

21*37 

20-65 

21*57 

20-95 

21*52 

20-90 

21*00 

20-55 

20*32 

20-10 

20*22 

19-87 

20*62 

19*72 

20*52 

19-62 

19*95 

19-77 

434*51 

424*88 

PC  No.  2-T+B  + 0'65417  gr.  T=.5759-4881  gr.  B = 1239-8880  gr.  Therefore 
PC  No.  2 7000-0303  grains. 

For  PC  No.  2,  log  A=  1-32560.  For  T+B-{-0-6542,  log  A=:  1-32564. 

Hence  v?C  No.  2=330-75,  t;(TH-B  + 0-6542)  =330-72.  t;PC  No.  2 is  greater  than 
t;(T+B+0'6542)  by  the  volume  of  0-03  grain  of  water,  or  of  0-00004  grain  of  air  of 
ordinary  density.  Hence 

PC  No.  2 = 7000-0303  grains. 


July  18,  1844. 


PC  No.  2. 


100  parts  =0*26  grain. 


PC  No.  2 and  hook  in  water. 
H.  P. 


16-5  17-3 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

0*20 

0*20 

0*20 

0*20 

0*20 

0*20 

0*18 

0*16 

0*16 

0*18 

0*20 

0*24 

0*16 

0*14 

0*20 

0*16 

0*18 

0*20 


16*5  17-3 


0-1867 


5 R 


Scale. 

20*6 

21*2 

21*1 

21*3 

21*5 

23-6 

23*2 

13-0 

15*7 

22-0 

25-4 

38*5 

15*3 

12*5 

23*5 

16-1 

18*9 

21*3 

20*82 


MDCCCLVI. 


836  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T + F-l-K-f(l6)-l-(8)-)-(4)-f(2)  + 0-60  11*9 

0-68  27-4 

0*64  13-2 

0-66  20-9 

Air.  0-70  44-5 

17-0, 6=753-94.  0-64  17*6 

0-60  12*2 

0-68  25*1 

0-60  9*4 

0-68  25-5 


0*648  20*77 


PC  No.  2 in  water  (^=l6*58)£iT-|-F-fK-h(l6)-l-(8)  + (4)-|-(2)-|-0*46l2  grain  in  air  (^=17*0,  6=753*94). 


July  23,  1844.  100  parts  =0*26  grain. 

PC  No.  2 and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

19*8 

20*7 

0*00 

14*1 

0*04 

22*1 

19*9 

20*85 

0*04 

30*0 

0*00 

14*3 

0*04 

34*0 

19*95 

20*95 

0*00 

15*2 

0*04 

24*8 

20*0 

20*95 

0*00 

16*0 

20*0 

21*0 

0*04 

27*0 

20*0 

21*0 

0*00 

16*5 

20*0 

21*0 

0*04 

30*5 

20*05 

21*05 

0*00 

15*2 

19*95 

20*92 

0*020 

21*66 

Hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


gr. 

T-|-F-(-K  + (l6)-|-  (8)  -f-  (4)-l-(2)  + 0*68 

0*64 

Scale. 

23*0 

14*5 

Air. 

0*68 

23*5 

= 21*5,  6=761*72. 

0*64 

15*0 

0*68 

26*5 

0*64 

12*0 

0*660 

19*08 

PC  No.  2 in  water  (<=20*07)  — T + F-|-K-|-(l6)-|-(8)-f(4)-|-(2)-h 0*6467  gr.  in  air  (^=21*5,  6=761*72). 


100  parts  =0*26  grain. 


PC  No.  2 and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

20*5 

21*6 

0*23 

15*5 

0*26 

21*8 

0*26 

23*4 

0*23 

14*6 

0*26 

23*5 

20*5 

21*5 

0*26 

23*7 

0*23 

18*5 

20*5 

21*55 

0*23 

14*8 

0*26 

21*6 

0*26 

23*5 

20*5 

21*55 

0*248 

20*09 

July  27,  1844. 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  NO.  2. 


837 


Hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T-fF+K  + (l6)-f(8)  + (4)-h(2)  + 0-98  27-0 

0-98  25-.’i 

0-94  13-7 

0-98  24-8 

0-94  11-6 

Air.  0-94  10*8 

^=22-3,  <^=765-63.  0*98  22*9 

0-94  12-1 

0-98  22-5 

0*98  32*0 

0*94  12*8 

0-98  22*1 

0-98  24-5 


0*9646  20*18 


PC  No.  2 in  water  (<=20*65):C!:T-|-F-|-K-t-(l6)-j-(8)-f(4)-|-(2)-|- 0*7164  grain  in  air  (^=22*3,  A=765*63). 
August  3,  1844.  100  parts  =0*26  grain. 


PC  No.  2 and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


H. 

P. 

gr- 

Scale. 

18*0 

18*9 

0*41 

21*5 

17*95 

18*8 

0*40 

23*0 

0*40 

21*5 

17*5 

18*4 

0*40 

21*5 

17*4 

18*2 

0*39 

18*7 

0*40 

11*5 

17*1 

17*95 

0*40 

17*4 

16*95 

17*6 

0*44 

20*5 

0*44 

22*6 

16*6 

17*5 

0*44 

24*0 

17*36 

18*19 

0*412 

20*22 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

T 4- F + K -f  (1 6) -h  (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0*94 

28*8 

0-94 

28*0 

0*90 

11*8 

Air. 

0*94 

22*0 

t— 

17*5,  5=744*15. 

0*90 

12*0 

0*94 

22*6 

0*94 

25*0 

0-90 

12*7 

0*94 

23*0 

0*9267 

20-31 

PC  No.  2 in  water  (<=17*5)^!:T-|-F-fK-|-(l6)-l-(8)-l-(4)-f(2)-|- 0*5144  grain  in  air  (<=17*5,  5=744*15). 


Apparent  weight  of  PC  No.  2 in  water,  weighed  with  platinum  weights. 


Water. 

Apparent  weight  of  PC  No.  2. 

Air. 

t. 

gr- 

t. 

b. 

16*58 

6669*8603 

17*0 

753*94 

20*07 

6670*0458 

21*5 

761*72 

20*65 

6670*1155 

22*3 

765*63 

17*50 

6669*9135 

17*5 

744*15 

5 R 2 


838  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Resulting  values  of  APC  No.  2 and  logAPC  No.  2. 


APC  No.  2. 

logAPC  No.  2. 

21-1656 

1-325631 

21-1640 

1-325599 

21-1631 

1-325579 

21-1633 

1-325584 

Mean 

21-1640 

1-325598 

1 0 — log  A 

8-674402 

PC  No.  2 (reduced) 

7000-002 

3-845098 

vPC  No.  2 

330-750 

2-519500 

Observations  for  Jinding  the  density  of  PS. 

Apparent  weight  in  water  of  the  hook  and  wire  by  which  PS,  PC  No.  3 and 
PC  No.  4 were  suspended  in  water. 

The  weight  of  123‘6  inches  of  the  platinum  wire  by  which  the  weights  were  sus- 
pended was  38‘815  grains.  Hence  one  inch  displaces  0'01365  grain  of  water.  100 
parts  of  the  micrometer  scale  correspond  to  a displacement  of  0’01365  grain  of  water. 
With  110  grains  in  each  pan,  100  parts  =0‘2559  grain.  With  the  hook  suspended 
in  water,  100  parts  =0‘2559  grain  +0'01365  grain  =0’27  grain.  The  upper  hook  by 
which  the  wire  was  attached  to  the  scale-pan  was  changed  twice  during  the  weighings. 


March  27?  1845.  Hook  in  water. 
In  right-hand  pan. 


gr- 

Scale. 

0-00 

18-2 

0-02 

20-2 

0-00 

18-9 

0-02 

20-6 

0-00 

18-9 

0-02 

20-5 

0-00 

20-5 

0-00 

18-5 

0-02 

19-5 

0-00 

18-9 

0-00 

20-0 

0-0073 

1 

1 6^ 

Counterpoise  balances  hook  in  water 

+ 0-0086  gr.  in  air. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

(64)  + (32)  + (8)  + (4)  + (l)  + 0-88 

21-75 

+ 0-87 

18-82 

+ 0-88 

22-12 

+ 0-87 

18-55 

0-875 

20-31 

C.poise  bal.  (64) -P  (32) -I- (8)-)- (4) -I- (1)4- 0-8742  gr. 
H.  in  w.£!;(64)-1-(32)-1-  (8)4-  (4)-|-(]  ) -p  0-8656  gr.in  a.: 


April  1,  1845.  Hook  in  water. 
In  right-hand  pan. 

g'’- 
2-30 
2-30 


2-30 

19*0 

2-30 

19-2 

2-32 

21-2 

2-30 

20-8 

2-30 

19-5 

2-3029 

19-94 

Counterpoise  balances  hook  in  water+ 2-3031  gr.  in 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K + (32)  + 0-18 

19-65 

+ 0-18 

19-72 

0-180 

19-68 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32) + 0-1 808  grain. 

Hook  in  water  ilK  + (32)  — 

•2-1223  grains  in  air. 

April  5.  Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

2-30 

20-2 

2-30 

20-4 

2-28 

20-5 

2-24 

12-0 

2-36 

25-5 

2-24 

7-0 

2-34 

26-0 

2-30 

21-0 

2-30 

22-3 

2-30 

22-5 

2-296 

19-5 

Counterpoise  balances  hook  in  water -p  2-2972  gr.  in  air. 


Scale. 

19- 9 

20- 0 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PS. 


8:39 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K + (32)  + 0-18 

17*15 

0*19 

20*55 

0*20 

23*87 

0*190 

20*64 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32) + 0’1 884  grain. 
Hook  in  water  £i:K  + (32)— 2*1088  grains  in  air. 


April  8.  Hook  in  water. 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

2*30 

18*0 

2*30 

20*5 

2*30  ' 

18*8 

2*30 

19*3 

2*30 

19*5 

2*30 

18*5 

2*30 

23*1 

2*30 

18*9 

2*30 

20*2 

2*30 

19*2 

2*300 

19*6 

Counterpoise  balances  hook  in  water  + 2*3011  gr.  in 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K + (32)  + 0*18 

18*05 

0*19 

21*7 

0*18 

18*0 

0*1883 

19*25 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32)  + 0*1902  grain. 

Hook  in  water  £l:K  + (32)  — 2* 

1109  grains  in  air. 

April  16.  Hook  in  water 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

2*30 

18*9 

2*30 

19*0 

2*30 

19*0 

2*30 

19*0 

2*30 

19*5 

2*30 

20*0 

2*30 

20*7 

2*30 

20*0 

2*300 

19*51 

Counterpoise  balances  hook  in  water+ 2*3013  gr.  in 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K + (32)  + 0-18 

17-65 

0*18 

18*55 

0*19 

19*95 

0*19 

21*65 

0*19 

21*8 

0*18 

16*8 

0*185 

19*4 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32)  + 0*1865  grain. 
Hook  in  water  £i:K  + (32)  — 2*1143  grains  in  air. 


Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

2*30 

17*1 

2*30 

18*2 

2*30 

18*5 

2*30 

18*9 

2*30 

18*9 

2*30 

19*9 

2*30 

21*5 

2*30 

19*0 

2*30 

18*5 

2*300 

18*94 

Counterpoise  balances  hook  in  water+ 2*3002 

April  17-  In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K + (32)  + 0*18 

15*9 

0*19 

17*6 

0*22 

29*05 

0*18 

15*3 

0*19 

15*7 

0*20 

21*05 

0*1933 

19*1 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32)  + 0*1956  g 

Hook  in  water  siK  + (32)  — 2*1046  grains 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

2*30 

31-0 

2*24 

12*1 

2*28 

25*0 

2*27 

22*9 

2*26 

19*7 

2*26 

19*0 

2*28 

25*0 

2*26 

18-2 

2*27 

20*5 

2*26 

18*0 

2*28 

21*0 

2*26 

17*0 

2*28 

20*9 

2*26 

19*5 

2*28 

21*0 

2*30 

26*5 

2*26 

15*6 

2*28 

18*0 

2*30 

24*8 

2'28 

15*0 

2*30 

24*5 

2*28 

19*0 

2*2745 

20*65 

Counterpoise  balances  hook  in  water  + 2*2727 

April  30.  In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K + (32) + 0*20 

24*0 

0*18 

14*8 

0*19 

18*2 

0*20 

22'7 

840  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


0-20 

20*8 

0-18 

14*95 

0-20 

20*6 

0-20 

20*05 

0-20 

20*0 

0*1944 

19*57 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32) + 0*1955  grain. 

Hook  in  water  £2:K  + (32)- 

-2*0772  grains  in  air. 

May  5.  Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

2*27 

21*1 

2*27 

21*0 

2*26 

22*9 

2*25 

16*5 

2*26 

19-2 

2*27 

22*5 

2*25 

18*5 

2*26 

20*6 

2*26 

20*9 

2*25 

15*2 

2*26 

11*2 

2*29 

20*0 

2*29 

20*6 

2*29 

20*5 

2*2664 

19*33 

Counterpoise  balances  h.  in  w. 

+ 2*2682  grains  in  air. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K + (32)  + 0*20 

19-0 

0*21 

20*0 

0*21 

22*3 

0*21 

23*9 

0*20 

16*7 

0*20 

18*5 

0*21 

19-5 

0*21 

19*5 

0*21 

19*0 

0*21 

19*1 

0*207 

19*75 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32) + 0*2076  grain. 

Hook  in  water  £2:  K + (32)  — 

-2*0606  grains  in  air. 

May  7.  Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

2*26 

11*2 

2*29 

20*0 

2*29 

20*6 

2*29 

20*5 

2*29 

25*5 

2*26 

15*6 

2*26 

15*0 

2*28 

20*5 

2*28 

20*7 

2*28 

19*5 

2*28 

19*9 

2*28 

20*8 

2*28 

22*4 

2*28 

22*5 

2*24 

15*0 

2*24 

15*0 

2*28 

25*0 

2*28 

26*0 

2*26 

20*0 

2*26 

20*6 

2*26 

19*8 

2*26 

19*5 

2*2718 

19-8 

Counterpoise  balances  h.  in  w. 

+ 2*2723  grains  in  air. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

K + (32) + 0*20 

20*8 

0*20 

20*2 

0*20 

21*3 

0*20 

24*0 

0*20 

23*4 

0*18 

19*2 

0*18 

20*9 

0*18 

17*1 

0*18 

17*2 

0*1911 

20*45 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32) + 0*1 899  grain. 

Hook  in  water  £!:K  + (32)  — 

2*0824  grains  in  air. 

Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

2*26 

18*9 

2*27 

21*9 

2*26 

19-8 

2*27 

22*8 

2*26 

20*0 

2*26 

19-0 

2*27 

22*1 

2*26 

20*0 

2*26 

19-3 

2*26 

20*0 

2*26 

20*1 

2*26 

20*4 

2*26 

19*9 

2*26 

20*0 

2*26 

20*0 

2*25 

17*4 

2*27 

24*3 

2*2618 

20*35 

Counterpoise  balances  h.  in  w. 

+ 2*2609  grains  in  air. 

May  10.  In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Seale. 

K + (32) + 0*20 

27*3 

0*17 

15*95 

0*18 

19*85 

0*18 

19*6 

0*18 

19*2 

0*18 

18*8 

0*1817 

20*1 

Counterpoise  balances  K + (32) + 0*1 81 4 grain. 

Hook  in  water  £!:K  + (32)  — 

2*0795  grains  in  air. 

OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PS. 


841 


May  22.  Hook  in  water. 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

2-26 

23-7 

2-24 

16-5 

2*25 

20-1 

2-25 

20-0 

2-25 

20-2 

2-25 

19-4 

2-25 

19-25 

2-25 

19-3 

2-26 

23-2 

2-25 

19-0 

2*25 

19-0 

2-26 

23-45 

2-2317 

20-26 

Counterpoise  balances  h.  in 

w.  + 2-25 1 0 grains  in  ; 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K -I- (32)  4- 0-20 

27-6 

0-l6 

12-4 

0-18 

20-05 

0-18 

19-95 

0-18 

20-0 

0-18 

19*5 

0-180 

19-92 

Counterpoise  balances  K 4- (32)-)- 0-1 802  grain. 

Hook  in  water  £i:K4-(32) 

— 2-O7O8  grains  in  air. 

Hook  in  water. 

Id  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

0-12 

21-2 

0-12 

21-0 

0-11 

17-1 

0-12 

20-9 

0-11 

16-9 

0-12 

20-6 

0-12 

21-8 

0-12 

27-0 

0-10 

13-15 

0-12 

16-0 

0-12 

23-9 

0-10 

18-3 

0-12 

24-0 

0-10 

17-8 

0-12 

24-0 

0-10 

18-0 

0-12 

21-4 

0-10 

17-0 

0-12 

22-3 

0-1137 

20-12 

Counterpoise  balances  h.  in  w.  +0‘1134 grain  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

K + (32)  4- 0-30 

28-6 

0-28 

20-4 

0-27 

20-7 

0-26 

10-3 

0-28 

20-0 

0-30 

27-65 

0-28 

19-45 

0-26 

16-25 

0-28 

17-3 

0-30 

25-8 

0-28 

19-4 

0-281 

20-53 

Counterpoise  balances  K 4- (32) -f- 0-2796  grain. 

Hook  in  water  4- (32)  4- 0-1662  grain  in  air. 

May  31.  Hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

0-12 

23-7 

0-10 

16-7 

0-11 

20-5 

0-11 

18-2 

0-12 

10-5 

0-14 

19-5 

0-14 

31-7 

0-11 

17-5 

0-12 

21-4 

0-10 

14-2 

0-11 

18-0 

0-12 

21-5 

0-11 

18-3 

0-12 

22-0 

0-11 

18-5 

0-12 

21-9 

0-11 

18-45 

0-1159 

19-57 

Counterpoise  balances  h.  in  w. 

4-  0-1170  grain  in  ; 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

K 4- (32)  4- 0-29 

24-2 

0-28 

20-8 

0-27 

16-8 

0-28 

20-0 

0-28 

19-7 

0-280 

20-3 

Counterpoise  balances  K-J- (32) + 0‘2792  grain. 
Hook  in  water  K + (32) + 0‘ 1622  grain  in  air. 


842  PaOF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  FOUND. 


Apparent  weight  of  the  hook  in  water. 


March  27 
April  1 ... 
April  5 
April  8..., 
April  16  . 
April  17 


gr. 

109-8592 

109-8686 

109-8821 

109-8800 

109-8761 

109-8863_^ 


Means. 


109-875 


April  30 
Maj^  5 .. 
May  7 .. 
May  10 
May  22 


109-9137^ 
109-9303  I 
109-9085  > 
109-9114 
109-9201 


109-917 


May  30 
May  31 


112-15671 

112-1527/ 


112-155 


March  27  ...  April  17*  Hook  in  water  109-875  grains  of  platinnm  in  air. 

April  30  ...  Majr  22.  Hook  in  water  £i:109-9l7  grains  of  platinum  in  air. 

May  30  ...  31.  Hook  in  water  £5=112-155  grains  of  platinum  in  air. 

With  6680  grains  in  the  right-hand  pan, — March  27. ..April  8,  100  parts  =0‘197 
grain.  April  29. ..May  3,  100  parts=  0-32  grain,  liable  to  some  uncertainty  on 
account  of  the  state  of  the  knife-edge.  May  9. ..May  30,  100  parts  =0-207  grain. 
The  dimensions  of  the  wire  by  which  the  lbs.  were  suspended  was  such  that  a por- 
tion of  the  wire  corresponding  to  100  parts  of  the  scale  displaced  0-01365  grain  of 
water.  Hence,  when  a platinum  lb.  is  suspended  in  water  from  the  right-hand  pan, — 
March  27. ..April  8 ....  100  parts  =0-21 1 grain. 

April  29. ..May  3 100  parts  =0‘33  grain. 

May  9. ..May  30  100  parts  =0-221  grain. 

The  thermometer  B was  suspended  in  the  water  with  its  bulb  in  a horizontal  plane 
through  the  middle  of  the  lb. ; the  thermometer  C was  placed  in  the  balance  case. 
F denotes  the  reading  of  Ernst’s  barometer,  E that  of  its  attached  thermometer. 

The  counterpoise  in  the  left-hand  pan  is  supposed  to  be  in  equilibrium  with  the 
weights  in  or  suspended  from  the  right-hand  pan,  when  the  reading  of  the  scale  is  20. 


Weighing  of  PS  in  air. 

June  4,  1845.  100  parts  =0-2649  grain. 


PS-I-X. 

T+C-{-0-68gr.-|-Y. 

PS+Y. 

T+C+0-68gr.+X. 

19-70 

18-60 

15-05 

19-40 

19-50 

18-95 

16-10 

18-00 

18-70 

18-05 

15-10 

17-50 

18-40 

17-10 

D = 

13-3 

15-70 

18-00 

17-00 

18-00 

C= 

13-4 

14-90 

16-90 

16-20 

18-10 

F= 

750-7 

PS+Y. 

T-f~C-|-0’67  gr.-j-X. 

17-20 

18-60 

E= 

14 

16-40 

14-30 

17-80 

17-75 

14-65 

15-80 

18-10 

19-05 

16-25 

13-80 

16-90 

18-70 

14-05 

13-70 

179-50 

183-70 

15-50 

12-75 

153-70 

160-15 

10(  PS-f  X)£hl0(T-;l-C  + 0-68gr.-l-Y)  — 4-2  parts.  10(PS-kY)£!:  10(T-i- C-f  0-675  gr.  + X)— 6-45  parts. 

20PS  = 20(T  + C)-|- 13-52179  grains. 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PS. 


843 


100  parts  =0*3108  grain. 


PS+X. 

T-l-C+0*68gr.+Y. 

PS+Y. 

T+C+0*67gr.+X. 

15*50 

16*55 

21*10 

19*30 

15*90 

15*20 

D=  13*5 

18*70 

16*40 

13*70 

14*30 

C=  13*55 

17*20 

16*00 

14*95 

14*10 

F=  752*4 

16*50 

18*90 

18*00 

15*90 

E=  14*1 

17*15 

14*80 

13*90 

14*90 

17*15 

15*30 

91-95 

90*95 

107*70 

100*70 

6(PS  + X):C!:6(T+C  + 0*68  gr.4- Y)+  1 part.  6(PS  + Y)£h6(T  + C + 0*67  gr.  + X)  + 7 parts. 

12PS:0:12(T  + C)  + 8*12486  grains. 

32PS£b32(T-t-C)  + 21*64665  grains. 

PS^T+C  + 0*67646  grain  in  air  (^=  13*45,  5=750*09). 


T=5759'47143  grains.  C=1239'88708  grains.  PS  ^2=  7000‘03495  grains  in  air. 
For  PS,  log  A=1'32545.  For  T-l-C+0’676  grain,  log  A=  1‘32566,  Hence  t;PS= 
330'86,  t;(T+C  + 0'676  gr.)  = 330’70.  Therefore  t;PS  is  larger  thant;(T-l-C+0’676  gr.) 
by  the  volume  of  0T6  grain  of  water,  or  of  0’00019  grain  of  air.  Hence 

PS=7000‘03516  grains. 


Weighing  of  PS  in  water. 


April  1,  1845, 

PS  and  hook  in  water.  In  r 

■ight-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F.  E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

9*05 

7*85 

769*8  8*1 

1*00 

14*5 

1*08 

20*0 

9 

1*08 

22*0 

8*95 

8*33 

769*65  8*5 

1*00 

13*1 

1*08 

24*0 

8*9 

1*04 

19*5 

8*87 

8*4 

1*08 

27*2 

1*00 

12*0 

8*85 

1*04 

19*0 

• 

1*04  • 

18*5 

8*94 

8*19 

769*72  8*3 

1*044 

18*98 

Counterpoise  in  air 

(C  = 8*19,F= 

769*4,  E=8*3)  balances  PS  and  hook  in 

. water  (B  = 8*94) -f  1*0462  grain  in  air. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

T + F+K  + N + R + (l6)  + (4)  + l*10 

20*67 

-1-1*10 

20*7 

1*10 

20*68 

Counterpoise  balances  T + F+K  + N+R + (1 6)  + (4)  + 1*0987  grain  in  air. 

PS  and  h.in  w.  (B= 

= 8*94)£i: T+ F + K + N + R + (16) + (4)  + 0*0525  grain  in  air(C  = 8*19,  F= 

769-72,  E=8*3). 

PS  and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F.  E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

13*05 

8*85 

762*25  9*6 

1*00 

27-4 

0*90 

9-5 

0*98 

21*9 

12*85 

8*93 

0*96 

19-0 

12*5 

0*94 

18*0 

MDCCCLVI. 

5 S 

844  PROF.  w.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


0-96 

18-3 

12-4 

762-13 

9-65 

0-98 

19-4 

12-25 

0-98 

20-0 

12-01 

9-05 

0-98 

18-5 

12 

1-00 

20-0 

11-95 

1-00 

20-0 

11-65 

9-35 

762-0 

9-5 

1-00 

21-0 

11-53 

1-00 

19-2 

11-50 

1-00 

19-5 

11-43 

1-00 

> 17-0 

11-40 

9-4 

1-00 

18-6 

12-18 

9-18 

762-06 

9-57 

0-98 

19-2 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C  = 9*18,  F=762‘06,  E=9'57)  — PS  and  hook  in  water  (I3=12'18)  + 0*9817  grain  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

T-pF-f  K + N-|-R  + (16)  + (4)+l-10 

20-02 

-hl-10 

20-25 

+ 1-10 

21-2 

1-10 

20-49 

Counterpoise  :£i:T  + F + K + N + R + (l6)  + (4)  + 1-0990  grain  in  air. 

PSandh.in  w.(B=12-18)£i:T-f  F + K + N + R + (l6)  + (4)  + 0-1173gr.inair(C=9-18,  F=762-06,  E=9-57). 


April  5. 

PS  and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F.  E.  gr. 

Scale. 

7-5 

8 

764-3  8-4  1-00 

10-0 

1-04 

18-2 

1-06 

19-1 

7-3 

1-08 

21-8 

1-07 

21-5 

1-04 

19-4 

7-55 

1-04 

20-7 

1-00 

8-0 

1-10 

28-5 

1-04 

21-5 

1-02 

16-5 

1-04 

21-3 

7-6 

1-04 

21-55 

8-5 

763-9  8-95  1-02 

20-6 

7-65 

1-00 

4-5 

1-00 

7-9 

1-10 

23-5 

1-00 

7-9 

7-65 

1-10 

23-5 

1-10 

25-4 

1-10 

27-5 

1-10 

29-4 

8-95 

1-10 

33-0 

7-65 

1-00 

9-0 

1-04 

18-0 

7-63 

1-04 

21-0 

1-04 

21-6 

1-04 

21-4 

1-04 

22-0 

7-6 

8-48 

764-1  8-67  1-0479 

19-47 

Counterpoise  in 

air  (C=8-48,  F 

= 764-1,  E=8-67)  — PS  and  hook  in  water  (B=7*6_)  + 1-0490 grain  in  air. 

OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PS. 


845 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T-f-F  + K-i-N-f  R-P(16)4-(4)  + M0  20*7 

-I-I-IO  21-0 


MOO  20*85 


Counterpoise  ilT-l-F-t-K-fN-|-R-|-(l6)-f(4)-l- 1*0983  grain  in  air. 

PS  and  h.  in  w.  (B=7*6)^T-|-F-i-K-|-N-|-R-i-(l6)-l-(4)-|- 0*0493  gr.  in  air  (C=8*48,  F=764*l,  E=8*67). 


PS  and 

hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

11*85 

1*06 

21*1 

1*06 

22*3 

11*7 

1*06 

20*0 

1*04 

14*0 

11*5 

759*4 

12*4 

1*06 

19-5 

1*02 

12*4 

1*06 

23*0 

1*10 

28*9 

11*65 

1*02 

12*7 

1*06 

23*7 

11*6 

12*2 

759*1 

12*2 

1*02 

15*4 

1*06 

23*5 

1*04 

21*6 

1*03 

16*9 

1*04 

20*5 

1*03 

20-3 

1*00 

12*5 

1*10 

27*6 

11*6 

1*00 

17*0 

1*10 

29*4 

1*04 

20*8 

1*02 

16*8 

1*04 

21*0 

1*03 

18*2 

11*5 

1*04 

20*5 

1*04 

20*9 

11*67 

11*85 

759*25 

12*3 

1*045 

20*02 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C  = n*85,  F=759’25,  E=12*3)£bPS  and  hook  in  water  (B= 11*67)-!- 1*045  grain  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

T -1- F -1- K -p  L -f  R -p  ( 1 6 ) H- ( 4 ) -H 1 * 1 8 

26*9 

-pl*14 

15*0 

-Pl*l6 

20*3 

-pl*l6 

21*8 

-Pl*l6 

17*5 

1*160 

20*3 

Counterpoise  :^bT-f-F-|-K-|-L-fR-|-(l6)-|-(4)-[-l*159  grain  in  air. 

PS  and  h.  in  w.(B=ll*67):!2:T-f  F-|-K-)-L-|-R-!-(l6)-f  (4)-(-0*114gr.in  air  (C=  11*85,  F=759'25,  E=12*3). 

May  5.  PS  and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

10*05 

10*4 

759-1 

11 

1*04 

18*0 

1*08 

24*5 

1*04 

19*4 

1*06 

22*5 

1*05 

21*5 

1*04 

15*5 

1*04 

16*7 

5 s 2 


846  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


1*06 

20*1 

1*06 

20*4 

1*06 

21*8 

10*05 

1*06 

22*0 

10*07 

11*3 

758*7 

11*5 

1*06 

21*7 

1*04 

17*7 

1*05 

20*2 

10*08 

1*05 

20*3 

1*05 

20*05 

1*05 

20*1 

1*05 

21*1 

10*09 

1*06 

21*15 

1*04 

15*9 

1*04 

16*8 

1*06 

23*5 

10*07 

10*85 

758*9 

11*25 

1*0518 

20*04 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C  = 10-85,  F=  758*9,  E=  1 1*25)£!:PS  and  hook  in  water  (B=  10*07)  + 1*0517  grain  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr- 

Scale. 

T + F + K + L + R + (l6)  + (4)+l*l6 

17*0 

1*17 

15*7 

1*18 

19*8 

1*18 

17*0 

1*18 

18*2 

1*21 

22*1 

1*21 

23*17 

1*20 

23*4 

1*20 

24*5 

1*1878 

20*1 

Counterpoise  :0:T  + F + K + L+  R + (l6)  + (4)  + 1-1875  grain  in  air. 

h.  in  w.(B  = 

10*07):;5=T+F  + K + L + R + (l6)  + (4)  + 0*1358gr. 

in  a.(C=  10*85,  F= 

758*9,  E 

28. 

PS  and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C.  F.  E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

0*21 

24-0 

759*4  11 

0*21 

22*7 

10*18 

0*20 

20*6 

0*20 

22*5 

0*18 

18*4 

0*20 

21*4 

10-2 

11*1 

0*18 

20*3 

0*18 

20*4 

0*16 

9*0 

0*18 

13*0 

0*20 

22*5 

10*4 

11*6  758*9  11‘4 

0*18 

20*1 

0*18 

20*6 

10*45 

0*18 

20*1 

0*17 

19*4 

0*16 

15*9 

0-20 

25*9 

10*31 

11*35  759*15  11*2 

0*1865 

19*81 

C. poise  in  air  (C  = 1 T35,  F=759*15,  E=  1 1*2)  balances  PS  and  hook  in  M^ater  (B  = 10*31)  + 0*1869  gr.  in  air. 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PS. 


847 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T + F-f  K + L-fR4-(l6)-f  (4)-|-2-52  18*6 

2-r,3  20-55 

2-54  29-5 

2-52  21-0 

2-54  30-7 

2-50  8-6 

2-52  18-9 

2-52  18-55 

2-53  21-65 


2-5244  20-89 


Counterpoise  balances  T + F + K-fL-f  R + (l6)-f  (4)-b(2) + 0-5224  grain  in  air. 
PS&h.inw.(B=10-31)£iT  + F+K  + L + R + (l6)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-3355gr.(C=ll-35,F=759-15,E=ll-2). 


PS  and  hook 

in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

10-5 

756-0 

11 

0-18 

0-17 

17-9 

0-18 

20-9 

0-17 

20-8 

0-18 

24-8 

10-3 

0-17 

21-2 

10-4 

10-6 

755-6 

11 

0-15 

14-1 

0-18 

26-0 

0-15 

15-2 

0-18 

27-4 

0-15 

12-8 

0-18 

26-8 

0-15 

12-6 

10-35 

10-55 

755-8 

11 

0-1685 

20-2 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C=  10-55,  F= 755-8,  E=  11)  balances  PS  and  hook  in  water  (B  = 10-35)  + 0-1681  gr.  in  air. 
Counterpoise  balances  T + F + K+ L + R + (l6)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-5211  grain  in  air.  (Mean,  May  28,  30.) 

PS  &h.inw.(B=10-35)i;:T  + F + K + L + R + (l6)  + (4)  + (2)  + 0-3530  gr.ina.(C=10-55,F=755-8,E=ll). 


PS  and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


B. 

C. 

F.  E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

10-12 

10-65 

758-85  11 

0-18 

26-0 

0-15 

12-7 

0-18 

27-5 

10-2 

0-16 

16-1 

0-17 

23-1 

10-25 

0-16 

14-5 

0-17 

20-5 

0-17 

21-0 

10-3 

759-4  12 

0-16 

14-5 

0-17 

20-5 

10-55 

12-1 

760-05  12-1 

0-18 

27-8 

0-14 

8-1 

0-16 

20-0 

0-18 

27-7 

0-16 

19-5 

0-16 

19-55 

0-14 

9-6 

10-6 

0-18 

31-5 

0-l6 

19-0 

0-16 

20-7 

0-16 

18-8 

10-6 

0-l6 

15-4 

10-4 

11-37 

759-58  11-8 

0-1641 

19-73 

Counterpoise  in  air(C  = 

11-37,  F= 

759*58,  E=  1 1-8)  balances  PS  and  hook  in 

water  (B: 

= 10-4)  + 0-l647 

848  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T-pF  + K4-L-FR-+-(l6)-p(4)-h2*52  21-3 

2*52  22*4 

2-52  18-7 

2*50  9*5 

2-54  29-1 

2-52  19*7 

2-52  19-6 


2-520  20-04 


Counterpoise  balances  T-|-F-|-K-f  L + R-t-(l6)-l-(4)-f-(2)-i-0-5199  grain  in  air. 
PSanclh.invv.(B  = 10-4)£i:T-FF-t-K-hL  + R + (l6)-F(4)-H(2)-|-0-3552gr.(C=ll-37,F=759-58,  E = ll-8). 


Apparent  weight  of  PS  in  water, 

weighed  with  platinum  wei. 

Water.  Apparent  weight  of  PS. 

Air. 

t. 

gr- 

t. 

b. 

8-95 

6669*555 

8-18 

769-13 

12-15 

6669-620 

9-17 

761-32 

7-62 

6669-552 

8*47 

763-47 

11-63 

6669-573 

11-83 

758-19 

10-05 

6669-595 

10-84 

757-97 

10-29 

6669-556 

11-34 

758-22 

10-33 

6669-573 

10-54 

754-90 

10-38 

6669-575 

11-36 

758-58 

Resulting  values  of  APS  and  lo 

gAPS. 

APS. 

log  APS. 

21-1570 

1-325455 

21-1572 

1-325457 

21-1581 

1-325477 

21-1553 

1-325420 

21-1590 

1-325496 

21-1563 

1-325440 

21-1573 

1-325461 

21-1574 

1-325463 

Mean 

21-1572 

1-325459 

10  — log  A 

8-674541 

PS  (reduced) 

7000-0009 

3-845098 

vPS 

330-856 

2-519639 

Observations  for  finding  tlte  density  of  PC  No.  3. 
Weighing  of  PC  No.  3 in  air. 


.June  10,  1845.  100  parts  =0-273  grain. 


PC+X. 

T+C+0-67gr.+Y. 

PC+Y. 

T+C+0-67gr.+X. 

16-75 

18-25 

24-2 

22-4 

16-6 

17-8 

24-6 

22-4 

16-7 

13-4 

PC+Y. 

T+C+0-68  gr.+X. 

16-9 

14-7 

20-5 

21-0 

15-9 

14-4 

19-55 

21-1 

15-5 

15-55 

D= 

14-1 

20-2 

20-6 

17-5 

15-65 

C = 

14-3 

20-4 

20-7 

17-2 

14-4 

F = 

771-6 

19-5 

20-9 

17-1 

14-1 

E = 

14-9 

20-0 

20-5 

16-3 

15-0 

19-2 

20-7 

15-25 

15-6 

19-1 

21-7 

15-1 

14-4 

19-85 

21*4 

14-8 

13-9 

18-65 

21-4 

81-6 

W2 

18-9 

20-5 

215-85 

230-5 

1 3( PC  4-  X ) £i:  1 3(T  + C)  -F  8-7 1 gr.  -F 1 4-4  pt.  1 3(PC  + Y)  ^ 1 3(T  + C)  + 8-82  gr. - 1 0-65  pt. 

26PC  26(T-F  C)  + 1 7-54024  grains. 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  No.  3. 


849 


June  11.  100  parts  =0*29  grain. 


PC-I-Y. 

26*15 

T-l-C-f-0-68  gr.-l-X. 

26-3 

D= 

14 

PC-fX. 

22*3 

T-i-C-t-O-68  gr.-HY. 
24-0 

23*43 

25-0 

C = 

14 

22*1 

23-2 

23-1 

25-6 

F = 

769-5 

23*9 

23-8 

24-5 

25-0 

E= 

15 

22*62 

24-15 

97*2 

101-9 

90-95 

95*15 

4( PC  + Y) 4(T  + C + 0-68  gr.  + X) - 4*7  pt.  4(PC  + X) ^ 4(T  + C + 0-68  gr.  + Y) - 4-2  pt. 

8PC  £!:  8(T+  C)  + 5-41864  grains. 

34PC  =2: 34(T  + C)  + 22-93888  grains. 

PCi2:T+C  + 0-67526  grain  in  air  (<=14-07,  &=769‘66). 

PC  No.  3 £5:7000-03375  grains  of  platinum  in  air  (<=14-07,  6=769-66). 

For  PC  No.  3,  log  A=  1'32555.  For  T+C+0’675  gr.,  log  A=  1*32566.  Hence 
t;PC  No.  3 =330*79,  (t;T+C+0*675).  Therefore  t;PC  No.  3 is  greater  than 
y(T+C+0*675  gr.)  by  the  volume  of  0*09  grain  of  water,  or  of  0*00011  grain  of  air. 
Hence 

PC  No.  3=7000*03386  grains. 


Weighing  of  PC  No.  3 in  water. 


March  31,  1845. 

PC  and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

9*18 

1-00 

27*8 

0-90 

8-8 

9*1 

0-97 

18*5 

0-98 

20-0 

9 

0-98 

21-55 

768*75 

8*8 

0-97 

20-0 

8-95 

8-65 

1-00 

22*8 

768*83 

9 

0-97 

20-6 

0*96 

19*4 

0*96 

19*3 

8-93 

8*84 

0-97 

19*7 

0-97 

18*5 

8-9 

768*8 

9 

0*97 

20-4 

0-97 

21-0 

9*01 

8*74 

768-79 

8*93 

0*9693 

19*88 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C=8-74,  F= 768-79,  E=8*93)  balances  PC  and  hook  in  water  (B=9*01)  + 0-9696  gr.  in  air. 

In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T+F-pK-f  L + R-|-(l6)  + (4)-h(l)-|-0-10  15-9 

0-11  22-75 

0-10  17-3 

0-10  17*9 

0-11  25-2 


0-104  19*81 


Counterpoise  balances  T-|-F  + K + L-l-R  + (l6)-|-(4)-l-(l)-f  0-1044  grain. 

PC  and  h.  in  w.  (B=9*01)£i:T  + F-)-K  + L-f  R-f  (16)  + (4) -1-0-1348  gr.  in  air  (C= 8-74,  F= 768*79,  E=8-93). 


850 


PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


PC  and  hook  in  water. 

- 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B.  C. 

f. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

1-00 

19-0 

1-00 

29-5 

1-00 

26-5 

8-45  8-4 

759-8 

8-9 

1-00 

20-2 

1-00 

24-5 

8-43 

0-96 

13-6 

0-92 

14-5 

0-92 

9-5 

1-04 

34-0 

7-4 

749-2 

8-4 

1-00 

19-0 

0-96 

15-0 

7-37 

1-00 

20-0 

1-00 

25-5 

8-4 

0-96 

14-5 

1-00 

25-0 

0-96 

17-0 

1-00 

20-0 

1-00 

27-5 

0-96 

18-0 

1-00 

21-6 

0-96 

9-5 

1-00 

21-7 

7-4 

0-99 

21-5 

0-95 

14-5 

8-6 

748-7 

9-0 

0-99 

21-2 

0-95 

7-5 

0-99 

20-0 

0-99 

21-6 

1-00 

27-0 

1-00 

24-6 

0-96 

11-6 

1-00 

23-7 

7-74  8-47 

752-57 

8-77 

0-9831 

20-27 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C  = 8'47,  F=752‘57,  E = 8‘77)  balances  PC  and  h.  in  w.  (B  = 7'74)  + 0‘9825  gr.  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T-|-F+K-1-N-)-R-|-(16)-|-(4)+M0  25-75 

1-08  14-45 

1-09  19-52 

T¥9  19-91 


Counterpoise  balances  T + F + K-l- N-1- R + (l6) + (4)  + 1-0902  grain. 

PCandh.in  w.(B=7-74)ii T-FF  + K + N+ R + (16)-p(4)  + 0-1077  gr.  in  air(C  = 8-47,  F=752-57,  E=8-77). 


PC  and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

c. 

F.  E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

7-65 

8-15 

770-87  8-8 

1-00 

19-1 

1-04 

33-5 

1-00 

18-5 

1-02 

20-7 

7-66 

' 1-00 

20-5 

1-02 

20-5 

0-96 

18-6 

1-00 

19-1 

7-66 

1-04 

22-8 

1-00 

19-5 

0-96 

18 

1-00 

19 

1-04 

22-4 

April  17 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  No.  3. 


851 


7*85 

9-3  770-7  9-4 

0-96 

17-0 

1-00 

19-3 

1-04 

22-5 

1-00 

18-6 

1-04 

23-4 

0-96 

18-9 

1-00 

20-5 

0-96 

18-0 

1-00 

20-4 

7-73 

8-7  770-78  9-1 

1-0018 

20-49 

Counterpoise  in  air 

(C  = 8-7j  F=770-78,  E=9-l)  balances  PC  and  h.  in 

water  (B= 

:7-73)  + 1-0008 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

T + F+K-fL-fR  + (l6)-p(4)  + l-12 

23-7 

1-10 

12-15 

1-11 

17-93 

Counterpoise  balances  T + E+K  + L + R + (l6)  + (4)+l'1141  grain. 

PC  and  h.  in  w.  (B  = 7-73):O:T  + F + K + L + R + (l6)  + (4)  + 0-1133  gr.  in  air(C=8'7,  F=770-78,  E=9-l). 


May  9. 

PC  and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F.  F. 

gr- 

Scale. 

10-4 

10-3 

750-5  10-6 

0-98 

23-5 

0-94 

7-5 

0-98 

23-5 

0-97 

17-3 

0-98 

21-5 

10-35 

0-97 

16-0 

0-98 

20-4 

0-98 

22-0 

0-98 

23-5 

0-97 

18-3 

10-33 

10-7 

750-4  10-9 

0-98 

24-0 

0-97 

18-4 

0-98 

21-2 

10-25 

0-97 

12-5 

0-98 

18-6 

0-99 

31-5 

0-98 

25-2 

0-97 

23-5 

10  25 

10-9 

0-97 

11-0 

10-3 

10-63 

750-45  10-75 

0-9747 

19-97 

Counterpoise  in  air(C  = 

10-63,  F= 

750-45,  E=  10-75)  balances  PC  and  h.  in  w.(B=  10-3) + 0-9748 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr.  Scale. 

T + F+K  + L + R + (l6)  + (4)  + M3  20-65 

1-13  20-55 

1-13  20-45 

1-13  20-55 


Counterpoise  balances  T+F+K  + L + R + (l6)  + (4)+l-1289  grain. 

PC&h.  in  w.(B=10-3):£1:T  + F + K + L + R + (16)  + (4)  + 0-1541  gr.in  air  (C=10-63,F=750-45,E=  10-75). 


5 T 


mdccclvi. 


852  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


May  10. 

PC  and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand 

pan. 

B. 

C. 

F.  E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

0*97 

12*4 

9*5 

9*8 

749*6  10*4 

1*01 

39*4 

0*98 

17*6 

0*99 

22*2 

0*98 

23*0 

0*97 

13*2 

0*98 

24*4 

0*97 

12*9 

9*5 

0*98 

19*4 

0*98 

19*4 

0*98 

19*3 

0*99 

23*0 

9*55 

10*8 

749*6  10*9 

0*97 

19*8 

0*97 

19*0 

0*98 

21*5 

9*55 

0*98 

21*5 

0*97 

18*7 

0*98 

23*1 

0*97 

21*0 

9*6 

0*98 

25*0 

0*96 

17*1 

9*6 

0*96 

16*9 

9*54 

10*3 

749*6  10*65 

0*9773 

20*45 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C  = 

10*3,  F= 

749*6,  E= 10*65)  balances  PC  and  hook  in  water  (B 

=9*54) -h  0*9764 

In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T-fF-|-K-|-L-hR  + (l6)-f  (4)-HM3  21-6 

1-13  22-3 

1-12  16-8 

1-13  22-5 

M3  20-8 

M28  20-8 


Counterpoise  balances  T-|-F-|-K  -f-L  + R-f  (l6)-|-(4)-t- 1-1264  grain. 

PC  and  h.  in  vv.  (B=9'54)£!:T-1-  F+K  -hL-l-R-)-(l6)-J-(4)-|-  0*1500  gr.  in  air  (C  = 10*3,  F=  749*6,  E= 10*65). 


Apparent  weight  of  PC  No.  3 in  water,  weighed 


Water.  Apparent  weight  of  PC  No.  3. 
t.  gr. 


9*02 

6669*635 

7*76 

6669*610 

7-75 

6669*614 

10*28 

6669*613 

9*52 

6669*609 

with  platinum  weights. 

Air. 


t. 

h. 

8*73 

768*13 

8*46 

751*95 

8*69 

770*09 

10*64 

749*59 

10*3 

748*76 

Resulting  values  of  APC  No.  3 and  logAPC  No.  3. 


APC  No.  3. 

log  APC  No.  3. 

21*1623 

1*325563 

21*1622 

1*325561 

21*1618 

1*325555 

21*1602 

1*325519 

21*1609 

1*325534 

21*1615 

1*325546 

10 — log  A 

8*674454 

PC  No.  3 (reduced) 

6999*999 

3*845098 

t;PC  No.  3 

330*790 

2*519552 

OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  NO.  4. 


853 


Observations  for  finding  the  density  of  PC  No.  4. 


Weighing  of  PC  No.  4 in  air. 

1845. 

100  parts  =0*26  grain. 

PC+Y. 

T+C+O-eSgr.+X. 

PC-fX. 

T+C+068gr.+Y. 

25*25 

25*25 

24*9 

25*8 

25*65 

26*75 

25*5 

26*2 

25*8 

26*6 

25*3 

26*0 

24*9 

25*7 

27*1 

27*1 

24*5 

25*5 

28*8 

26*5 

24*3 

25*0 

27*8 

26*8 

23*8 

23*7 

28*3 

27*9 

23*0 

23*35  D=  12*5 

28*25 

27*55 

22*4 

22*9  C=  12*48 

20*25 

20*7 

21*5 

22*8  F = 752*93 

21-5 

19-3 

20*9 

21*3  E=  13*97 

20*8 

18*7 

20*75 

21*0 

19-3 

20*7 

19-9 

20*6 

21*35 

19-6 

22*0 

24*8 

20*7 

19-6 

21*8 

22*25 

25*5 

23*2 

22*1 

23*3 

25*1 

23*5 

22*35 

22*7 

24*0 

23*55 

22*0 

23*6 

23*5 

22*45 

21*7 

23*0 

2.3*65 

21*9 

435*6 

450*1 

461*6 

447*25 

1 9(PC  + Y) £!:  1 9(T  + C + 0-68  gr.  + X) - 1 4-5  parts.  1 9(PC  + X)  ^ 1 9(T  + C + 0-68  gr.  + Y)  + 1 4- 1 3 parts. 

PC  No.  4£bT  + C + 0*67999  grain  in  air  (it=12*31,  S=751‘68). 

PC  No.  4 :£!: 7000*03848  grains  of  platinum  in  air  (^=  12*51,  6=751*68). 

For  PC  No.  4,  log  A =1-32543.  For  TH-C  + 0-680  grain,  log  A =1-32566. 
yPC  No.  4 = 330-88,  t;(T+C4-0-68)  = 330-70.  Therefore  t^PC  No,  4 is  greater  than 
t;(T-]-C  + 0-680  grain)  by  the  volume  of  0-18  grain  of  water,  or  of  0-00022  grain  of 
air.  Hence 

PC  No.  4=7000-03870  grains. 


Weighing  of  PC  No.  4 in  water. 

March  26,  1845.  PC  and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


B. 

c. 

F. 

E. 

gr. 

Scale. 

8*93 

7-5 

759-3 

7-9 

3*00 

21*65 

2*96 

12*5 

8*92 

795  15 

8*0 

2*99 

18*5 

3*00 

21*7 

8-85 

3*00 

22*0 

8'5 

7*85 

759*5 

8*0 

3*00 

21*1 

2*98 

19-5 

2*96 

17*2 

3*00 

21*8 

8*7 

7-67 

759-36 

7-97 

2*9878 

19-55 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C  = 7-67,  F=759-36,  E=7-97)  balances  PC  and  hook  in  water  (B=8*7)  + 2*9887  gr.in  air. 


5 T 2 


• 

854  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

Sr. 

Scale. 

T-|-F-|-N  + K-|-S  + (16)  + (4)  + 3*00 

13*6 

3*04 

35*8 

3*00 

15*4 

3*04 

35*6 

3*02 

25*1 

Counterpoise  balances  T-hF-|-N-|-K-l-S-f-(l6)-|-(4)-l-3*0103  grains. 

PC  and  h.in  w.  (B: 

= 8*7)  — T-t-F-f  N-|-K  -t-S-F(l6)-t-  (4)-|-  0*02l6  gr.  in  air  (C= 7*67,  F= 

759*36,  E=7*97). 

March  27. 

PC  and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C.  F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

6*8 

7*4  757*9 

7*9 

1*10 

20*1 

1*10 

20*8 

1*10 

24*0 

1*10 

23*6 

1*06 

17*0 

6*85 

1*04 

9*5 

1*10 

20*0 

757*9 

8 

1*10 

21*0 

6*95 

1*07 

17-7 

1*08 

18*2 

6*97 

8 757*9 

8 

1*10 

19*1 

1*10 

20*0 

1*10 

21*2 

6*89 

7*7  757*9 

7*97 

1*0885 

19*4 

Counterpoise  in  air 

(C  = 7*7,  F=757*9,  E=7*97)  balances  PC  and  hook  in 

water  (B=6*89)-l- 1*0898  gr.  in  air. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

sr- 

Scale. 

23*92 

1*080 

14*45 

1*00 

24*3 

1*09 

20*89 

Counterpoise;  balances  T + F + K + N + S + (l6)+(4)+ 1*0882  grain. 

PC  and  h.  in  w.  (B=6*89)  — T-|-F  + K + N + S + (l6)  + (4)  — 0*0003 gr.in  air  (C=7*7,  F=757*9,  E=7*97). 


April  16.  PC  and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


B. 

c. 

F. 

E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

7*87 

8 

771*3 

8*5 

1*10 

20*9 

1*08 

18*4 

7*87 

1*10 

21*6 

1*08 

19-8 

7*85 

1*09 

19*8 

1*12 

25*5 

1*04 

16*0 

7*85 

8*35 

1*08 

18*6 

1*12 

22*5 

1*08 

18*5 

770*9 

8*8 

1*12 

31*0 

1*08 

19*0 

1*08 

18*7 

7*85 

8*8 

770*75 

8*9 

1*08 

18*3 

1*12 

23*0 

1*08 

18*6 

1*08 

19*5 

1*12 

22*0 

1*08 

19*7 

1*08 

19*0 

OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  No.  4. 


8o.) 


1*12 

21*0 

1*08 

20*5 

7*87 

8*8 

1*08 

19*0 

7*86 

8*44 

770*92 

8*77 

1*0909 

20*47 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C  = 8*44,  F=770*93,  E=8*77)  balances  PC  and  h.  in  w.  (B=7*86)  + 1‘0899  gr.  in  air. 

In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T-hF-f  K + L-|-R  + (l6)-h(4)+M0  15*95 

1*11  22*65 

1*10  16*55 

1*11  23*5 


1*105  19*66 


Counterpoise  balances  T -|-F-t-K-fL-|-  R -l-(l6)-l-(4)-l- 1*1057  grain. 

PC  andh.  in  w.  (B=7*86):iiT  + F-l-K  + L-l-R  + (l6)-i- (4) + 0*0158  gr.  in  air  (C  = 8*44,  F=  770*92,  E=8*77). 


April  29.  PC  and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


B. 

C.  F.  E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

11*1 

10*5  761*53  11 

1*10 

27*0 

1*06 

14*7 

1*10 

27*5 

1*06 

17*9 

1*08 

20*4 

1*08 

25*0 

1*08 

20*5 

11*05 

1*06 

17*1 

1*08 

22*0 

1*06 

21*3 

1*06 

21*3 

11*03 

1*04 

19*0 

11*01 

761*57  ll'o 

1*06 

22*6 

1*04 

20*5 

1*00 

12*3 

1*04 

20*5 

1*02 

16*7 

11 

11*55 

1*04 

20*0 

11*04 

10*84  761*55  11*2 

1*0589 

20*35 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C= 

10*84,  F=761*55,  E=11*25)  balances  PC  and  h. 

in  w.  (B=r 

11*04)+ 1*0577  gr.  in 

In  right-hand  pan. 

ST- 

Scale. 

T + F + K + L + R + (16)  + (4)+1*18 

23*7 

1*16 

20*7 

1*16 

17*0 

1*16 

15*0 

1*18 

24*4 

1*168 

20*18 

Counterpoise  balances  T + F + K +L  + R + (l6)  + (4)  + 1*1674  grain. 
PCandh.inw.(B=ll*04)£iT  + F + K + L + R + (l6)  + (4)  + 0*1097gr.  in  a.(C  = 10*85,  F=76l*55,  E=  11*25). 


April  30. 

PC  and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C. 

F. 

E.  gr. 

Scale. 

10 

10*7 

763*2 

11*1  1*08 

25*0 

1*04  17*5 

1*08  23*5 

1*04  13*0 

1*08  22*9 

1*04  12*5 

1*07  21*5 


10*05 


856  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


1*04 

11*4 

1*07 

19-0 

1*08 

20*5 

10*07 

1*07 

19*5 

1*08 

22*1 

10*1 

11*7 

763*1 

11*9 

1*08 

21*6 

1*07 

20*5 

10*13 

1*06 

18*0 

1*07 

19-7 

1*06 

18*4 

10*2 

1*07 

21*4 

1*06 

19*2 

1*07 

20*4 

1*06 

19-1 

1*07 

21*6 

10*3 

11*9 

762*7 

11*9 

1*07 

22*0 

10*12 

11*25 

763*05 

11*63 

1*0657 

19-58 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C  = 11'25,  F=763”05,  E=ll*63)  balances  PC  and  hook  in  water  (B=10‘12)  + 1’0671  gr. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T + F-l-K-fL-|-R-|-(l6)  + (4)-f  M8  20-3 

M8  23-6 

1-18  22-5 

M7  17-6 


1*1775  21 


Counterpoise  balances  T+F-j-K  + L-t-R-f(l6)  + (4)-f  1*1743  grain. 
PCandh.inw.(B=10*12)ii:T-f  F + K -hL  + R-f- (16) -f  (4) -1-0*1 072gr.in  air  (C=  11*25,  F= 763*05,  E=1 1*63). 


May  20. 


PC  and  hook  in  water. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


B. 

10*5 


C. 

9-9 


F. 

759-3 


E. 

10*4 


Mav  21. 


9*35 


10 


754*5 


753*25 


10*2 


10*5 


9*5 


10*6 


gr- 

Scale. 

1*02 

14*2 

1*04 

29*7 

1*04 

19-0 

1*04 

25*0 

1*04 

26*6 

1*00 

5*3 

1*04 

30*1 

1*00 

8*7 

1*04 

17-8 

1*04 

19-8 

1*04 

21*5 

1*04 

23*0 

1*03 

17*2 

1*03 

16*9 

1*04 

21*2 

1*04 

21*2 

1*03 

17-4 

1*03 

18*5 

1*04 

20*4 

1*04 

21*2 

1*03 

18*1 

1*04 

21*5 

1*03 

19-0 

1*04 

21*5 

1*03 

19-8 

1*04 

22*2 

1*03 

19-7 

1*0333 

19-5 

9-78  10*17  755*68  10*37 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C=10*17,  F=755*68,  E=  10*37)  balances  PC  and  h.  in  w.  ( B=:9-78)-(- 1*0344  gr.  in  air. 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  PC  No.  4. 


857 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

T-hF  + K + L + R-l-(l6)-(-(4)+Ml  2M 

Ml  19-6 

Ml  17-8 

M2  23-4 

Ml  181 

Ml  17"6 

Ml  17*0 


M114  19-23 


Counterpoise  balances  T-l-F-fK-l-L-fR-|-(l6)-|-(4)-|- 1*1130  grain. 

PC&  h.in  w.(B=9-78)£iT  + F-HK  + L-l-R-|-(l6)-|-(4)-|-0-0786  gr.in  air  (C=  10-17,  F=755-68,  E=  10-37). 


May  22. 

PC  and  hook  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

B. 

C.  F.  , E. 

gr- 

Scale. 

9-4 

9*7  756-5  10-5 

1-03 

16-3 

1-04 

22-5 

1-03 

17-0 

1-04 

21-9 

9-45 

1-03 

18-0 

1-04 

22-5 

1*03 

18-4 

1-04 

22*8 

1-03 

18-5 

9-45 

1-04 

22-7 

9-3 

9-8  756-8  10-9 

1-03 

20-4 

1-03 

21-1 

1-02 

18-05 

1-03 

21-05 

1-02 

17-35 

9-55 

1-03 

21-0 

1*02 

19-6 

1-03 

22-8 

1-02 

18-7 

9-6 

1-03 

21-55 

9-5 

9-75  756-65  10-7 

1-0305 

20-12 

Counterpoise  in  air 

(C  = 9’75,  F=756*65,  E=  10*7)  balances  PC  and  hook  in  water  (B= 

9-5)  + l-03( 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

T + F -f- K -p  L -t- R -p  (16)  + (4)  + 1-1 2 

24-93 

Ml 

14-9 

1-12 

24-9 

MO 

14-6 

1-12 

24-1 

Ml 

14-4 

1-10 

19-64 

Counterpoise  balances  T-pF-fK  + L-i-R-f  (l6)-|-(4)-f- 1*1 108  grain. 

PC  and  h.inw.  (B=9-5):0:T-pF-t-K-pL  + R-f(l6)  + (4)+ 0-0806  gr.in  air  (C=9’75,  F=756-65,  E=  10-7). 


Apparent  weight  of  PC  No.  4 in  water,  weighed 


with  platinum  weights. 


Water. 


Apparent  weight  of  PC  No.  4. 

Air. 

t. 

gr. 

t. 

h. 

8-71 

6669-524 

7-65 

758-82 

6-92 

6669-503 

7-68 

757-36 

7-88 

6669-516 

8-43 

770-27 

11-01 

6669*568 

10-85 

760-61 

10*11 

6669*566 

11-26 

762-06 

9-76 

6669-337 

10-17 

754-85 

9-49 

6669-3.39 

9-75 

755-79 

858  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Resulting  values  of  APC  No.  4 and  log  APC  No.  4. 


APC  No.  4. 

log  APC  No.  4. 

21*1553 

1*325420 

21*1552 

1*325417 

21*1551 

1*325416 

21*1356 

1*323426 

21*1567 

1*325449 

21*1554 

1*325422 

21*1538 

1*325430 

21*1556 

1*325426 

10  — log  A 

8*674574 

PC  No.  4 (reduced) 

6999*998 

3*845098 

^?PC  No.  4 

330*881 

2*519672 

Comparison  of  PS  with  ea  ch  of  the  weights  T + Q + A , T + Q + B , T -j-  Q -f-  C,  T -j-  Q + D . 

7’he  weights  Q were  changed,  so  that  each  of  the  ten  weights  Q was  used  the  same 
number  of  times  in  each  series  of  weighings.  The  cistern  of  the  barometer  was  305  mm. 
above  the  weights.  Therefore  0‘03  inm.  must  be  added  to  F. 


June  13,  1846. 

100  parts  =0*31041 

grain. 

PS+X,  T+Q+A-fY. 

T+Q+A+Y,  PS+X. 

PS+Y,  T+Q+A+X.  T+Q+A+X,  PS+Y. 

18*60 

15*56 

17*97 

15*91 

17*15 

15*29 

17*42 

15*99 

18*35 

15*74 

17*44 

15*84 

17*75 

13*31  D=  19*65 

17*91 

16*22 

17*50 

15*55  C=  19*6 

16*77 

15*93 

17*86 

14*96  F=767*6 

17*75 

15*65 

17*21 

15*04  E=  20*9 

17*41 

16*01 

17*54 

15*55 

18*19 

13*80 

18*00 

15*39 

17*34 

16*00 

17*50 

14*81 

18*02 

15*87 

177*46 

153*20 

176*22 

159*21 

!0(PS  + X)£i20(T  + Q + A + Y)  — 24*26  parts.  20(PS  + Y)£i20(T  + Q+A  + X)  — 17*01  parts. 

40PS:i::40(T  + Q+ A)-0*12811  grain  in 

air  (#=  19*68,  ^=765*49). 

June  24. 

100  parts  =0*3006 

grain. 

PS+Y,  T+Q+A+X. 

T+Q+A+X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  T+Q+A+Y.  T+Q+A+Y,  PS+X. 

15*71 

14*25 

14*49 

1.3*35 

15*87 

14*06  D=  19*65 

18*44 

16*90 

14*92 

14*17  C=  19*63 

18*73 

16*74 

15*29 

13*86  F=  748*5 

18*34 

16*92 

14*71 

13*70  E=  20*3 

17*74 

16*85 

76*50 

70*04 

87*73 

80*76 

1 0( PS  + Y) 1 0(T  + Q+  A + X) - 6*46  parts. 

10(PS  + X)-10(T  + Q + A + Y)-6*97  parts. 

20PS£!:20(T  + Q+ A)  — 0*04038  grain  in 

1 air  19*70,  6=746*53). 

June  29- 

100  parts  =0*29539 

grain. 

PS+Y,  T+Q+A+X. 

T+Q+A+X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  T+Q+A+Y.  T+Q+A+Y,  PS+X. 

16*95 

15*70 

19*02 

15*49 

16*92 

15*82  D=  18*8 

18*85 

13*90 

16*41 

14*23  C=  18*8 

18*39 

15*86 

16*35 

14*17  F=758*0 

18*25 

15*30 

16*46 

14*52  E=  20 

18*35 

16*65 

83*09 

74*46 

93*06 

79*30 

10(PS  + Y)^10(T  + Q + A + X)-8-63  parts.  10(PS  + X)^10(T  + Q+A  + Y)-13-86  parts. 

20PS£1:20(T  + Q + A)  — 0'06643  grain  in  air  (<=18’83,  6=756*03). 


COMPARISON  OF  PS  WITH  T+Q+A,  T+Q  + B,  T + Q + C,  T+Q  + D.  859 


June  12.  100  parts= 0*30735  grain. 


PS+Y,  T+Q+B+X. 

T+Q+B+X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  T+Q+B+Y. 

T+q+b+y,  ps+x. 

16*74 

18*17 

17-99 

15*26 

17*00 

17*52 

17-56 

15*09 

17*12 

17*11 

17-60 

14*94 

17-27 

17-96 

D=  19-05 

17-65 

15*32 

17*00 

17*10 

c=  19-1 

17-91 

14*44 

16*80 

17-80 

F=769-4 

16*92 

15*06 

17*20 

17-61 

E=  20*4 

16*97 

14*67 

16*86 

17*82 

17-10 

14*87 

16*66 

17-21 

17-77 

15*44 

16*16 

16*97 

17-64 

14*75 

168*81 

175*27 

175*11 

149*84 

20(PS  + Y)£!:20(T+Q+B-|-X)  + 6*46  parts. 

20(PS  + X) 20(T  + Q + B + Y) - 25*27  parts. 

40PS:^i:40(T+Q+B)— 0*05781  grain  in 

air  (#=19-12,  6=767-35). 

June  24. 

100  parts=  0*30065 

grain. 

PS+X,  t+q+b+y. 

t+q+b+y,  ps+x. 

PS+Y,  T+Q+B+X. 

T+Q+B+X,  PS+Y. 

18*46 

17-21 

18*06 

15*52 

17-94 

17-27 

D=  19-65 

17-36 

14*62 

17-97 

16*99 

C=  19-68 

17-42 

15*06 

18*46 

16*97 

F=748*5 

17-95 

15*29 

17-60 

17-02 

E=  20-3 

17-45 

15*20 

90*43 

85*46 

88-24 

75*69 

10(PS+X)^10(T  + Q+B+Y)-4-97  parts.  10(PS  + Y)£2:10(T  + Q+B  + X)-12-55  parts. 

20PS£!:20(T  + Q + B)— 0*05267  grain  in  air  (#=19*7>  6=746*53). 


June  29.  100  parts=  0*29539  grain. 


PS+X,  T+Q+B+Y. 

T+Q+B+Y,  PS+X. 

PS+Y,  T+Q+B+X. 

T+Q+B+X,  I 

18*84 

17-50 

17-37 

16*65 

18*35 

17-09 

D= 

18*8 

17-36 

17-19 

18*31 

16*96 

C = 

18*8 

18*16 

17-05 

17*47 

16*44 

F = 

758*0 

17-17 

16*91 

17*85 

16*46 

E = 

20 

17>54 

16*69 

90*82 

84*45 

87-60 

84*49 

10(PS  + X)iil0(T  + Q+B  + Y)-6*37 parts.  10(PS  + Y)iil0(T+Q+B  + X)-3*ll  parts. 

20PS£!:20(T  + Q+B)-0*02800  grain  in  air  (#=18*83,6=756*03). 


June  25.  100  parts =0*291 6 1> grain. 


PS+Y,  T+Q+C+X. 

T+Q+C+X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  T+Q+C+Y. 

T+Q+C+Y,  F 

18*00 

17-97 

18*47 

17*44 

17-70 

18*51 

D= 

19-1 

18*57 

17-07 

17*69 

18*35 

C = 

19-1 

18*42 

16*99 

17*70 

17-97 

F = 

756*85 

18*31 

17*47 

17-72 

18*44 

E = 

19-75 

18*01 

17-52 

88*81 

91*24 

91*78 

86*49 

1 0(PS + Y)  1 0(T + Q + C + X)  + 2*43  parts.  10(PS  + X)£i:10(T+Q+C  + Y)-5*29  parts. 

20PS:C!:20(T+Q+C)— 0*00834 grain  in  air  (#=19*15,  6=754*92). 


5 u 


MDCCCLVI. 


860  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  FOUND. 


June  27. 

100  parts=  0*29438  grain. 

PS+X,  T+Q+C+Y.  T+Q+C+Y,  PS+X. 

PS+Y,  T+Q+C+X. 

T+Q+C+X,  PS+Y. 

19-94 

18-05 

17-40 

15-52 

19-57 

18-30 

17*90 

16-57 

19-32 

17-91 

16-84 

16-40 

18-59 

17-70  D=  18-6 

17-42 

16-17 

18-17 

17*21  C=  18-6 

16-94 

15-92 

17*77 

16-49  F =755-7 

16-80 

14-70 

18-07 

16-71  E=  19-1 

16-74 

16-01 

17-42 

16-44 

16-37 

15-84 

17-91 

16-00 

16-70 

15-50 

17-60 

16-99 

16-27 

15-30 

184-36 

171-8O 

169-38 

157-93 

20(PS  + X)ii 

20(T  + Q + C + Y)  — 12-56  parts.  20(PS  + Y):il20(T  + Q+  C + X)- 

— 11*45  parts. 

40PSii:40(T  + Q + C)-0-07068 grain  in 

air  (<=18-65,  6 = 753-85). 

June  30. 

100  parts= 0-29982  grain. 

PS+Y,  T+Q+C+X.  T+Q+C+X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  T+Q+C+Y. 

T+Q+C+Y,  PS+X. 

20-09 

18-96 

18-64 

16-27 

19-51 

18-75  D=  18-8 

18-62 

16-39 

19*60 

18-67  C=  18-85 

18-30 

15-62 

19*06 

17-85  F = 761-2 

17*69 

15-55 

18-89 

18-44  E=  19*9 

18-36 

15-36 

97-15 

92-67 

91-61 

79*19 

10(PS  + Y)£il0(T  + Q + C + X)-4-48  parts.  10(PS  + X)^10(T  + Q + C + Y)-12*42  parts. 

20PSii20(T  + Q + C)-0-05067  grain  in  air  (<=18-87,  6=759*23). 


June  5 and  6.  100  parts= 0*29998  grain. 


PS+Y,T+Q+D+X. 

T+Q+D+X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  T+Q+D+Y. 

T+Q+D+Y,  PS+X. 

15-24 

14-16 

21-59 

20-85 

14-37 

14-25 

21-17 

20-04 

13-86 

12*47 

20-70 

19*89 

13-21 

12-17 

D=  18-3 

20-56 

19*57 

12-65 

12-27 

C=  18-27 

20-51 

19*16 

11*60 

12-56 

F =766-8 

18-30 

18-77 

18-90 

19-90 

E=  19*65 

18-36 

18-60 

18-91 

19-70 

18-21 

18-51 

19*26 

19-49 

18-20 

18-17 

18-52 

19-50 

18-44 

18-61 

156-52 

156-47 

196-04 

192-17 

20(PS  + Y)£!:20(T  + Q+D  + X)-0-05  part.  20(PS  + X)ii:20(T+Q  + D + Y)-3-87  parts. 

40PS£i40(T  + Q + D)-0-01176  grain  in  air  (<=18-32,  6=764-85). 


June  20.  100  parts  = 0*31320  grain. 


PS+X,  T+Q+D+Y.  T+Q+D+Y,  PS+X. 

PS+Y,  T+Q+D+X.  T+Q+D+X, 

18-92 

17*32 

19-55 

18-34 

18-52 

19-31 

19-76 

18-42 

18-82 

18-80 

19-47 

18-11 

18-36 

19-01 

D=  21-25 

18-89 

17-61 

18-42 

18-42 

C=  21-25 

18-97 

17-94 

17*95 

18-77 

F =768-9 

18-70 

17-81 

18-82 

18-46 

E=  22-4 

18-44 

17-95 

18-76 

18-30 

18-96 

17*85 

20-22 

19*59 

19*16 

18-11 

19*71 

18-84 

19*09 

17-85 

188*50 

186-82 

190-99 

179-99 

20('PS  + X)£i:20(T  + Q+D  + Y)-l-68i)art. 

20(PS  + Y):O:20(T  + Q+D  + X)-l 

40PS:ii:40(T  + Q + D)  — 0-03971  grain  in 

air  (<=21*31,  6=766*60). 

APPARENT  WEIGHT  OF  THE  COMMERCIAL  STANDARD. 


861 


June  30. 

100  parts=  0-29981  grain. 

PS+X,  T-l-Q-l-D-l-Y.  T-fQ+n+Y,  PS+X. 

PS+Y,  T-(-Q+D-|-X.  T+Q+D+X,  PS+Y. 

18-70 

16-22 

16-16 

16-74 

17*95 

16-32  D=  18-8 

16-96 

16-92 

17-75 

16-00  C=  18-85 

16-24 

16-55 

17-24 

15-56  F = 761-20 

17*32 

16-84 

17*61 

15-90  E=  19-9 

16-34 

16-56 

89-25 

80-00 

83-02 

83-61 

10(PS  + X)^ 

1 0(T-1- Q + D + Y) - 9-25  parts.  10(PS  + Y)£bl0(T+Q  + D + X)  + 0-59  part. 

20PSbi20(T  + Q-|-D)  — 0-02596 grain  in 

air  (iJ=  18-87,  &=759-23). 

gr.  t.  h. 


40PS=2:40(T  + Q + A)  —0-12811 

19*68 

765-49 

20PS:£b20(T  + Q + A)  —0-04038 

19-70 

746-53 

20PS:£1:20(T  + Q+A)  -0-06643 

18-83 

756-03 

40PSit40(T+Q+B)  -0-05781 

1912 

767*35 

20PS:O:20(r  + Q + B)  -0-05267 

19*7 

746-53 

20PSib20(T+Q  + B)  -0-02800 

18-83 

756-03 

20PS:ib20(T  +-Q  + C)  -0-00834 

19-15 

750-60 

40PS:£i:40(T+Q+C)  -0-07068 

18-65 

753-85 

20PS:ri20(T4-Q  + C)  -0-05067 

18-87 

759*23 

40PS=ib40(T+Q  + D)  -0-01176 

18-32 

764-85 

40PSib40(T+Q+D)  -0-03971 

21-31 

766-60 

20PS£b20(T+Q  + D)  -0-02596 

18-87 

759-23 

Means. 

gr. 

t. 

b. 

PS£bT+Q  + A -0-002936 

19*47 

758-38 

PSibT  + Q+B  -0-001731 

19*19 

759*31 

PS^T  + Q + C -0-001621 

18-83 

754-38 

PSbbT+Q+D  -0-000774 

19-63 

764-43 

Mean  of  all. 

gr. 

t. 

b. 

-T  + Q + KA  + B + C + D)  -0-00177 

19*28 

759*: 

Or,  since  A + B + C + D = 4F  + 4G— 0'00712  grain, 

PS^bT  + Q+F+G— 0’00355  grain  in  air  (<=19‘28,  5=759'12). 

T+Q  + F+G-0-00355  grain  =7000-00073  grains. 

PS  displaces  0'39744  grain  of  air,  T+Q  + F+G  — 0‘00355  gr.  displaces  0‘39727  gr. 
of  air.  Hence 

PS=T+Q+FH-G-0-00338  grain. 

Hence,  supposing  U to  have  had  the  same  density  as  V,  PS=7000’00093  grains,  of 
which  U contained  5760. 

Apparent  weight  of  the  Commercial  Standard. 

During  the  comparison  of  U with  Sp  and  RS  in  Somerset  House,  the  mean  tempe- 
rature was  18°°7  G.,  and  the  mean  height  of  the  barometer,  reduced  to  0°C.,  was 
755*64  mm.  PS  displaced  0*38035  grain  of  air,  T-|-Q+F-|-G  displaced  0*38019  grain 
of  air,  when  ^=18*7,  6=755*64.  Hence  PS^bT+Q-J-F-f-G— 0*00354  grain  in  air 
(f=18*7,  6=765*64)  in  Somerset  House. 

5 u 2 


862  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Let  W be  a weight  of  7000  grains  of  the  same  density  as  U.  In  air  (^=18’7, 
fe=755-64)  U £i:T+0‘00745  grain.  Therefore  (T+0'00745  grain). 

(T+O-00745  gr.)=T+0-00745  gr.+^  (T+0-00745  gr.). 
T=72(R+S)H-0*00559  grain,  and  4F+4G=:62(R+S) +0-01 112  grain. 

1 24  fi2  fi2 

yyg  (T+0-00745  gr.)  = ^[72(R+S)+0-01303  gr.]=^(R+S)+0-00281  gr. 

= F+G+0-00003  gr. 

Hence  [T+0-00745  grain]  =T+F+G+0-00748  grain. 

Therefore  W£i:T+F+G+0-00748  grain. 

Hence  in  Somerset  House,  PSi^  W+Q— 0-01 102  gr.  in  air  (^=18-7,  6=755-64). 

Q— 0 01102  grain  =0  63407  grain.  The  weight  of  0-63407  grain  was  adjusted  by 
PS.  This,  in  air  (#=  18-7,  6=755-64),  is  equivalent  to  a weight  of  0-63413  grain 
adjusted  by  W. 

The  commercial  standard  lb.  is  a brass  weight  which  in  air  (^=18*7,  6=755*64), 
or  at  the  temperature  65°-66  Fahrenheit,  under  the  pressure  of  29-750  inches  of  mer- 
cury at  32°  Fahrenheit,  in  Somerset  House,  for  which  log  A=7-078324— 10,  appears 
to  weigh  as  much  as  W,  or  as  much  as  PS — Q+0-01102  grain.  For  in  air  having 
the  above-mentioned  temperature  and  pressure,  the  apparent  weight  of  such  a lb. 
would  be  of  that  of  the  lost  standard.  This  result  is  not  affected  by  the  uncer- 
tainty of  the  value  of  the  specific  gravity  of  the  lost  standard. 


In  the  following  comparisons  of  the  platinum  copies  of  the  pound  with  PS, 
I,  K,  L,  M,  N will  be  used  to  denote  PS,  PC  No.  1,  PC  No.  2,  PC  No.  3,  PC  No.  4 
respectively.  The  zero  of  the  scale  of  the  barometer  was  305  millimetres  above  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  weights. 


Comparison  of  PC  No.  1 with  PS. 


February  16,  1846. 

100  parts =0*26222 

grain. 

February  18.  100  parts= 

= 0*27683  grain, 

K+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  K+Y. 

K+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  K+X. 

20*14 

20*30 

15*32 

17*76 

20*44 

20*61 

15*29 

17*40 

21*25 

20*94 

15*51 

17*41 

20*64 

19-61 

D= 

16*05 

15*80 

17-67 

20*89 

20*94 

C = 

16*1 

16*96 

17-75 

20*01 

20*85 

F = 

766*8 

16*46 

17-24 

20*57 

19*46 

E = 

16*42 

15*35 

17-52 

20-04 

19-82 

16*24 

16*62 

20*70 

19-75 

16*60 

16*46 

19-65 

19-81 

16*27 

16*94 

204*33 

202*09 

159*80 

172*77 

20(K-|-Y):£i20(I  + X)-2*24  parts.  20(K  + X)£i20(I  + Y)  + 12*97  parts. 

40K £5: 401 + 0*03031  grain  in  air  (<=l6*09)  Z»=765*25). 


COMPARISON  OF  PC  No.  1 WITH  PS. 
February  20.  100  parts= 0*22624  grain. 


K+Y,  1+X. 

I+X,  K+Y. 

K+X,  1+Y. 

I+Y,  K+X, 

21*70 

23*17 

18*09 

19-79 

23*27 

22*27 

18*55 

19-02 

22*22 

22*86 

19*11 

20-25 

22*29 

23*07 

D= 

= 9-3  19-70 

20*40 

21*66 

21*20 

C = 

= 9-5  18-54 

20*74 

21*26 

20*77 

F = 

= 766*8  19*16 

20*39 

20*95 

21*24 

E= 

= 16*8  19-12 

20*35 

20*50 

20*26 

19-02 

19-72 

19-62 

20*36 

18*99 

20*07 

20*55 

19-65 

19-50 

20*59 

214*02 

214*85 

189-78 

201*32 

20(K  + Y):<i 

20(1 + X)  + 0*83  part. 

20(K  + X)£h20(I  + Y)  + 11*54  parts. 

40K  £1:401  + 0*02799  grain 

in  air  (<=9*4,  6=765*30). 

February  25. 

100  parts= 0*29063 

grain. 

K+X,  1+Y. 

1+Y,  K+X. 

K+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  K+Y. 

20*35 

21*56 

17-10 

17-15 

19-85 

21*67 

16*05 

16*66 

19-36 

21*00 

17-45 

17-51 

18*84 

20*69 

D=  18*05 

16*81 

17-70 

18*62 

19-92 

C=  18*1 

16*57 

16*45 

18*67 

19-75 

F = 753*05 

17-19 

17*51 

18*90 

19-12 

E=  18*5 

16*69 

17-77 

18*62 

18*97 

16*50 

17-42 

18*37 

19-06 

16*92 

16*42 

18*21 

18*22 

16*76 

16*49 

189-79 

199-96 

168*04 

I7I-O8 

20(K  + X) 

£:  20(1 + Y)  + 10*1 7 parts. 

20(K  + Y)£2:20(I  + X)  + 3*04  parts. 

40K  £5:401  + 0*03839  grain  in  air  (<= 

= 18*08,  6=751*28). 

March  6. 

100  parts= 0*29781  grain. 

K+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  K+Y. 

K+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  K+X. 

18*00 

19-00 

15*22 

15*36 

17-34 

17-31 

12*85 

13*22 

17-41 

18*06 

20*41 

20*36 

16*32 

17-07 

D=  17-85 

20*05 

19-50 

16*07 

17-57 

C—  17-85 

20*12 

19-37 

16*35 

16*65 

F = 755*3 

19-05 

19-17 

16*10 

16*24 

E=  18*35 

18*07 

18*42 

15*80 

16*37 

17*47 

17-42 

15*54 

16*46 

16*54 

16*55 

16*04 

15*97 

15*80 

15*62 

164*97 

170*70 

175*58 

174*99 

20(K  + Y)  20(1  + X)  + 5*73  parts.  20(K  + X)  £!=  20(  I + Y)  - 0*59  part. 

40Kii40I  + 0*01531  grain  in  air  (<=17-88,  6=753*54). 


863 


864  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


April  20. 


100  parts=0'24107  grain. 


K+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  K+X. 

K+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  K+Y. 

20*09 

21*27 

18*71 

19*11 

20*65 

21*30 

18*42 

18*47 

20*62 

21*25 

18*52 

18*75 

20*71 

21*17 

D=  12*25 

18*46 

19*01 

20*52 

21*44 

C=  12*3 

17*65 

18*89 

19*99 

20*00 

F= 766*2 

17*76 

18*00 

19*34 

20*79 

E=  13 

18*27 

18*35 

19*57 

20*50 

18*00 

18*50 

19*27 

19*71 

18*55 

18*97 

19*20 

20*00 

18*45 

19*09 

199*97 

207*43 

182*79 

187*14 

20(K  + X)  ^ 20(1  + Y)  + 7-47  parts.  20(K  + Y):fi  20(1  + X)  + 4-35  parts. 

40K £1:401 + 0*02849  grain  in  air  (<=12*3,  Z»=765*07). 


gr- 

t. 

b. 

40K£1: 

401  + 0*03003 

16*09 

765*25 

40K£1: 

401  + 0*02799 

9*4 

765*30 

40K£i 

401  + 0*03839 

18*08 

751*28 

40KS1 

401  + 0*01531 

17*88 

753*54 

40K£:: 

401  + 0*02849 

12*3 

765*07 

200K£i:200I  + 0*14021 


PC  No.  1 £!: PS + 0*00070  grain  in  air  (<=  14*75,  5=760*09). 

PC  No.  1 displaces  0*40452  grain  of  air,  PS  displaces  0*40471  grain.  Therefore 

PC  No.  I = PS -f- 0*00051  grain. 


Comparison  of  PC  No.  2 with  PS. 


February  11,  12. 


100  parts= 0*25720  grain. 


L+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  L+X. 

L+Y,  I+X. 

1+X,  L+Y. 

16*36 

15*89 

15*61 

14*81 

17*69 

16*14 

14*66 

15*44 

17*10 

15*60 

15*64 

15*46 

16*74 

15*59 

D= 

14*95 

14*41 

13*54 

16*94 

15*04 

C = 

15 

13*56 

13*17 

15*19 

14*00 

F= 

762*52 

17*04 

17-06 

15*30 

13*41 

E= 

15*42 

16*26 

17*01 

14*95 

13*37 

15*61 

16*16 

14*61 

13*10 

15*87 

15*77 

14*81 

13*24 

14*75 

15*77 

159*69 

145*38 

153*41 

154*19 

20(L  + X)£b20(I  + Y)-14*31  parts.  20(L  + Y)£i20(I  + X)  + 0*78  part. 

40L£!:40I  — 0*03480  grain  in  air  (f=15*0,  5=761*1). 


COMPARISON  OF  PC  No.  2 WITH  PS. 
March  13,  14.  100  parts=0‘29530  grain. 


L+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  L+X. 

L+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  L+Y. 

23-25 

24-55 

22-30 

20-62 

23-81 

24-06 

22-59 

21-10 

23-34 

23-21 

21-85 

20-50 

22-35 

22-66 

D=  17-55 

21-49 

20-00 

23-16 

22-99 

C=  17-55 

20-55 

19-55 

21-87 

23-16 

F=773-5 

19-72 

19-47 

22-91 

23-00 

E=  18 

21-14 

19-54 

22-11 

21-62 

20-89 

18-91 

22-36 

23-81 

19-67 

18-32 

22-22 

23-72 

21-04 

19-66 

21-86 

22-85 

20-85 

19-17 

249-24 

255-63 

232-09 

216-84 

22(L+X)£1 

22(1  + Y)  + 6-39  parts. 

44L£i441-0-026l6 

i?rain  in  air  (t= 

22(L  + Y)£2:22(I  + X)- 
17-58,  ^.=771-73). 

— 15-25  parts. 

March  17. 

100  parts= 0-26284  grain. 

L+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  L+X. 

L+Y,  I-+  X. 

I+X,  L+Y. 

21-35 

22-07 

20-76 

18-81 

20-37 

19-92 

20-89 

19-02 

20-60 

19-82 

19-66 

18-92 

18-56 

19-12 

D=  16-22 

20-44 

18-47 

19-42 

19-26 

C=  16-25 

19-89 

17-75 

19-00 

18-85 

F = 750-05 

20-41 

19-00 

17-85 

19-19 

E=  17-1 

21-19 

19-36 

18-02 

18-74 

20-42 

18-36 

17-34 

17-94 

20-51 

19-84 

16-50 

16-86 

20-62 

19-84 

14-59 

15-55 

20-52 

19-40 

203-60 

207-31 

225-31 

208-77 

22(L  + X)£i: 

22(1 + Y)  + 3-71  parts. 

22(L  + Y):0:22(I  + X)- 

- 17-54  parts. 

44L£i:44I  — 0-03635  grain  in  air  (t— 

16-25,  ^1= 748-46). 

April  1. 

100  parts=  0-27933  grain. 

L+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  L+Y. 

L+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  L+X. 

19-40 

20-75 

17-44 

14-86 

19-39 

20-47 

17-12 

14-47 

18-62 

20-92 

16-49 

14-60 

18-02 

20-16 

D=  16-2 

16-54 

14-96 

17-64 

19-16 

C=  16-3 

16-02 

14-17 

17-84 

18-87 

F = 750-7 

16-49 

14-92 

17-29 

18-80 

E = 1 8-6 

16-52 

14-65 

17-37 

18-51 

16-72 

15-29 

16-56 

17-41 

16-42 

15-15 

16-29 

17-64 

16-62 

16-00 

16-04 

17-36 

16-72 

15-42 

194-49 

210-05 

183-10 

164-49 

22(L  + Y)£i: 

22(1  + X) + 15-56  parts. 

22(L  + X)£1:22(I  + Y)- 

I8-6I  parts. 

44L  £1:441  — 0-00852  grain  in  air  (<= 

16-27,  6=748-93). 

865 


866  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


April  8.  100  parts=0’24979  grain. 


L+X,I+Y. 

I+Y,  L+X. 

L+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  L+Y. 

24*39 

24*05 

19*64 

19*72 

24*72 

23*51 

20*55 

19*70 

25*07 

24*69 

19*49 

19*51 

24*80 

24*59 

D=  15*02 

19*84 

19*04 

24*52 

21*70 

C=  15*02 

19*67 

18*71 

24*60 

22*90 

F =745*2 

20*17 

19*80 

24*42 

22*37 

E=  15*9 

19*94 

19*46 

24*25 

22*19 

20*47 

19*17 

24*12 

22*55 

20*79 

19*45 

23*46 

22*84 

20*16 

19*42 

24*00 

21*16 

20*24 

19*34 

268*35 

252*55 

220*96 

213*32 

22(L  + X):0: 

22(1  + Y)  — 15*80  parts. 

22(1. + Y):2:22(  I+X) 

— 7*64  parts. 

44L£!:44I— 0*05855  grain  in  air  (<= 

15*04,  5=743*77). 

gr- 

t. 

1. 

40L£^  401—0*03480 

15*0 

761*1 

44L:£1:  441-0*02616 

17*58 

77l'7S 

44L£i;  441-0*03635 

16*25 

748*46 

44L£i  441-0*00852 

16*27 

748*93 

44L£i  441  — 0*05855 

15*04 

743*77 

2l6L£:b2l6I-0*l6438 

PC  No.  2^ PS- 

-0*00076  grain  in  air  (<= 

16*12,  5=754*68). 

PC  No.  2 displaces  0*39966  grain  of  air,  PS  displaces  0*39979  grain.  Hence 

PC  No.  2 = PS— 0*00089  grain. 


Comparison  of  PC  No.  3 with  PS. 


February  9,  10. 

100  parts=0*26l46  grain. 

M+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  M+Y. 

M+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  M+X. 

17*65 

17*54 

17*64 

16*26 

17*15 

17*52 

17*86 

16*07 

16*31 

16*42 

D=  15*15 

17*02 

14*90 

16*44 

16*25 

C=  15*25 

17*85 

15*22 

16*04 

15*56 

F = 771*l 

17*79 

15*79 

15*47 

15*46 

E=  15*5 

17*06 

14*96 

16*52 

15*09 

16*69 

14*77 

15*49 

16*00 

15*80 

14*0S 

14*99 

16*15 

16*29 

14*09 

16*17 

15*95 

15*42 

14*17 

162*23 

161*94 

169*42 

150*28 

20(M  + Y) 20(1  + X)— 0*29  part.  20(M  + X):0: 20(1  + Y)  — 19*14  parts. 

40Mii40I— 0*05080  grain  in  air  (<=15*22,  &=769*64). 


COMPARISON  OF  PC  No.  3 WITH  PS. 


867 


February  13.  100  parts  =0*26281  grain.  February  14.  100  parts  =0*26683  grain. 


M+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  M+X. 

M+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  M+Y. 

23*49 

21*00 

19*89 

19*01 

23*55 

21*11 

19*99 

19*40 

22*10 

20*77 

19*27 

18*14 

22*65 

20*82 

D=  15*73 

19*26 

17*47 

23*57 

20*27 

C=  15*82 

19*55 

18*34 

21*99 

20*12 

F = 767*55 

18*85 

17*65 

22*25 

20*55 

E=  16*05 

18*12 

17*70 

22*41 

20*54 

17*95 

16*41 

22*01 

21*27 

18*12 

17*24 

21*59 

21*30 

17*91 

17*14 

225*61 

207*75 

188*91 

178*50 

20(M  + X):£!; 

20(1  + Y)  — 17*86  parts. 

20(M  + Y)ii20(I  + X)- 

— 10*41  parts, 

40M£!:40I  — 0*07472  g 

rain  in  air  (t= 

15*8,  6=766*04). 

March  18. 

100  parts  =0*24265  grain. 

M+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  M-f-Y. 

M+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  M+X. 

16*80 

16*40 

18*99 

17*24 

17*71 

14*65 

19*06 

17*82 

17*92 

15*94 

19*44 

17*76 

17*54 

14*40 

D=  15*13 

19*39 

17*96 

16*66 

15*16 

C=  15*22 

19*06 

16*76 

16*07 

14*40 

F=752*4 

18*25 

17*00 

16*39 

14*00 

E=  15*9 

18*24 

17*05 

15*52 

13*36 

18*64 

16*85 

14*92 

13*42 

17*25 

17*01 

15*35 

13*75 

17*57 

16*15 

164*88 

145*48 

185*89 

171*60 

20(M  + Y)£!: 

20(1 +X)  — 19*4  parts. 

40M£i40I-0*08176 

grain  in  air  (^= 

20  ( M + X)  £i:  20(  1 + Y) - 
15*19,  6=750*95). 

14*29  parts. 

March  19. 

M+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  M+X. 

100  parts  =0*24331  grain. 

M+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  M+Y. 

22*79 

21*66 

17*54 

17*11 

23*35 

21*60 

17*27 

15*17 

23*04 

22*27 

17*45 

15*54 

22*50 

21*76 

D=  14*0 

16*77 

14*84 

2.3*12 

21*65 

C=  14*08 

15*97 

14*09 

22*82 

21*57 

F=  753*2 

1*5*75 

13*97 

22*30 

21*51 

E=  14*45 

15*74 

14*64 

22*21 

21*42 

15*92 

13*57 

21*40 

20*65 

15*24 

13*40 

20*15 

20*01 

15*64 

14*50 

223*68 

214*10 

163*29 

146*83 

20(M  + X)£!:20(I  + Y)-9*58  parts.  20(M  + Y)ii:20(I  + X)-l6*46  parts. 

40M£!:  401—0*06336  grain  in  air  (<=14*06,  6=751*92). 


5 X 


MDCCCLVI. 


868  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


April  1 1. 


100  parts  =0’23525  grain. 


M+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  M+Y. 

M+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  M+X. 

23*40 

21*36 

17*26 

14*67 

23*45 

21*81 

16*90 

15*66 

23*41 

22*11 

16*82 

15*60 

02-27 

20*89 

17*37 

15*69 

18*04 

16*45 

D=  14*0 

17*47 

15*57 

18*21 

16*52 

C=  14*0 

16*47 

15*65 

17*80 

16*40 

F =750*2 

15*89 

15*75 

17*10 

15*25 

E=  14*7 

15*02 

15*42 

17*20 

14*94 

16*79 

15*62 

17*47 

16*00 

16*41 

15D2 

17*62 

15*20 

17*55 

15*99 

215*97 

196*93 

183*95 

170*74 

22(M  + Y)£b 

22(1  + X)  — 19*04  parts. 

22(M  + X)£b22(I  + Y) 

— 13*21  parts. 

44M£i:44I  — 0*07587  grain  in  air  (<= 

14*02,  6=748*89). 

gr- 

t. 

h. 

40M£i 

401-0*05080 

15*22 

769*64 

40M:£!: 

401-0*07472 

15*80 

766*04 

40M£;: 

401-0*08176 

15*19 

750*95 

40Mii 

401-0*06336 

14*06 

751*92 

44Mii 

441-0*07587 

14*02 

748*89 

204M£L  2041-0-34651 


PC  No.  3 PS  — 0*00170  grain  in  air  (<=  14-84,  6 = 757*32). 

PC  No.  3 displaces  0’40302  grain  of  air,  P8  displaces  0'40310  grain.  Therefore 

PC  No.  3 = PS  — 0'00178  grain. 


Comparison  of  VC  No.  4 with  P8. 


February  7» 


100  parts  =0*29952  grain. 


N+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  N+X. 

22*42 

19*56 

22*40 

19*12 

21*76 

18*30 

20*85 

17*77 

D= 

21*14 

17*10 

C= 

19*69 

17*06 

F= 

19*46 

16*55 

E= 

20*20 

16*97 

20*00 

15*72 

19*89 

16*01 

207*81 

174*16 

20(N  + X)£!:20(I  + Y)  — 33*65  parts. 


N+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  N+Y. 

19*34 

19*35 

19*85 

20*02 

20*22 

19*57 

17*4 

19*67 

20*04 

17*45 

20*79 

19*35 

757*4 

20*01 

19*45 

17*65 

20*20 

18*89 

19*84 

19*04 

20*09 

19*24 

20*25 

19*85 

200*26 

194*80 

20(N  + Y)ii20(I  + X) 

— 5*46  parts. 

40Nii40I  — 0*1 1715  grain  in  air  (^=17*46,  6=755*72). 


COMPARISON  OF  PC  No.  4 WITH  PS.  869 


March  23.  100  parts  =0*22348  grain. 


N+y,  i+x. 

I+X,  N+Y. 

N+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  N+X. 

20  49 

17*81 

16*41 

13*50 

20-61 

17*35 

17*21 

14*20 

21-05 

18*07 

17*49 

14-31 

21*17 

18*19 

D=  9*25 

17*59 

13-75 

20*07 

18*05 

C=  9*4 

17*47 

13-31 

20*04 

17*49 

F =743*0 

17*72 

14-10 

19*15 

16-44 

E=  14-6 

17*27 

14-66 

18*92 

17-37 

17*64 

13*97 

18*45 

16*62 

17*72 

13*74 

18*30 

16*26 

17*86 

13*81 

198*25 

173*65 

174*38 

139*35 

20(N  + Y)£i: 

20(1 + X)— 24-6  parts. 

20(N  + X)^20(I  + Y)- 

—35*03  parts. 

40N£i:40l-0*13326 

grain  in  air  (t= 

9-32,  6=741*72). 

March  30. 

100  parts  =0*27112  grain. 

N+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  N+X. 

N+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  N+Y. 

20-04 

16-10 

20*01 

18*74 

17*45 

16-05 

19*81 

18-07 

17*89 

15*70 

19*11 

18*57 

17*87 

15*05 

D=  16  19*95 

18*56 

22*11 

18*50 

c=  16  19*60 

17*95 

21*50 

18*30 

F=755*0  19*69 

17*94 

21*30 

19*29 

E=  17*9  19*70 

18*45 

20*31 

18-49 

18*75 

18*35 

20*91 

18-66 

17*80 

16-31 

20*80 

17*50 

17*20 

15*86 

200*18 

173*64 

191*62 

178*80 

20(N  + X)£1 

20(1 + Y)  — 26*54  parts. 

20(N+Y):ri20(I  + X)- 

— 12*82  parts. 

40N£i:40I-0*1067l 

grain  in  air  (^=  16*01,  6=753*3)., 

April  13. 

100  parts 

= 0*24070  grain. 

N+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  N+X. 

N+Y,  I+X, 

I+X,  N+Y. 

18*27 

15*11 

16*69 

13*36 

17*77 

15*90 

16*79 

13*12 

19-05 

16*07 

16*57 

12-60 

18*59 

15*52 

16-09 

12-35 

18*46 

15*89 

D=  14*2 

25-15 

20-67 

17*27 

15*19 

C=  14*25 

20*99 

17*45 

16*65 

14*22 

F=753*45 

21-47 

18*71 

16-85 

15-17 

E=  15*3 

20-92 

18*45 

16*76 

14*45 

20-77 

19*35 

17*26 

14*91 

21*51 

19*46 

16*56 

14*00 

21*34 

19*49 

193*49 

166-43 

218*29 

185*01 

22(N  + X):ii 

22(1 + Y)— 27*06  parts. 

22(N  + Y)£i22(I  + X)- 

■33*28  parts. 

44N:ii44S — 0*14524  grain  in  air  (<=14*24,  6=752*06). 

5x2 


870  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


April  22.  100  parts  =0’24294  grain. 


N+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  N+X. 

N+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  N+Y. 

19*40 

17-39 

17-29 

14*55 

19*92 

16*57 

17-71 

14*10 

19-80 

16*95 

17-34 

14*81 

19-80 

16*50 

D=  12*75 

17-67 

14*41 

19-75 

17*01 

C=  12*8 

17*66 

14*59 

18*56 

16*09 

F=760*9 

17-86 

14*22 

18*40 

15*22 

E=  13*95 

17-60 

13*70 

18*29 

15*69 

17-34 

14*81 

18*42 

15*26 

17-64 

15*81 

17*36 

14*80 

17-64 

13*71 

189-70 

161*48 

175*75 

144*71 

20(N  + X)ii 

2G(I  + Y)-28*22  parts. 

20(N  + 'f)ii:20(I  + X)- 

— 31*04  parts. 

40N— 401 — 0*14397  grain  in  air  (t=- 

12*8,  6=759-67). 

gr. 

t. 

b. 

40N£i 

401 

-0*11715 

17*46 

755*72 

40Nii 

401 

-0*13326 

9-32 

741*72 

40N£i 

401 

-0*10671 

16*01 

753*30 

44N£i 

441 

-0*14524 

14*24 

752*06 

40N£i 

401 

-0*14397 

12*80 

759-67 

204Nii204l  — 0*64633 


PC  No.  4iiPS  — 0*00317  grain  in  air  (<=13*97)  ^=752*49). 


PC  No.  4 displaces  0*40184  grain  of  air,  P8  displaces  0*40181  grain.  Therefore 

PC  No.  4 = PS — 0'00314  grain. 


Determination  of  the  volume  of  Professor'  Schumacher’s  pound  Sp+V. 

The  troy  pounds  Sp,  Sb,  K were  returned  to  Professor  Schumacher,  accompanied 
by  a platinum  weight  V of  about  1240*53  grains  which  with  Sp  makes  a pound  of 
7000  grains. 


January  28. 


100  parts  =0*26743  grain. 


Weighing  of  V in  air. 

Z=F+H  + R + S + Q. 


Z+0*06gr.  +X,  V+Y. 

V+Y,  Z+X. 

Z+0*06gT. +Y,  V+X. 

V+X,  Z+Y. 

18*87 

20*05 

20*02 

20*57 

19-55 

20*87 

20*20 

21*37 

19-56 

20*75 

20*70 

21*22 

19-55 

21*25 

20*15 

21*20 

19-77 

21*27 

20*21 

21*10 

97-30 

104*19 

101*28 

105*46 

Y)ii:10(Z  + 0*03gr.  +X) 

—6*89  parts. 

10(V  + X)£il0(Z  + 

0*03  gr.  +Y)  — 4*18  parts. 

20V:£2:20Z  + 0*6  gr.  — 0*02960  gr. 

V£b  1240*530  grains  of  platinum  in  air. 


t;V=;59*34,  i;Z=58*61,  ^;V— i;Z  = 0*73=  volume  of  0 0009  grain  of  air.  Hence 

V = 1 240*5309  grains. 


DENSITY  OF  THE  PLATINUM  WEIGHT  V. 


871 


Weighing  of  V in  water. 

The  wire  by  which  V was  suspended  in  water  was  so 

fine,  that 

the  effect  of  the 

displacement  of  the  water  by  it,  on  the  sensibility  of  the 

balance,  may  be  neglected. 

The  thermometer  B was  suspended  in  the  water,  with  its  bulb  in  a 

horizontal  plane 

through  V.  The  counterpoise  in  the  left-hand  pan  is  su 

pposed  to  be  in  equilibrium 

with  the  weights  suspended  from  the  right-hand  end  of  the  beam, 

when  the  read- 

ing  of  the  scale  is  1 9. 

January  24,  26,  1846.  100  parts  =0*2626  grain. 

V and  hook  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 

B.  C.  F.  S. 

gr- 

Scale. 

12*16 

0*64 

23*20 

0*62 

14*80 

0*63 

19*35 

11*1 

0*63 

18*30 

0*63 

18*90 

12*13 

0-63 

19*40 

12*05 

0*64 

20*57 

0*63 

18*15 

752*47  15*95 

0*64 

20*60 

0*63 

18*30 

12*0  11*35 

0*63 

18*20 

0*64 

20*65 

12*0 

0*63 

19*85 

11*37 

0*63 

19*50 

0*63 

19*57 

0*63 

20*10 

0*63 

20*05 

11*1 

0*63 

19*90 

0*63 

19-85 

0*63 

19*85 

11*35  742*2  16 

0*63 

19*65 

11*1 

0*63 

19-52 

11*76  11*29  747*33  16 

0*6314 

19-52 

Counterpoise  in  air  (C=11‘29,  F=747*33,  E=l6)  balances  V and  hook  in  water  (B=ll‘76)  + 0*630  gr.  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

F-f  H-l-R-l-0-06 

18*72 

+ 0*06 

18*82 

+ 0*06 

18*86 

+ 0*06 

18*92 

+ 0*06 

18*61 

1^9 

Counterpoise  balances  F4-H  + R + 0*0606  grain. 

V and  hook  in  water  (B=ll'76):!lF  + H + R— 0*5694  grain  in  air  (C  = ll*29,  F=747*33,  E=l6). 


100  parts  =0*292  grain. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr- 

Scale. 

1*61 

20*00 

1*61 

20*05 

1*61 

20*20 

1*61 

19*40 

1*61 

20*70 

1*61 

21*45 

January  26. 


Hook  in  water. 


872  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


1-61 

23*05 

1*61 

22*55 

1*61 

22*25 

1*61 

22*75 

1*61 

21*24 

Counterpoise  balances  hook  in  water  +T6045  grain  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr* 

Scale. 

(l6)  + (2)  + (l)-f0*7  gr.  + 0*00 

20*92 

0*00 

20*87 

0*00 

20*95 

0*00 

21*47 

0*00 

21*05 

Counterpoise  balances  (l6)  + (2)  + (l)  + 0*694  grain  in  air. 

Hook  in  water  ii(l6)  + (2)  + (l)— 0*9105grain  in  air. 

Hook  in  water  £1: 18*0880  grains. 

V in  water  (^=ll*67):i2;  1181*2028  grains  of  platinum  in  air  (<=  11*30,  745*84). 

Hence  AV=20-8834,  log  AV=  1-319797,  ^^V=59•403. 


Comparison  t^'Sp+V  with  PS. 

The  zero  of  the  scale  of  the  barometer  was  305  millimetres  above  the  centre  of 
gravity  of  the  weights. 


April  15,  1846. 

PS+Y,  Sp+V+X. 
19-35 
20*30 
19-85 
20*10 
19-40 
19-35 
19*44 
19-30 
19-35 
19-35 


195*79 


100  parts  =0*24256 

grain. 

Sp+V-f  X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  Sp+V+Y. 

Sp+V+Y,  ps+>; 

19-92 

18*72 

19-61 

20*21 

18*90 

19-75 

20*51 

18*35 

19-69 

20*32 

D=  13*7 

18*30 

19-40 

20*42 

C=  13*8 

19*05 

19-67 

19*40 

F = 756*4 

18*20 

19-74 

19*67 

E=  14*1 

18*86 

19-46 

20*29 

18*54 

19-61 

20*02 

18*84 

18*99 

19-20 

18*82 

19-82 

199-96 

186*58 

195*74 

20(Sp  + V + X)£!:20(PS  + Y)  — 4*17 parts.  20(Sp4- V + Y)2i20(PS  + X)— 9*16  parts. 

40(Sp  + V)£i;40PS  — 0*03233  grain  in  air  (^=13*78,  & = 755*15). 


April  17*  100  parts  =0*24555  grain. 


PS+Y,  Sp+V+X. 

Sp+V+X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  Sp+V+Y. 

Sp+V+Y,  PS+X, 

21*29 

19-27 

18*74 

19*65 

20*59 

18*94 

19*42 

20*74 

21*09 

21*15 

19-96 

20*50 

21*17 

20*89 

D=  13*55 

19-66 

20*17 

20*35 

20*57 

C=  13*56 

19-84 

20*32 

20*15 

20*15 

F = 760*65 

19-90 

20*67 

20*06 

21*26 

E=  14 

20*09 

20*37 

20*35 

19-20 

20*00 

20*60 

20*17 

18*91 

20*05 

20*34 

19-87 

• 18*89 

19-81 

20*19 

205*09 

199-23 

197-47 

203*55 

20(Sp  + V+X)£i 

20(  PS  + Y) + 5*86  parts. 

20(Sp  + V + Y)£i20(PS  + X)-6*08  parts, 

40(Sp  + V)£i:40PS  — 0*00054 grain  in  air 

(<=13*59,  ^-=759-41). 

COMPARISON  OF  Sp  + V WITH  PS. 


873 


April  18.  100  parts  =0*24021  grain. 


PS+Y,  Sp+V+X. 

Sp+V+X,  PS+Y. 

PS+X,  Sp+V+Y. 

Sp+V+Y,  PS+X. 

24*30 

24*69 

16*20 

17*36 

24*76 

25*35 

16*25 

17*30 

18*77 

19*39 

17*47 

17*50 

19*10 

19*74 

D=  13*05 

17-21 

18*14 

18*82 

19*46 

C=  13*1 

18*52 

19*60 

19*10 

18*96 

F=76i*8 

19*35 

20*62 

18*20 

19*36 

E=  13*4 

19*17 

19*74 

18*06 

18*82 

19*10 

19*52 

18*41 

19*31 

19*42 

19*27 

18*19 

17*97 

18*96 

19*16 

197*71 

203*05 

181*65 

188*21 

20(Sp  + V+X)ii: 

20(PS  + Y)— 5*34  parts.  20(Sp  + V+ Y)— 20(PS  + X)— 6*56  parts. 

40(Sp  + V)ti40PS  — 0*02858  grain  in  air  (<=13*1,  6=760*63). 

April  21. 

100  parts  =0*24l60 

grain. 

PS+X,  Sp+V+Y. 

Sp+V+Y,  PS+X. 

PS+Y,  Sp+V+X. 

Sp+V+X,  PS+Y. 

21*57 

20*41 

14*97 

14*65 

20*97 

20*02 

14*60 

15*47 

20*21 

19*12 

14*40 

14*84 

19*66 

18*70 

D=  12*6 

14*40 

15*37 

18*89 

18*07 

C=  12*63 

14*02 

15*86 

19*29 

17*60 

F=  764*03 

14*52 

15*39 

19*02 

17*52 

E=  13*9 

14*10 

16*15 

18*75 

17*22 

14*86 

14*97 

17*97 

16*86 

15*05 

15*34 

17*95 

16*77 

14*82 

15*60 

194*28 

182*29 

145*74 

153*64 

20(Sp  + V + Y)ii20(PS-t-X)  — 11*99  parts.  20(Sp  + V + X)£i20(PS  + Y)  — 7*90  parts. 

40(Sp + V)£i40PS— 0*04805  grain  in  air  (<=12*64,  6=762*79). 

April  23. 

100  parts  =0*23834 

grain. 

PS+X,  Sp+V+Y. 

Sp+V+Y,  PS+X. 

PS+Y,  Sp+V+X. 

Sp+V+X,  PS+Y. 

21*50 

21*50 

19*66 

19*64 

20*85 

21*80 

19*72 

20*14 

21*14 

20*90 

19*12 

20*04 

20*92 

21*96 

D=  12*3 

19*19 

20*06 

20*11 

21*36 

C=  12*35 

19*39 

20*56 

20*24 

21*11 

F=759*0 

19*52 

20*36 

20*12 

21*12 

E=  12*9 

19*90 

19*62 

19*74 

20*76 

19*67 

19*96 

20*11 

20*67 

19*81 

20*21 

19*32 

20*40 

18*91 

20*20 

204*05 

211*58 

194*89 

200*79 

20(Sp  + V + Y)£:20(PS  + X)-7*S3  parts.  20(Sp  + V + X):ii20(PS  + Y)-5*90  parts, 

40(Sp  + V)i^40PS  — 0*03200  grain  in  air  («=  12*35,  &=757*43). 


gr- 

t. 

b. 

40(Sp  + V)iI:40PS- 0*03233 

13*78 

755*15 

40(Sp  + V)  40PS- 0*00054 

13*59 

759*41 

40(  Sp  + V)  £1: 40PS  - 0*02858 

13*10 

760*63 

40(Sp  + V)  ii:  40  PS  - 0*04805 

12*64 

762*79 

40(Sp  + V)£l:40PS-0*03200 

12*35 

Ihl'AZ 

Mean  ......  Sp  + Vi2:PS“0*0007l  grain  in  air  (<=13*09,  ^=759*08). 


874  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


rSp=271‘832  as  computed  by  means  of  Schumacher’s  tables,  butvTis  0’014  less  as 
computed  by  Schumacher’s  tables  than  as  computed  by  the  tables  used  in  calculating 
vM  and  uPS;  therefore  probably  ^^Sp  would  be  271 '846  if  computed  by  the  latter  tables, 
dV=59*403,  ^;PS  = 330•856.  Hence  i/'(Sp+V)  = 331*249,  ^;(Sp+V)  — ?;PS=0’393. 
t»(Sp+V)—yPS=  volume  of  0 00048  grain  of  air.  Therefore 

Sp-]-V= PS  — 0*00023  grain. 


Comparison  of  the  Pound  with  the  Kilogramme. 

The  necessity  of  a new  comparison  of  the  kilogramme  with  English  weights  appears 
by  the  following  extract  from  a paper  by  Professor  Moll  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Institution,  No.  4,  1831.  “Each  of  the  governments  who  sent  Commissioners  to 
the  Committee  of  Weights  and  Measures  in  Paris  were  presented  with  a kilogramme 
and  a metre  by  the  French  government.  A similar  present  was  made  to  each  of  the 
Commissioners.  These  weights  and  measures  were  fabricated  under  the  eyes  of  the 
united  Commission  and  marked  with  their  particular  stamp,  after  being  previously 
examined,  it  is  said,  with  great  care.  The  kilogramme  and  the  metre  of  the  late 
M.  VAN  SwiNDEN  are  now  in  my  hands.  1 have  compared  Van  Swinoen’s  kilogramme 
and  several  standards  of  the  same  weight  with  the  English  troy  weights  of  Robinson, 
and  I am  very  sorry  to  say  that  the  result  has  left  me  in  an  entire  darkness  as  to  the 
real  value  of  the  kilogramme. 

Van  Swinden’s  kilogramme 15432*295 

A kilogramme  module  made  by  Fortin  and  belonging  to  Government  15432*752 
A kilogramme  modele  made  by  Ganuolfi,  Balancier  de  laMonnaye  de 
Paris,  and  sent  during  the  French  occupation  of  this  country  by  the 

Parisian  Mint  to  the  Mint  at  Utrecht 15432*730 

A kilogramme  by  the  same  artist,  also  belonging  to  the  Mint  at  Utrecht  15432*752 
A kilogramme  by  Nagel  of  Amsterdam,  and  serving  as  a standard  at 

the  Mint 15432*920 

Another,  made  as  a standard  for  the  Royal  Institute  of  Holland  . . 15432*985 

Another  by  the  same,  in  my  possession 15433*420 

Another,  also  said  to  be  a standard 15434*91 

Anniiaire  du  Bureau  des  Longitudes 15438*355 

Kelly 15433,” 

According  to  Hassler  (Comparison  of  Weights  and  Measures  reported 
to  the  Senate  of  the  United  States,  1832),  the  weight  of  an  original  brass 
kilogramme^presented  to  M.  Tralles  by  theFrench  Committee  of  Weights 
and  Measures,  in  grains  of  which  the  United  States  Mint  troy  pound 

adjusted  by  Captain  Kater,  contains  5760  15433*159 

Result  of  the  comparison  of  a troy  pound  sent  to  Paris,  according  to  a 
statement  of  theFrench  Minister  of  the  Inteiior,  in  a letter  to  the  English 
Commissioners  of  Weights  and  Measures,  dated  Paris,  February  28,  1821  15432*719 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  VOLUMES  OF  ^ AND  €. 


875 


By  the  good  offices  of  M.  Arago,  permission  was  obtained  from  the  French  Govern- 
ment to  compare  the  pound  with  the  standard  kilogramme  of  platinum  deposited  in 
the  Archives  on  the  22nd  of  June,  1799,  known  as  the  ‘kilogramme  des  Archives.’ 
The  weights  selected  for  comparison  with  the  standard  kilogramme,  which  hence- 
forward will  be  designated  by  the  letter  91,  were  PC  No.  1 and  PC  No.  2,  together 
with  the  auxiliary  weight  B and  a platinum  weight  V of  about  192'4  grains,  making 
altogether  about  ]5432'35  grains.  In  order  to  obtain  a second  comparison  perfectly 
independent  of  the  former,  a kilogramme  of  bronze  was  constructed  by  Mr.  Barrow, 
with  which,  after  comparison  with  9[,  it  was  my  intention  to  compare  PS  together 
with  each  of  the  four  platinum  copies  of  the  pound  in  turn,  and  other  platinum 
weights  sufficient  to  make  up  a kilogramme. 

By  some  most  unaccountable  oversight  91  had  never  been  weighed  in  water  pre- 
vious to  its  final  adjustment.  Afterwards,  on  account  of  its  legal  importance,  it  was 
considered  hazardous  to  immerse  it  in  water,  especially  as,  from  the  method  of  pre- 
paring platinum  at  that  time  in  use  (fusion  with  arsenious  acid  and  subsequent  igni- 
tion of  the  arsenide  of  platinum  under  a muffle  till  the  arsenic  was  burnt  away),  there 
is  reason  to  suppose  that  it  is  not  entirely  free  from  an  admixture  of  arsenic  which, 
on  being  wetted,  might  oxidize  and  then  dissolve,  and  thus  produce  a very  sensible 
alteration  of  weight.  Its  form  is  that  of  a cylinder  of  about  39’4  millimetres  in 
diameter  and  39‘7  millimetres  high,  having  its  edges  rounded  by  a surface  0'75 
millimetre  broad,  and  having  a radius  of  about  3 millimetres.  An  approximate  value 
of  its  density  was  obtained  by  Professor  Schumacher  and  Olufsen  in  the  following 
manner.  In  August  and  November  1831,  the  density  of  a kilogramme^  in  Professor 
Schumacher’s  possession  was  found  to  be  21*212,  by  weighing  it  in  water  and  in  air. 
In  March  1832,  by  measuring  pairs  of  diameters  at  right  angles  to  each  other  in 
planes  cutting  the  axis  in  eight  different  points,  and  the  distances  between  nine 
corresponding  pairs  of  points  in  the  ends  of  the  cylinder,  the  volume  of  ^ at  0° 
appeared  to  be  471 14*4  cubic  millimetres.  In  the  autumn  of  1834,  Professor  Olufsen 
measured  two  diameters  at  right  angles  to  each  other  at  the  middle  and  at  each  end 
of  91,  and  the  distances  between  eight  pairs  of  corresponding  points  in  the  circular 
ends.  The  volume  of  91  at  0°,  deduced  from  these  linear  dimensions  appeared  to  be 
48615*4  cubic  millimetres,  and  consequently  its  density  20*644*.  These  measure- 
ments, though  made  with  the  utmost  care,  appeared  to  be  too  few,  and  confined  to 
too  small  a number  of  points,  to  determine  the  density  of  91  in  this  manner  with 
sufficient  accuracy.  I therefore  resolved  to  compare  its  volume  by  means  of  the 
stereometer,  with  that  of  a brass  cylinder  of  nearly  the  same  dimensions,  the  volume 
of  which  might  afterwards  be  found  by  weighing  in  air  and  in  water. 

The  representations  of  M.  Arago  procured  for  me  the  privilege  of  forwarding  the 
balance  and  stereometer  unexamined  from  Havre  to  the  Douane  in  Paris,  where  I 
received  them  without  being  obliged  to  unpack  the  cases  in  which  they  were  con- 

* Schumachee’s  Jahrbuch  fur  1836,  p.  237. 

5 Y 


MDCCCLVI. 


876  PROF.W.  H,  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

tained.  From  M.  Letronne  and  M.Lallemand,  Officers  of  the  Archives,  to  the 
latter  of  whom  the  custody  of  the  standards  was  confided,  I received  every  possible 
assistance.  The  balance  was  mounted  on  a strong  and  heavy  carpenter’s  bench  in  a 
room  paved  with  brick,  on  the  ground  floor  of  the  Archives.  On  unpacking  the 
stereometer,  the  graduated  tube  was  found  to  be  broken,  in  consequence,  as 
M.  Bunten  affirmed,  of  mere  contact  with  a slender  iron  wire  used  in  cleaning  the 
tube  with  cotton  wool,  and  left  in  it  in  ignorance  of  the  peculiar  action  of  iron  wire 
on  the  interior  of  a glass  tube,  and  not  from  any  violent  shock.  M.  Bunten  replaced 
the  broken  tube,  which  had  been  divided  into  inches,  by  a tube  divided  into  centi- 
metres, and  traced  upon  the  slip  of  ivory  a scale  of  10  millimetres  divided  to  every  0’2 
of  a millimetre.  I procured  one  of  Ernst’s  cistern  barometers,  which,  after  hanging 
all  night  by  the  side  of  the  standard  barometer  of  the  observatory,  was  compared 
with  it  on  the  following  day  by  one  of  the  Assistants.  M.  Gambey  was  commissioned 
to  construct  a brass  cylinder,  either  solid  or,  if  hollow,  air-tight,  nearly  of  the  dimen- 
sions of  91,  a cylindrical  cup  to  receive  the  kilogramme  or  the  model,  fitting  into  the 
cup  of  the  stereometer,  and  a second  cylinder  closed  at  both  ends,  to  fill  up  as 
much  as  possible  of  the  space  left  vacant  in  the  cup  of  the  stereometer.  While  with 
M.  Gambey,  I ascertained  that  he  had  some  platinum  kilogrammes  finished,  with  the 
exception  of  the  final  reduction.  This  appeared  to  be  a favourable  opportunity  for 
commencing  the  formation  of  a collection  of  accurate  copies  of  foreign  standards, 
which  had  been  recommended  in  Art.  33  of  the  Report  of  the  Committee,  dated 
December  21,  1841.  Also  the  comparison  of  91  with  a copy  having  nearly  the  same 
density  and  expansion,  and  unalterable  by  mere  exposure  to  the  atmosphere,  promised 
to  be  much  more  serviceable  in  finding  the  relation  between  the  French  and  English 
standards  of  weight,  than  its  comparison  with  a copy  expanding  nearly  twice  as 
much  by  heat,  and  having  nearly  three  times  its  volume,  and  liable  to  become  con- 
siderably heavier  by  oxidation  in  the  course  of  a few  years.  I therefore  applied  to 
the  Astronomer  Royal  for  authority  to  purchase  a platinum  kilogramme  for  the  use 
of  the  Committee.  While  waiting  for  his  reply,  I occupied  myself  with  the  compa- 
rison of  91  with  PC  No.  1-|-PC  No.  2-1-B-l-V. 

The  platinum  kilogramme  being  a cylinder  without  a knob,  does  not  admit  of  being 
lifted  with  a fork,  consequently,  in  putting  it  into  the  scale-pan  or  taking  it  out,  it 
must  be  held  in  the  hand,  a glove  or  a piece  of  silk  being  of  course  interposed  between 
the  fingers  and  the  weight.  The  insertion  of  the  hand  into  the  balance  case,  and  the 
communication  of  its  warmth  to  the  weight  itself,  are  so  prejudicial  to  the  accuracy 
of  a weighing,  that  it  became  necessary  to  seek  for  some  method  of  obviating  this 
source  of  error.  Such  a method  was  found  in  the  employment  of  the  detached  scale- 
pans  described  in  page  764,  and  answered  so  well,  that  I afterwards  continued  to  use 
it  in  comparing  weights  of  the  usual  form. 

On  the  16th  of  September,  the  Astronomer  Royal  having  approved  of  the  pur- 
chase of  a platinum  kilogramme  for  the  use  of  the  Committee,  I procured  one  from 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  VOLUMES  OF  S AND  (£. 


877 


M.  Gambey.  In  form  it  resembles  91,  except  that  it  is  not  quite  so  large,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  greater  density  of  the  metal  of  which  it  is  composed.  The  cylindrical 
surface  and  the  ends  are  very  accurately  worked.  The  metal  of  which  it  is  made  is 
greatly  superior  to  that  of  which  the  standard  lb.  and  its  copies  are  constructed,  as 
not  the  slightest  indication  of  any  defective  place  can  be  observed  on  its  surface. 
This  kilogramme  will  be  designated  by  the  letter  (§.  The  comparisons  of  91  with 
PC  No.  l-fPC  No.  2+B+V  were  now  discontinued,  being  of  secondary  importance 
after  the  acquisition  of  (B,  and  serving  mainly  to  control  the  comparison  of  (0  with  91. 

A considerable  number  of  observations  were  made  with  the  stereometer  on  the 
25th  of  September,  for  the  purpose  of  finding  the  volume  of  91  by  comparing  it  with 
that  of  a hollow  brass  cylinder  M of  nearly  the  same  dimensions.  Towards  the  end 
of  the  series,  M being  in  the  cup,  the  mercury  in  the  graduated  tube  was  observed 
to  descend  perceptibly  though  very  slowly.  This  was  caused  apparently  by  the 
passage  of  a small  quantity  of  air  into  the  upper  part  of  the  graduated  tube,  where 
the  pressure  was  about  half  that  of  the  external  air.  At  first  it  was  supposed  that 
the  air  found  an  entrance  either  between  the  rim  of  the  cup  and  the  glass  plate 
which  closed  it,  or  through  the  screw  joint  by  which  the  cup  was  connected  with  the 
collar  into  which  the  graduated  tube  was  cemented,  or,  lastly,  through  the  cemented 
joint  itself.  The  cement  was  then  varnished  with  shell-lac  dissolved  in  alcohol,  and 
the  screw  and  glass  plate  carefully  smeared  with  lard,  so  as  to  render  the  passage  of 
air  through  the  joints  all  but  impossible.  The  mercury  in  the  graduated  tube  still 
continued  to  descend  when  M was  in  the  cup,  but  not  otherwise.  It  appeared  there- 
fore probable  that  the  soldering  of  M had  given  way  under  the  changes  of  pressure 
to  which  it  had  been  exposed,  so  as  to  allow  the  air  enclosed  within  it  to  escape 
slowly,  when  the  pressure  of  the  air  in  the  cup  was  diminished.  This  conjecture  was 
verified,  on  attempting  to  weigh  M in  water  on  the  22nd  and  23rd  of  April,  1845, 
when  M was  found  to  have  increased  in  weight  after  being  left  all  night  in  the  water 
in  which  it  had  been  weighed  ; and  on  placing  it  in  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump  and 
partially  exhausting  the  air,  drops  of  water  made  their  appearance  at  the  junction  of 
the  plane  and  cylindrical  surfaces  at  one  end  of  the  cylinder.  It  was  evidently  useless 
to  continue  the  observations  with  M,  on  account  of  its  presumed  leakage ; a second 
series  of  stereometer  observations  was  therefore  made  on  the  5th  of  October,  in  which 
the  volume  of  91  was  compared  with  that  of  (If. 

Stereometer  observations  for  finding  tlie  volume  o/’91. 

At  16°  the  mercury  contained  in  the  graduated  tube  between  163’2  mm.  and 
108*9  mm.  weighed  1812*35  grains,  and  the  mercury  contained  between  108*9  mm. 
and  0*0  mm.  weighed  3614*99  grains.  Hence  the  mercury  contained  between  0 mm. 
and  136  mm.  weighed  4532*87  grains,  and  each  mm.  of  the  tube  near  136  mm.  con- 
tained 33*38  grains  of  mercury.  The  volume  of  PM  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the 

5 Y 2 


878  PKOF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


volame  of  a grain  of  mercury  at  16°.  The  temperature  of  the  mercury  in  the  stereo- 
meter was  determined  by  a thermometer  placed  in  the  jar  which  received  the  mer- 
cury that  escaped  on  opening  the  stopcock  at  the  lower  end  of  the  tube.  Let  t 
denote  this  temperature.  The  barometer  was  suspended  near  the  stereometer,  and 
was  presumed  to  have  the  same  temperature.  The  height  of  the  column  of  mercury 
in  it,  corrected  for  its  constant  error,  but  not  reduced  to  0°,  will  be  denoted  by  h. 


dB  in  cup. 

<=16-92,  /i= 750-24. 


PM. 

PC. 

136-43 

518-10 

136-60 

518-80 

136-40 

519-10 

136-40 

519-20 

136-35 

518-85 

136-40 

519-10 

136-25 

518-20 

136-45 

518-85 

136-41 

518-77 

CM=  382-36 
A-CM=  376-89 
Vol.  PM=  4546-56 
Vol.  cup— vol.  ^=4481-4 


^ in  cup. 

<=17-1,4=759-07. 


PM. 

PC. 

136-35 

529-55 

136-15 

530-50 

136-00 

531-00 

136-20 

530-65 

136-45 

531-50 

136-30 

531-30 

136-00 

530-50 

135-90 

530-15 

136-10 

530-70 

136-20 

531-10 

136-65 

531-95 

136-40 

531-70 

136-22 

530-88 

CM=  394-66 
4— CM=  364-41 
Vol.  PM=4540-2 
Vol.  cup— Vol.  ^=4192-2 


® in  cup. 

<=17*3,  4=758-65. 


PM. 

PC. 

136-10 

517*90 

136-20 

518-55 

136-10 

518-40 

136-05 

517-90 

136-45 

518-90 

136-05 

517*40 

136-25 

517*75 

136-35 

518-60 

136-20 

518-15 

139-65 

519*30 

136-23 

518-28 

CM= 

: 382-05 

4-CM= 

: 376-60 

Vol.  PM= 

;4540-7 

Vol.  cup  — 

Vol.  €=4475' 

Hence,  at  17°'l,  vol.  cup  — vol.  (0  = volume  of  4478*65  grains  of  mercury  at  16°, 
and  vol.  cup  — vol.  volume  of  4192*2  grains  of  mercury  at  16°.  Therefore,  at 
17°’lj  vol.  91—  vol.  (0  = volume  of  286*45  grains  of  mercury  at  16°. 


v^—vdB  in  vol.  of  a grain  of  mercury  at  16°  ...  286-45  2-45705 

A mercury  at  0°:  A mercury  at  16°  1-00287  0-00124 

2-45829 

13-596  1-13341 

1-32488 
0-00020 

21-119  1-32468 


A mercury  at  0° : A water  at  4° 

v^-v<!B  at  17°*1  

A platinum  at  0°:  A platinum  at  17°-1 
v^—vdB  at  0° 


fVeighing  of  (0  in  water. 

The  kilogramme,  after  having  been  washed  with  alcohol,  was  suspended  from  the 
right-hand  pan  of  the  balance,  by  a loop  of  platinum  wire  wound  round  it,  so  as  to 
hang  in  the  middle  of  the  jar  destined  to  receive  the  water  in  which  it  was  to  be 
weighed.  In  order  to  prevent  the  formation  of  air-bubbles,  the  water  was  poured 
through  a funnel  having  a very  small  opening  inserted  into  the  upper  end  of  a 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  VOLUMES  OF  ^ AND  (£. 


879 


glass  tube  the  lower  end  of  which  reached  to  the  bottom  of  the  jar.  The  left-hand 
pan  contained  the  counterpoise  consisting  of  14003  grains  of  bronze,  for  which 
log  A=0*92260.  The  thermometers  C,  D were  suspended  in  the  water  with  their 
bulbs  in  a horizontal  plane  through  the  centre  of  gravity  of  (B.  The  counterpoise 
is  supposed  to  be  in  equilibrium  with  the  weights  in  or  suspended  from  the  right- 
hand  pan,  when  the  reading  of  the  scale  is  20. 

Let  K,  L denote  PC  No.  1,  PC  No.  2 respectively,  and  P,  Q,  R the  bronze  weights 
marked  100,  200,  400.  (B  and  the  loop  of  wire  being  suspended  in  water,  and  the 
weight  in  the  first  column  placed  in  right-hand  pan,  the  second  column  gives  the 
corresponding  reading  of  the  scale. 


September  27,  1844. 


100  parts  =0*500  grain. 


C.  D. 

14*97  15*0 


14*97  15*0 


14*98  15*0 


14*97  15*0 


F.  E. 


764*65  16*1 


764*65  16*1 


764*55  16*2 


764*62  16*13 


gr- 

Scale. 

0*0 

20*1 

0*0 

20*15 

0*0 

20*15 

0*0 

20*2 

0*0 

18*9 

0*0 

18*9 

0*0 

19*9 

0*0 

20*0 

0*0 

20*05 

0*0 

19*9 

0*0 

20*25 

0*0 

20*3 

0*0 

20*3 

0*0 

20*35 

0*0 

20*4 

0*0 

20*4 

0*0 

18*8 

0*0 

18*8 

0*0 

18*8 

0*0 

20*5 

0*0 

20*45 

0*0 

20*45 

0*0 

20*55 

0*0 

20*45 

0*0 

20*45 

0*0 

19*98 

Counterpoise  in  air  (<=16*05,  6=763*08)  balances  (£  and  wire  loop  in  water  (<=1 5*0) -|- 0*0001  grain  in  air. 


The  wire  loop  alone  being  suspended  in  the  water  contained  in  the  jar,  to  which  a 
volume  of  water  equal  to  that  of  (B  had  been  added,  and  the  weights  K-l-L-l-(2)-l-(l) 
-fP-l-Q-l-R,  together  with  the  weight  given  in  the  first  column,  being  placed  in  the 
right-hand  pan,  the  second  column  gives  the  corresponding  reading  of  the  scale. 


gr. 

Scale. 

0*60 

45*00 

0*50 

22*80 

0*50 

22*35 

0*44 

11*85 

0*48 

15*00 

0*48 

15*80 

0*50 

20*80 

D. 


c. 


F. 


E. 


880  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


16*05  16*05 


16*4  16*4 


16*22  16*22 


764*23  16*2 


764*23  6*2 


0*50 

20*80 

0*40 

4*25 

0*40 

4*20 

0*50 

20*80 

0*50 

20*80 

0*50 

20*85 

0*50 

23*20 

0*50 

23*20 

0*50 

21*00 

0*50 

21*00 

0*50 

21*10 

0*50 

21*15 

0*48 

20*25 

0*48 

20*40 

0*46 

18*45 

0*46 

18*40 

0*48 

20*15 

0*48 

20*40 

0*48 

20*45 

0*48 

20*50 

0*48 

20*50 

0*48 

20*50 

0*4848 

19*86 

In  a.(<=  1 6*24,6= 762*68) counterpoise  balances  the  wire  loop  inw.  + K + L + (2)  + (l)  + 0*4855gr.  + P + Q + R. 


A correction  must  be  applied  for  the  change  of  density  of  the  air  displaced  by  the 
counterpoise  after  C was  taken  out  of  the  water.  When  0 and  the  wire  loop  were 
in  the  water,  15*07,  &=763‘08.  When  the  wire  loop  alone  was  in  the  water  and 
weights  in  the  right-hand  pan,  16*24,  &=:762‘68.  The  counterpoise  displaces 
2*0453  grs.  of  air  (#=16*07,  6=76*308),  and  2*0429  grs.  of  air  (#=16*24,  6 = 762*68). 
14003  — 2*0453  grs.  balance  ® and  wire  loop  in  water  (#=15*0)-}- 0*00 10  grain  in  air. 
14003—2*0429  grains  balance  the  wire  loop  in  water  and  K-}-L-|-(2) -j-(l)-|-0*4855 

grain-j-P-f-Q+I^  in  aii’  (#=16*22,  6 = 762*68). 

Hence  (B  in  water  (#=15*0)  ii:K-|-L-}-(2)-|-(l)-l-0*4830  grain  -}-P-|-Q-l-R  in  air 
(#=16*24,  6=762*68). 


Comparison  of  P+Q  + R with  the  sum  of  the  auxiliary  platinum  weights  G,  K,  L,  M,  (16),  (4). 

March  5,  1845.  100  parts  =0*244  grain. 

pt. 

P-|-Q  + R:^G  + KH-L+M  + (l6)  + (4)  + 0*70 

+ 0*95 
+ 0*82 
+ 1*50 

P + Q + R£i:G  + K + L + M + (l6)  + (4)  + 0*00242  grain  in  air  (#=4*88,  6=763*86). 
P+Q+R=700*003  grains  nearly. 

G + K+L  + M + (l6)  + (4)  + 0*00242=699*93747  grains. 

The  weights  of  the  air  displaced  by  the  bronze  and  platinum  weights  are  0*10668  gr. 
and  0*04217  gr.  respectively.  Hence  P-|-Q-|-R=700*00197  grains. 

The  weight  of  air  displaced  by  the  platinum  and  bronze  weights  used  in  weighing 
B in  water  =0*40355  gr.-f  0*40361  g. -+-0*00020  gr.-[-0*10212  gr.=0*90948  grain. 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  VOLUMES  OF  ^ AND  <£. 


881 


K + L + (2)  + (l)  + 0-4830  grain  

P+Q+R  

14003*48359 

700*00197 

Apparent  weight  of  CE  in  water 

Weight  of  air  displaced  by  the  weights  

14703*48556 

0*90948 

Weight  of  CE  in  water  

Weight  of  

14702*57608 

15432*32653 

Weight  of  water  at  15‘0  displaced  by  C 

Max.  density  of  water:  density  of  water  at  15*0 

A pt.  at  15*0  : A pt.  at  0° 

729*75045 

2*8631744 

0*0003708 

9*9998241 

v(£  

(£ 

730*078 

15432*32653 

2*8633693 

4*1884314 

A(!£  

21*13791 

1*3250621 

The  stereometer  observations  gave  v(0=21‘l  19.  Hence  1^91= 751’ 197. 

In  1845  the  Committee  received  from  Professor  Schumacher  an  account  in 
manuscript  of  fourteen  newer  and  more  accurate  determinations  of  the  density  of 
and  of  several  hundred  measurements  of  its  linear  dimensions,  together  with  a copy 
of  Professor  Steinheil’s  paper  entitled  “Ueber  das  Bergkrystall-Kilogramm*,”  con- 
taining numerous  determinations  of  the  linear  dimensions  of  ^ by  himself  and  Gambey 
in  May  1837,  in  addition  to  those  made  byOnuFSEN  in  1834.  The  linear  dimensions 
of  ^ and  91  were  all  measured  with  the  same  instrument,  which  was  made  by  Gambey. 

Assuming  the  linear  expansion  of  platinum  to  be  0’0000085655  for  1°  C., 
=21*2037,  by  fourteen  observations  made  February  3. ..24,  1837-  (The  value 
A^=21*2047  given  in  Steinheil’s  memoir  is  the  mean  of  four  sets  of  observations 
of  rather  doubtful  accuracy  made  in  September  1831.)  By  the  comparisons  of  ^ 
with  91,  April  9...  14,  1835,  ^=999*9993  grammes.  Previous  to  February  9,  1837,  ^ 
had  lost  about  1*6  milligramme,  in  consequence,  as  was  supposed,  of  being  washed 
with  alcohol.  In  May  1837,  therefore,  its  weight  may  be  taken  =999*998  grammes 
nearly.  The  volumes  of  ^ and  91  at  0°,  deduced  from  their  linear  dimensions, 
appeared  to  be  47147  and  48650  cubic  millimetres  respectively. 


A^ 

v^{\n  cubic  millimetres) 



21*2037 

47147 

1*3264117 

4*6734541 

0*0000009 

(in  cubic  millimetres) 

48650 

5*9998667 

4*6870828 

A<B. 

S (in  grains  nearly) 

20*5487 

15432*35 

1*3127839 

4*1884321 

v'B. 

751*014 

2*8756482 

Hence  the  volume  of  91  at  0°  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  751*014  grains,  or  48*665 
grammes  of  water  at  its  maximum  density. 

The  observations  by  which  this  value  of  was  obtained  are  so  numerous,  and 
made  with  such  extreme  care,  that  I have  no  hesitation  in  adopting  it  in  preference 
to  the  value  751*197  resulting  from  the  observations  made  with  the  stereometer. 

The  value  ofi;91  just  found  depends  upon  A^;  therefore,  in  computing  z;9[—y(0, 
for  reducing  the  weighings  by  which  (0  is  compared  with  91,  the  density  of  (i5  must 
* Abhandlungen  der  K.  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Munchen,  B.  4,  S.  165. 


882  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


be  (calculated  with  the  same  data  that  were  used  in  calculating  the  density  of  sub- 
tracting O'OOOIS  from  log/3  on  account  of  the  difference  between  the  force  of  gravity 
in  Altona  and  in  Paris.  The  same  expansions  of  platinum  and  bronze  are  to  be  used 
in  calculating  the  weight  of  the  air  displaced  by  the  weights  used  in  weighing  ^ in 
water,  as  were  used  in  calculating  their  volumes.  16°’24  C.=6l°'23  F.,  762’68  mm. 
= 30*027  in.,  15°*0  C.=59°*0  F. 


Weight  of  air  displaced  by  the  weights  used  in  weighing  in  water. 


30-027 

1-47751 

30-027 

1-47751 

61-23 

5-61139 

61-23 

5*61139 

at  61-23 

2-51963 

vh  at  61-23 

2-51969 

0-40600 

9-60853 

0-40606 

9-60859 

30-027 

1*47751 

30*027 

1*47751 

61-23 

5-61139 

61-23 

5-61139 

v[(2)  + (l)-|- 0-483  gr-]  at  61*23 

9-21641 

^,[P  + Q-f  R]  at  61-23  1-92286 

0-00020 

6-30531 

0-10275 

9-01176 

Weight  of  air  displaced  by  the  weights  =i 

0-40600  gr.-l- 0-40606  gr.-h  0-00020  gr.-|- 0-10275  gr.=0-91501 

Calculation  of  the  volume  and  density  of  (25. 

Apparent  weight  of  ((t  in  water 

..  14703-48556 

Weight  of  air  displaced  by  the 

weights  

0-91501 

Weight  of  (£  in  water 

..  14702-57055 

Weight  of  (£  

..  15432-32653 

Weight  of  water  (<=.’>9-0)  displaced 

729-75598 

2-8631777 

Max.  density  of  water  : A water  at  59°-0  F 

0-0003606 

A pt.  at  59°-0  F. : A pt.  at  38°  F 

9-9998326 

v(£  

730-081 

2*8633709 

(£  

..  15432-.327 

4-1884315 

A(!E  

21-13783 

1-3250606 

^31 — 7S1’014.  Hence  the  volume  of  91 — the  volume  of  (j!5,  at  the  freezing-point,  is 
equal  to  the  volume  of  20*933  grains  of  water  at  its  maximum  density. 


Comparison  of  (25  with  91. 

The  zero  of  the  scale  of  the  barometer  was  180  mm.  below  the  middle  of  the  weights, 
consequently  0*02  mm.  must  be  subtracted  from  the  height  of  the  mercury  in  the 
barometer.  The  left-hand  pan  contained  a counterpoise,  and  91  and  (25  in  the  detached 
scale-pans,  the  weights  of  which  are  denoted  by  X and  Y,  were  suspended  alternately 
from  the  agate-plane  which  rested  on  the  right-hand  knife-edge. 


September  28,  1844, 

(!F+Y. 

Q+x. 

22-71 

21-00 

23-36 

22-40 

25*20 

23*63 

25-62 

23-96 

24-77 

24-24 

24-76 

24-77 

24-51 

24-02 

24-46 

24-46 

100  parts = 

0*49579  grain 

e+x. 

c=  17-0 

21-13 

F = 76l-67 

23-37 

E=  16-55 

23-58 

23-67 

24-10 

23-25 

23-50 

24-61 

a+Y. 

23-22 

C= 

17-25 

23-29 

F = 

760-3 

23-21 

E= 

17*0 

24-18 

23-66 

23- 17 

24- 88 
24-17 

883 


COMPARISON  OF  e WITH 


24-90 

24-04 

23-98 

23-67 

24-68 

25-35 

23-49 

23-37 

23-82 

24-45 

24-07 

23-73 

24-92 

23-93 

23-16 

22-81 

24-97 

24-48 

22-50 

24-2] 

23-87 

24-10 

22-75 

22-90 

24-76 

24-71 

24-05 

24-00 

24-24 

24-59 

23-46 

24-32 

24-62 

24-35 

23-48 

23-22 

24-26 

24-09 

C=  17*25 

23-27 

24-22 

c=  17-4 

23-97 

23-91 

F = 760-2 

23-93 

24-30 

F = 759*5 

23-50 

23-84 

E=  17*0 

24-48 

23-99 

E=  17*15 

480-32 

487*90 

472-83 

474-52 

20(€  + Y) 

ii20(a  + X)  + 7*58  parts. 

20(€  + X) 

:ii:20(a  + Y)  — 1 

-69  part. 

^+0-0007251  grain  in  air 

(<=17*27,  b= 

= 758-79). 

October  1. 

100  parts= 0-47393  grain. 

e+Y. 

S+x. 

e+x. 

^+Y. 

19-55 

19*50 

C=  14-9 

21-54 

21-15 

C=  15-8 

19*87 

19*06 

F = 767*44 

20-39 

21-49 

F = 764-82 

20-11 

19-44 

E=  15-05 

20-54 

20-42 

E=  15-1 

20-07 

18-71 

20-82 

22-15 

19-40 

19*44 

21-49 

21-02 

20-62 

19*78 

22-97 

22-20 

19*54 

18-78 

23-35 

22-72 

19*31 

18-52 

22-19 

22-70 

19*55 

18*25 

23-47 

23-06 

19*87 

19*53 

22-66 

22-24 

20-09 

18-58 

22-70 

22-66 

19*57 

18-48 

22-25 

23-01 

19*06 

18-90 

22-05 

22-09 

18-80 

18-76 

22-71 

22-67 

19*00 

17*84 

22-87 

22-93 

18-84 

19-09 

22-37 

22-37 

18-79 

17*45 

22-51 

22-82 

18-50 

18-46 

C=  15-8 

24-03 

23-42 

C=  15*75 

18-46 

18-52 

F = 764-82 

24-00 

23-27 

F = 763-85 

18-25 

18-15 

E=  15-1 

23-85 

24-01 

E=  15-2 

387*25 

375-24 

448-76 

448-40 

20(€  + Y):^2:20(^  + X)  + 12-01  parts. 

20(€  + X):^20(a+Y)  + 0*36  part. 

+ 0-001 466  grain  in  air 

(<=15-59,  b= 

= 763-79). 

October  3. 

100  parts  =0-48591  grain. 

^+X. 

e+x. 

^+Y. 

21-07 

19-62 

C=  15-65 

17*40 

18-34 

C=  16-4 

20-56 

20-42 

F=761-57 

18-57 

17-83 

F=760'73 

20-86 

20-27 

E=  16-0 

18-50 

18-59 

E=  16-05 

20-51 

20-49 

18-75 

19-22 

19*60 

19*96 

18-89 

18-95 

19*98 

19*12 

18-96 

18-80 

20-34 

20-01 

18-55 

18-79 

20-01 

18-99 

18-51 

18-47 

19*61 

19*27 

18-30 

18-46 

19*92 

19*60 

18-06 

17*75 

19-55 

19*91 

18-01 

17*62 

20-03 

19*69 

18-38 

17*40 

19*59 

19*98 

18-27 

18-36 

19*55 

19*29 

18-12 

18-05 

20-11 

19*01 

18-19 

18-06 

19*59 

19*37 

18-39 

18-45 

19*14 

19*62 

18-54 

18-16 

MDCCCLVI. 

5 Z 

884  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


19*64 

18*70 

C=  16*4 

18*37 

17*45 

0 

II 

i 

18*99 

19*32 

F = 760*73 

18*26 

17*99 

F = 760*5 

17-79 

19*27 

E=  16*05 

18*09 

17*36 

E=  16*0 

398*44 

391*91 

367*11 

364*10 

20((!B  + Y)ii 

20(3[ + X)  + 6*53  parts. 

20(€  + X):Q:20(a  + Y)  + 3*01  parts. 

(£ 

+ 0*001159  grain 

in  air  (^=  16*25,  b= 

759*31). 

October  8. 

100  parts 

= 0*48077  grain. 

e+Y. 

g+x. 

e+x. 

^+Y. 

21*10 

20*59 

C=  14*7 

18*62 

18*69 

C=  15*6S 

21*57 

20*95 

F=  760*9 

18*80 

18*40 

F=759*i 

21*97 

20*50 

E=  14*6 

19*30 

19*05 

E=  14*8 

22*37 

20*94 

18*96 

18*33 

22*14 

21*97 

19*19 

19*09 

22*35 

2J*87 

18*95 

18*51 

21*61 

20*54 

18*81 

18*62 

21*10 

20*90 

20*24 

19*68 

20*97 

20*42 

19*06 

18*75 

21*55 

21*20 

t 

19*64 

18*64 

21*19 

21*05 

19*37 

18*61 

21*82 

20*59 

19*40 

18*10 

20*57 

20*54 

18*96 

19*03 

21*74 

20*54 

19*30 

18*50 

20*84 

20*12 

19*10 

18*95 

20*56 

19*96 

19*59 

18*54 

21*02 

20*90 

18*80 

18*60 

20*54 

19*57 

C—  15*65 

18*86 

18*84 

c=  15*3; 

20*35 

19*60 

F = 759*l 

19*47 

18*87 

F = 756*6 

19-52 

20*07 

E=  14*8 

19*10 

19*47 

E=  14*5 

424*88 

412*82 

383*52 

375*27 

20(C+ Y)£i:20(^  + X)  + 12*06  parts.  20((!c  + X)£i: 20(21 + Y)  + 8*25  parts. 

®ii:^  + 0‘002441  grain  in  air  (#=15*37j  Z»  = 757'80}. 


October  9-  100  parts  =0-48757  grain. 


©+Y. 

^+X. 

e+x. 

SI+Y. 

20*97 

20*67 

C=  14*35 

19*26 

19*24 

C=  15*45 

21*85 

21*64 

F =746*68 

19*48 

19*41 

F = 745*]5 

22*06 

22*22 

E=  14*1 

19*46 

19*47 

E=  14*6 

22*19 

22*24 

19*56 

19*40 

22*05 

22*58 

19*24 

19*75 

22*35 

22*22 

19*47 

20*25 

22*57 

22*51 

19*34 

19*37 

22*22 

22*17 

19*88 

19*49 

21*55 

22*22 

19*65 

19*58 

22*09 

21*64 

19*50 

19*91 

21*81 

21*53 

19*19 

19*52 

22*04 

21*42 

19*62 

19*49 

21*79 

21*57 

19*70 

19*89 

21*34 

20*87 

19*57 

19*57 

21*05 

21*11 

19*67 

19*54 

21*00 

20*66 

20*24 

19*46 

20*75 

20*51 

19*66 

19*50 

20*31 

19*86 

C=  15*45 

20*12 

19*60 

C=  15*47 

20*05 

19*65 

F = 745*15 

19*42 

19*16 

F =743*9 

20*29 

19*84 

E=  14*6 

19*39 

19*45 

E=  15*05 

430*33 

427*13 

391*42 

391*05 

20((£  + Y) 

£!:20(^  + X)  + 3*2  parts. 

20((£+X):£i:20(a  + Y)  + 0*37  part. 

(!?£!: 

^ + 0*000435  grain  in 

air  (^=  15*21, 

6=743*89). 

COMPARISON  OF  <£  WITH  I + K+A,  I + L+B,  I + M + F,  I + N + A. 


885 


gr- 

t. 

b. 

September  28. 

+ 0-000725 

17*27 

758-79 

October 

1. 

+ 0-001466 

15-59 

763-79 

October 

3. 

(Eiia  + 0-001159 

16-25 

759*31 

October 

8. 

eE  £1:21 + 0-002441 

15-37 

757*8 

October 

9. 

(££1:^+ 0-000435 

15-21 

743-89 

If  20*933,  as  given  by  the  observations  of  Schumacher  combined  with 

those  of  Olufsen,  Steinheil  and  Gambey,  the  true  weight  of  ^ compared  with  (& 
will  be  larger  than  its  apparent  weight  by  the  weight  of  air  displaced  by  a mass  of 
platinum  the  volume  of  which  at  0°  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  20*933  grains  of  water 
at  its  maximum  density. 


Weight  of  air  displaced  by  weight  of  air  displaced  by  0. 


September  28.  0-025316 

October  8.  0-025462 

October  1.  0-025643 

October  9.  0-025007 

October  3.  0-025430 

Therefore 

gr- 

September  28. 

(!E=a— 0 02459 

October  1. 

(!E=H— 0-02417 

October  3. 

(£=^-0-02427 

October  8. 

(2E=a— 0-02302 

October  9. 

(£=^-0-02457 

Mean  

0-02412  grain. 

If  ^0=21*119,  as  given  by  the  stereometer  observations,  the  differences  of 
the  weights  of  air  displaced  by  91  and  (Q  will  be 


September  28.  0-025541 

October  8.  0-025688 

October 

1.  0-025871 

October  9-  0-025230 

October 

3.  0-025655 

Therefore 

gr. 

(£=^-0-02482 

September  28. 

October 

1. 

e=^-0-02439 

October 

3. 

CE=g[-0-02450 

October 

8. 

(!E=H- 0-02325 

October 

9. 

(£= a -0-02480 

Mean  

0-02435  grain. 

Comparison  of  with  each  of  the  weights  I+K+A,  I+L+B,  I + M + F,  I+N+A. 

The  use  of  auxiliary  weights  corresponding  to  the  divisors  obtained  in  the  process 
of  expressing  in  a continued  fraction  the  ratio  of  one  to  the  other  of  the  two  weights 
to  be  compared,  answered  so  well  in  deducing  the  pound  of  7000  grains  from  the 
pound  troy  of  5760  grains,  that  I resolved  to  em[)loy  it  in  comparing  the  kilogramme 
with  the  pound.  The  weight  of  (&  is  nearly  15432*325  grains,  and  that  of  each  of 
the  weights  I,  K,  L,  M,  N,  the  new  standard  lb.  and  its  four  copies  respectively,  is 
7000  grains.  Then,  each  of  the  weights  A,  B,  F,  A being  1432*324  grains,  Z being 
1270*707  grains,  and  0 being  161*629  grains,  the  following  comparisons  became 
possible : — 


5 z 2 


886  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


(Q  with  each  of  the  weights  I+K+A,  I+L+B,  I+M+F,  I+N+A;  each  of  the 
weights  K,  L,  M,  N with  I ; I with  A+B+F+A+Z;  each  of  the  weights  A,  B,  F, 
A with  Z+0.  The  value  of  0 in  terms  of  I was  known  from  comparisons  made  for 
a different  purpose.  The  weights  A,  F,  A consisted  of  the  auxiliary  platinum  weights 
A,  C,  D,  used  in  forming  the  lb.  of  7000  grains,  with  the  addition  to  each  of  a three 
rouble  platinum  coin  and  a little  more  than  33  grains  of  platinum  wire  weights; 
B of  the  auxiliary  platinum  weight  B together  with  the  platinum  weight  V+0'03  gr. 
which  had  been  used  with  K + L in  weighing  the  kilogramme  des  Archives.  Z con- 
sisted of  the  platinum  weights  F,  G and  30'85  grains  of  platinum  wire  weights.  0 was 
made  up  of  the  platinum  W’eights  L and  M of  nearly  80  grains  each,  one  of  the  1-grain 
weights  of  the  two  Robinson’s  balances,  used  by  turns,  and  one  of  the  ten  weights 
Q of  0‘64509  grains  each,  also  used  by  turns. 

The  zero  of  the  scale  of  the  barometer  was  305  mm.  above  the  middle  of  the 
weights,  0’03  mm.  must  therefore  be  added  to  the  observed  value  of  F. 

Let  l^=I-f  K+A,  L-f  B,  F,  Jl5=I+N-f  A. 


February  27,  1846. 

100  parts= 

:0-65509  gr. 

m-l-Y,  (!E-I-X. 

e+X,  It+Y. 

19‘26 

18-80 

19-05 

19-04 

19-00 

18-50 

18-01 

17-96 

18-00 

18-15 

18-82 

17-02 

17-57 

17-21 

17-67 

17-02 

D=  18-9 

17-17 

16-60 

C=  18-9 

16-82 

16-54 

F = 755-9 

17-30 

16-25 

E=  19-0 

17-07 

16-69 

17-11 

16-69 

17-26 

16-86 

17-51 

17-46 

17-72 

17-40 

17-55 

17-34 

302-89 

295-53 

34(;!r  + X):2:30(m  + Y)-f  7*36  parts. 


March  2.  100  parts=0-67362  grain. 

m+X,  CF+Y. 

CF+Y,  m+X. 

16-46 

15-25 

16-94 

16-84 

17-22 

17-29 

16-39 

17-15 

15-89 

15-80 

16-15 

16-35 

16-77 

16-26 

16-04 

16-60  D=  19-6 

16-24 

15-96  C=  19-6 

15-91 

15-75  F = 763-2 

15-99 

14-76  E=  22-0 

15-97 

14-66 

15-65 

14-56 

15-29 

14-32 

16-20 

14-79 

15-69 

14-75 

15-56 

13-95 

274-36 

265-04 

34(®  + Y)  =0: 34(a  + X)  -f  9*32  parts. 


68€i^68lt  + 0-11100  grain  in  air  (/=19-3,  b-757-52). 


Januar}-  31.  100  parts=0‘56899  grain.  February  2.  100  parts=0‘6l069  grain. 


2.+X,  (IF+Y. 

«F+Y,  iL+X. 

H+Y,  e+X.  e+X,  !L+Y. 

18-90 

17-64 

18-01 

17-70 

18-82 

18-61 

16-51 

16-84 

18-79 

18-14 

16-51 

17-06 

19-00 

17-72 

D=  11 

16-04 

16-07 

D=  15-7 

18-51 

17-85 

C=  11-05 

15-75 

16-22 

C=  15-75 

18-81 

17-82 

F = 760-4 

15-74 

16-02 

F = 759-0 

17-84 

16-92 

E=  17-5 

15-46 

16-15 

E=  16-0 

18-36 

17-52 

16-06 

16-64 

18-72 

18-17 

16-12 

16-07 

18-64 

17-30 

15-97 

16-54 

186-39 

177-69 

162-17 

165-31 

20((£+y) 

ii20(iL  + X)  + 8-7  parts. 

20((£+X): 

:il:20(iL+Y)- 

3*14  parts. 

403L  + 0-03032  grain 

in  air  (i=  13-37,  b 

= 758-12). 

COMPARISON  OF  € WITH  1 + K + A,  I + L + B,  I + M + T,  I-fN  + A. 


887 


March  24. 


100  parts=0‘57337  grain. 


31+ X,  ©+Y. 

©+Y,  3t+X. 

3t+Y,  ©+X.  ®+X,  ft+Y. 

17-57 

17-45 

16*56 

15*92 

16*34 

15*97 

17*35 

16*30 

16*02 

15*54 

16*62 

16*54 

16*54 

15*04 

D=  9-55 

16*20 

16*07 

D=  9-55 

16*60 

16*34 

C=  9-7 

16*22 

16*12 

C=  9-7 

16*02 

15*05 

F = 746*3 

15*67 

13*46 

F= 746*3 

13*92 

15*45 

E=  11*6 

16*45 

16*05 

E=  11*6 

16*04 

15*25 

16*35 

15*40 

15*50 

15*25 

16*10 

16*36 

13*49 

13*05 

16*11 

16*24 

162*04 

156*39 

163*63 

160*46 

20(€  + Y) 

1 £!:  20(31 +X)  + 5*65  parts. 

2o(e+x) 

:£t20(3l  + Y)  + 3*17  parts. 

40(!B£!: 

403i+ 0*05057  grain 

in  air  (^=9*62,  b= 

:745*38). 

February  3.  100  parts= 0*64809  grain. 

February  4.  100  parts=0*64288 

grain. 

iaa+Y,  e+x.  < 

S£+X,  iW+Y. 

iW+X,  0+Y.  e+Y,  i*t+x. 

18*67 

18*06 

18*92 

17-37 

18*29 

18*17 

18*37 

17-39 

17*90 

17-70 

16*84 

17-45 

17-64 

16*97 

D=  1605 

18*57 

17-26 

D=  16*35 

17-61 

17-26 

C=  16*15 

17*87 

16*71 

C=  16*4 

17-00 

16*16 

F = 759-l 

17-24 

15*82 

F = 765*2 

16*35 

16*24 

E=  16*6 

17-01 

15*00 

E=  17-1 

16*97 

16*19 

16*87 

14*45 

16*61 

16*37 

17-40 

14*71 

16*72 

16*25 

16*65 

14*37 

173*76 

169-37 

175*74 

160*53 

20((!H  + X) 

£i20(p[  + Y)  + 4*39  parts. 

20((i£  + Y)£i: 

20(|il  + X)  + 15*21  parts. 

40C:i^40JH+ 0*1 2623  grain 

in  air  (#=  16*24,  b- 

= 760*56). 

March  25. 

100  parts= 

0*57820  grain. 

i®l+Y,  (£+X. 

e+x,  iw+Y. 

^+x,  e+Y. 

(£5+Y,  i^+X. 

19-22 

17-11 

16*56 

15-82 

19-01 

17-34 

16*62 

14*89 

18*90 

17-52 

17-37 

15*62 

18*80 

17-10 

D=  9-5 

17-17 

15*16 

D=  9-5 

18*55 

17-72 

C=  9-5 

17-67 

14*71 

C=  9-5 

18*30 

16*57 

F =747-3 

17-07 

15*27 

F = 747-3 

17-84 

17*02 

E=  15*7 

17*54 

15*52 

E=  15*7 

17-57 

16*37 

17*06 

15*99 

17-85 

16*02 

17*66 

14*77 

1.7-62 

15*95 

17*46 

14*95 

183*66 

168*72 

172*18 

152*70 

20(®+X) 

:Cb20(JSl+Y)+ 14*94  parts. 

20(C£+Y) 

£t20(P[+X)  + 19-48  parts. 

40<2E£b 

40^H  + 0*19902  grain 

in  air  (#=9*55,  b 

= 745*88). 

888  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


February  5. 

100  parts=  0-63391  grain. 

February  6. 

100  parts  = 

0-64246  grain. 

^+X,  e+Y. 

e+Y,  ie+x. 

i^+Y,  e+X. 

e+X.  i9+Y. 

17*50 

16-19 

15-74 

16-17 

16-92 

15-71 

14-97 

15-79 

17*09 

17-00 

13-44 

13-62 

16-70 

16-66 

D=  16-45 

18-19 

17*74 

D=  17*5 

16-80 

15-76 

C=  16-45 

16-87 

17*70 

c=  17*5 

15-79 

15-32 

F = 759-65 

16-52 

17*07 

F = 763-8 

15-97 

14-71 

E=  16-9 

16-02 

17*20 

E=  18-6 

16-00 

14-74 

16-54 

17*69 

15-69 

14-49 

17*79 

18-37 

15-80 

14-89 

17*55 

18-57 

164-26 

155-47 

163-63 

169*92 

20((£+ Y)i2:20(j3  + X)  + 8-79  parts. 

20(€  + X) 

:£l:20(3a  + Y)- 

-6-29  parts. 

40CE^40^  + 0-01531  grain 

in  air  (<=17-0,  h 

= 760-02). 

March  26. 

100  parts = 

0-60994  grain. 

iU+X,  e+Y.  e+Y,  ^+X. 

iH+Y,  e+X. 

(£+X,  i®+Y. 

18-02 

17*90 

14-89 

15-54 

18-00 

17*84 

15-94 

15-45 

17*09 

18-06 

16-14 

15-91 

18-37 

17-66 

D=  15-6 

16-26 

15-75 

D=  16-4 

17*94 

18-45 

C=  15-65 

15-54 

15-97 

C=  16-4 

17*41 

17*81 

F = 752-05 

15-46 

15-12 

F = 752-05 

17*72 

18-19 

E=  17*4 

15-61 

15-35 

E=  17*4 

17*21 

17*46 

15-56 

15-81 

16-84 

17*91 

15-01 

15-24 

17*29 

17*51 

15-82 

15-66 

16-79 

16-65 

15-25 

15-40 

192-68 

195-44 

171-48 

171*20 

28((!E  + Y)ii22(Ji  + X)- 

■2-76  parts. 

22(€  + X)  ^ 22(il + Y)  + 0-28  part. 

44€:ii 44^^-0-0151 3 grain 

in  air  (<=  16-03,  6=750-42). 

gr- 

t. 

h. 

No.  of  observations. 

+0-00163 

19-3 

757-52 

68 

+0-00101 

11-5 

756-25 

80 

(f:2:P[  + 0-00407 

12-9 

753-22 

80 

+0-00000 

16-51 

754-99 

84 

t;I  = 330'856,  ^;K=330•70I,  ^;L=330•750,  vM=330790,  i;N=330-881. 


For  the  weights  A,  B,  F,  A of  1432’324  grains  each,  log  A=  1’325642.  Therefore 
the  volume  of  either  of  them  at  0°  will  be  67*6704.  Hence  ^;|^=729*227,  ^;!L=729•276, 
= 729*3 16,  z;jI3  = 729*407.  t;(0  = 730*078,  and,  therefore,  — 

v(i5—vl.=0'S02,  v(B—v^—Q'7Q‘^,  viB—vB  = 0'&7\. 

The  true  weight  of  C compared  with  !L,  115  will  be  larger  than  its  apparent 

weights,  by  the  weights  of  air  displaced  by  masses  of  platinum  the  volumes  of  which 
at  0°  are  respectively  equal  to  the  volumes  of  0*851  gr.,  0*802  gr.,  0*762  gr.,  0*671  gr. 
of  water  at  its  maximum  density.  These  are  0*00102  gr.,  0*00099  gr.,  0*00093  gr., 
0*00081  gr.  respectively. 


COMPARISON  OF  I WITH  A + B + r + A + Z.  889 

Hence 

gr- 

(£=I  + K +A  + 0-00265 
(£=I  + L +B  + 0-00200 
(!B=I  + M+r  + 0-00500 

(!B=I+N  +A  + 0-00081 


March  29.  100  parts=0'24964  grain. 

H = A+B+r+A+Z. 


H+Y,  I+X. 

I+X,  H+Y. 

H+X,  I+Y. 

I+Y,  H+X. 

26*62 

26*31 

17*00 

17*99 

26*76 

26*52 

17*57 

17*90 

21*99 

22*50 

17*14 

17*75 

21*11 

21*99 

16*61 

18*75 

20*12 

21*90  D=  14*8 

16*96 

17*97 

D=  15*1 

20*80 

21*26  C=  14*8 

16*57 

17*52 

C=  15*2 

19*46 

19*44  F = 766*9 

17*57 

18*74 

F = 766*9 

19*65 

20*74  £=  16*4 

17*46 

18*80 

E=  16*4 

19*77 

20-24 

17*00 

17*42 

19*49 

20*06 

17*46 

17*60 

18*94 

19*42 

17*32 

18*50 

18*32 

19*49 

17*05 

18*54 

253*03 

259*87 

205*71 

217*48 

24(I  + X):ii 

24(H  + Y)-6*84  parts. 

24(I  + Y)£124(H  + X)- 

11*77  parts. 

I ilbH— 0*00097  grain 

in  air  (<=15*0,  6= 

:765*35). 

Log  AH=  1*325642,  therefore  ?;H  = 330*717>  ^^I  = 330*856.  Hence  z;H=0*139. 
The  true  weight  of  I is  greater  than  its  apparent  weight  when  compared  with  H, 
by  0*00017  grain,  the  weight  of  air  displaced  by  a mass  of  platinum  the  volume  of 
which  at  0°  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  0*139  gr.  of  water  of  maximum  density.  Hence 

I=A+B4-r-)-A+Z— 0*00080  grain. 


March  27. 

100  parts= 

0*25617  grain. 

Z+e+X,  A+0-01  gr.+Y. 

A+0*01  gr.+Y,  Z+e+X. 

Z+e+Y,  A+0-01  gr.+x. 

A+0-01  gr.+x,  Z+e+Y. 

16*49 

18*69 

15*44 

17*70 

15*92 

18*27 

15*40 

18*24 

16*37 

18*24 

15*10 

17*61 

15*69 

18*15 

15*17 

17*89 

15*51 

18*57 

15*34 

16*86 

ms 

91*92 

76*45 

88-30 

10(A  + 0-01  gr.  + Y)  = 10(Z+e  + X)-ll'94  parts.  10(A  + 0-01  gr.  + X)  = 10(Z  + e + Y)-ll-85  parts. 

A=Z  + 0 — 0*01305  grain. 


Z+e+Y,  B+O-Ol  gr.+x. 

18*77 

18*35 

17*47 

17*25 

17*37 


89*21 


B+0'01  gr.+x,  Z+e+Y. 
19*85 
20*47 
19*92 
20*14 

19*79 

100*17 


Z+0+X,  B+0-01  gr. 
16*64 
16*82 
16*81 
16*60 
16*35 

83*22 


'.  B+0-01  gr.+Y,  Z+e+X. 

18*47 
18*70 
18*40 
18*35 
17*85 


91*77 


10(B  + 0*01  gr.  + X)=10(Z  + e + Y)  — 10*96  parts. 


10(B+0*01  gr.  + Y)=lO(Z  + 0 + X). 


B=Z  + 0— 0*01250  grain. 


890  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Z+e+Y,  r+0-02gr.+X. 

18-27 

18-67 

17- 44 

18- 22 

17-90 

90-50 


r+0-01  gr.+x,  Z+e+Y. 

18-47 
18-86 
18-62 
18-41 
18-35 


92-71 


Z+e+X,  r+0-02gr.+Y. 

17- 92 

18- 27 

21- 92 

22- 20 
21-92 

102-23 


r+0-01  gr.+Y,  Z+e+X. 
18-76 
18-45 
23-45 
23-57 
22-99 

107-22 


10(r  + 0-015gr.+  X)=10(Z  + e + Y)-2-21  parts.  lO(r+O-O15gr.  + Y)  = lO(Z  + 0+X)-4-99  parts. 


r=Z  + 0 — 0'01592  grain. 


Z+e+X,  A+0-01  gr.+Y. 

19- 51 

20- 04 
20-05 

19-40 
18-81 

97-81 


A+0-01  gr.+Y,  Z+e+X. 

20-30 
20-22 

19-57 

19-15 
19-14 


98-38 


Z+e+Y,  A+0-01  gr,+X. 
18-57 

17- 76 

18- 61 
18-64 
17-69 


91-27 


A+0-01  gr.+x,  Z+e+Y. 
19-11 
18-80 
18-75 
18-00 
18-21 


92-87 


lO(A  + O-Olgr.  + Y)=lO(Z  + 0 + X)-O-57  part. 


10(A  + 0-01  gr.  + X)=lO(Z  + 0 + Y)-l-6O  part. 


A=Z  + 0 — 0-01028  grain. 


gr- 

L=:  79-99112 
M=  79-99261 
J = 0-99996 

Q=  0-64509 


0=L+M  + J + Q=161-62878 


gr- 

C^=I  + K+ A +0-00265 
®=I  + L +B  + 0-00200 
CH=I  + M + r + 0-00500 
®=I  + N +A  + 0-00081 

Whence 


gr- 

K = I + 0-00051 
L =1-0-00089 
M = I — 0-00178 
N =1-0-00316 


S*-- 

(!B=2I  + Z + 0-O-OO989 
®=2l  + Z + 0-O-O1139 
(!0=2I  + Z + 0-O-O127O 
®=2I  + Z + 0 — 0-01263 


Mean €=21  + Z + 0—0-01165 


gr. 

A=Z+0  — 0-01305 
B=Z  + 0-O-O125O 
r = Z + 0 — 0-01592 
A=Z  + 0 — 0-01028 


gr. 

I=A  + B + r + A + Z-0-00080 
A + B + r+A=4Z  + 40  —0-05175 


I = 5Z  + 40  —0-05255 

5(Z  + 0)  = I + 0 +0-05255 


1=7000-00000  grains  of  the  new  standard,  0=161-62878  grains.  Therefore 
5(Z-i-0)  = 7l61-68133grs.,  Z+0=  1 432-33627  grs.  Therefore  (®=  15432-32462 grs. 

According  to  the  observations  of  Schumacher,  Olufsen,  Steinheil  and  Gambey, 
v^—v(!5=20’933,  whence  9[=C+0-02412  grain.  Therefore  the  kilogramme  des 
Archives  =15432-34874  grains,  of  which  I,  the  new  standard  pound,  contains 
7000-00000.  If  we  adopt  for  v^l—vd^  the  value  2T1 19  given  by  the  observations  with 
the  stereometer,  ^=(25+0-02435  grain,  and  therefore  91=15432-34897  grains.  Of 
these  two  values  of  91  the  former  is  probably  the  more  accurate. 


COMPARISON  OF  91  WITH  PC  No.  1+PC  No.  2 + B + V+0-03  gr.  891 

Comparison  of^  with  PC  No.  1+PC  No.  2 + B+V+0'03  grain. 

Let  K,  L denote  PC  No.  1,PC  No.  2 respectively;  i^=K+L+B+V+0*03  grain. 
The  zero  of  the  scale  of  the  barometer  was  180  millimetres  below  the  middle  of 
the  weights,  consequently  0*02  mm.  must  be  subtracted  from  the  height  of  the 
mercury  in  the  barometer. 


September  16,  1844. 

100  parts 

= 0*565  grain. 

g[+x. 

1+Y. 

^+Y. 

?^+x. 

22*62 

22*25 

C=  20*4 

20*46 

20*69 

C=  20*55 

22*52 

22*16 

F = 762*1 

20*65 

20*85 

F = 76i*7 

21*90 

22*40 

E=  20*1 

20*51 

21*16 

E=  20-4 

22*43 

22*33 

21*05 

21*30 

22*65 

22*53 

20*71 

20*71 

22*37 

21*97 

21*54 

21*50 

21*48 

21*81 

C=  20*55 

22*49 

21*91 

C=  20*55 

21*23 

21*19 

F = 76i*7 

21*80 

21*55 

F = 761*35 

21*25 

20*86 

E=  20*4 

21*86 

21*93 

E=  20*55 

198*45 

197-50 

191-07 

191-60 

9(a+X)-:9(?l  + Y)  + 0* 

95  part. 

9(a  + Y)i:: 

9(?^  + X)— 0*53  part. 

18^£!:18?|+ 0*00237  grain  in  air  (<=  20*61,  b- 

= 759-64). 

September  17. 

100  parts=  0*5746  grain. 

g[+x. 

?§+Y. 

^+Y. 

?l+x. 

20*02 

19-91 

c=  19-8 

19-05 

19-37 

C=  20*76 

19-70 

20*00 

F = 758*53 

19-36 

19-37 

F = 758*2 

19*70 

20*55 

E=  20*4 

19-51 

19-24 

E=  20*9 

19-31 

20*22 

18*49 

19-90 

19-57 

20*32 

19-45 

19-56 

19-29 

20*01 

18*44 

19-91 

20*09 

20*47 

19-39 

19-37 

20*32 

20*21 

C=  20*76 

18*82 

19-80 

C=  21 

19-71 

20*01 

F = 758*2 

19-40 

19-71 

F = 758*04 

20*09 

19*76 

E=  20*9 

19-03 

19-15 

E=  21 

179-80 

201*46 

199-94 

195*38 

10(a+X)£i: 

10(?|  + Y)- 

- 3*66  parts. 

10(a+Y)i:=10(?|+X) 

— 4*44  parts. 

20^£t20?|— 0*046543  grain 

in  air  (#=20*68,  b 

=756*12). 

September  19. 

100  parts= 

0*5322  grain. 

^+X. 

?§+Y. 

^+Y. 

I^+X. 

25*73 

25*59 

C=  18*5 

14*25 

14*19 

C=  18*8 

26*32 

26*00 

F =758*23 

18*94 

19-61 

F = 758*12 

24*73 

26*46 

E=  18 

19-50 

19-87 

E=  17-6 

24*52 

25*41 

19-42 

20*00 

25*77 

26*16 

19-50 

19-72 

25*66 

25*44 

19-89 

20*05 

25*15 

25*65 

19-42 

20*02 

25*93 

25*59 

20*10 

20*19 

25*61 

25*65 

C=  18*8 

19-49 

20*04 

C=  18*85 

24*79 

25*59 

F = 758*12 

19-80 

19-96 

F = 758*2 

25*20 

25*31 

E=  17*6 

19-23 

19-22 

E=  17*9 

278*41 

282*85 

209-54 

212*87 

ll(a  + X)£2:ll(?^  + Y) 

— 4*44  parts. 

11(^  + Y) 

-11(?^  + X)- 

3*33  parts. 

22aii:22?^-0*041356  grain 

in  air  (#=18*8,  b- 

= 756*39). 

6 A 


MDCCCLVI. 


892  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


By  a mean  of  the  60  comparisons, 

91  0-00 143  grain  in  air  (^=  19-97,  b=757’28). 

The  value  of  these  observations  is  considerably  diminished  by  the  fact  that  B con- 
tained a small  cavity  filled  with  some  hygroscopic  substance,  which  renders  its  weight 
slightly  variable. 

The  following  comparisons  of  V-)-0-03  grain  with  the  sum  of  the  auxiliary  weights 
M,  N,  (32)  were  made  with  Robinson’s  10|-inch  balance. 

H=M-l-N-f-(32)-l-0'45  grain, 

March  29?  1845.  100  parts= 0-290  grain. 


V+O-03  gr.,  S. 

S,  V+0-03  gr. 

4-27 

3-05 

4-42 

3-05 

4-57 

3-20 

4-55 

3-25 

17*81 

12-55 

8V  + 0-03gr.=8S-|-5'26  parts. 

V + 0-03  gr.=  M + N + (32)  + 0-451 91  grain  = 192-43590  grains. 

i!(B-1-V-1-0-03  gr.)=67"670,  «;K=330'701,  «;L  = 330-750.  Hence  the  volume  of  ^ 
at  0°  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  729-121  grains  of  water  of  maximum  density. 
But  e;^=751-014,  hence  — = volume  of  21-893  grains  of  water  at  its  maxi- 
mum density  = volume  of  0-02617  grain  of  air  (^=  19-97,  b=7b7‘28).  Therefore 
^=K-l-L-fB-l-V-l-0-03gr.-f 0-02474  gr.  K = 7000-00051  grains,  L = 6999-99911 
grains,  of  which  I contains  7000-00000.  The  best  determination  of  the  weight  of 
B-l-V-1-0-03  gr.  is  that  which  was  obtained  in  March  1846,  in  the  process  of  comparing 
(15  with  I.  This  gave  B-f-V-TO-03  gr.=Z-}-0— 0 01250  gr.,  Z-}-©=  1432*33627  grs. 
Therefore  B-l-V-|-0-03  gr.=  1432-32377  grains.  Hence  91=15432-34813  grains. 

A similar  comparison  made  in  November  and  December  1845,  but  afterwards 
rejected  on  account  of  the  quantity  of  hygroscopic  matter  contained  in  the  auxiliary 
weights  A,  C,  F,  gave, — B-l-V-l-O’O3gr.  = (I>-l-0+O-OlO55gr.,  0-1-0=  1432-31313grs. 
Therefore  B-l-V-|-0*03  gr.=  1432*32368  grains.  Whence  91=15432*34804  grains. 

On  the  29th  of  March,  1845,  V-|-0-03  grain  was  compared  eight  times  with 
M-{-N-1-(32)-)-0*45  grain,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  an  approximate  value  of 
B-l-V-1-0-03  gr.,  to  be  used  in  the  reduction  of  the  weighings  by  which  91  was  com- 
pared with  K-l-L-l-B-l-V-1-0-03  gr.  These  comparisons  gave  V-l-0*03  gr.=M-l-N 
-b (32) -1-0-45 191  grain.  Whence  V-l-0*03  gr.=  192*43590  grains.  By  numerous 
comparisons  of  the  auxiliary  weights  with  each  other  and  with  T after  its  final 
reduction,  in  January  and  February  1845,  B=  1239*88650  grains,  of  which  T con- 
tains 5759*47141  and  1 contains  7000*00093.  Hence  B=  1239*88634  grains,  of 
which  T contains  5759*47067  and  I contains  7000*00000.  Therefore  B-l-V-l-0*03  gr. 
= 1432*32224  grains,  and  91=15432*34660  grains. 


COMPARISON  OF  ^ WITH  PC  No.  1+PC  No.  2 + B + V + 0-03  gr. 


893 


By  a mean  of  286  comparisons  of  T with  Sp  in  January ...  August,  1845, 
Tii:Sp+0'00073  grain  in  air  (^=  13*74,  6 = 758*91).  ^;T—^;Sp= volume  of  0*26  grain 

of  water  = volume  of  0*00032  grain  of  air.  Therefore  T=Sp4-0*00105  grain.  If 
1=7000*00000  grains,  T=5759*47067  grains,  and  therefore  Sp=5759*46962  grains. 
According  to  the  account  in  manuscript  of  Professor  Schumacher’s  comparisons  of 
his  kilogramme  ^ with  his  troy  pound  Sp,  by  the  observations  of  December  1831 
and  October  1835,  15433*77226  grains,  of  which  Sp  contains  5760.  After  these 

comparisons  ^ lost  a portion  of  its  substance,  and  became  0 02557  grain  lighter; 
for  by  a mean  of  forty  comparisons  by  Petersen  in  March  1837,  and  thirty-six  com- 
parisons by  Captain  v.  Nehus  in  February  and  March  1837,  ^=15433*74669  grains, 
of  which  Sp  contains  5760.  Hence,  in  1837,  ^=15432*32555  grains,  of  which  I con- 
tains 7000*00000.  In  Steinheil’s  Memoir,  “ Ueber  das  Bergkrystall-Kilogramm,” 
(p.  168),  the  following  passage  occurs;  “ Conferenzrath  Schumacher  erhielt  eine 
Platina-Copie  des  Archivkilogrammes,  welche,  zufolge  sorgfaltiger  Abwagungen  des 
Professor  Olufsen  aus  Koppenhagen  im  April  1835  (siehe  Jahrbuch  fiir  1856  von 
Schumacher,  p.  250)  leichter  war  als  das  Archivkilogramm  um  0*41  Milligrammen. 
Aus  Unvorsichtigkeit  eines  Mechanikus  wurde  diese  Copie  spater  abgewaschen  und 
hatte  dadurch  an  Gewicht  verloren.  Um  zu  bestimmen,  wie  viel  dieser  Verlust 
betrug,  wiederholte  ich  im  Jahr  1837  die  Vergleichung  der  Schumacher’schen  Copie 
mit  dem  Normalkilogramm  der  Archive  und  es  ergab  sich,  dass  es  nun  1*59  Milli- 
grammen leichter  war,  also  1*09  Milligrammen  an  Gewicht  durch  die  Operation  des 
Abwaschens  verloren  hatte.”  The  most  probable  explanation  that  can  be  offered  of 
the  discrepancy  contained  in  these  words,  is  that  by  an  error  of  the  press,  1*59  was 
substituted  for  1*50.  According  to  Kupffer,  however  (Travaux  de  la  Commission 
pour  fixer  les  mesures  et  les  poids  de  I’Empire  de  Russie,  t.  ii.  p.  413),  the  value  of 
^ is  1*592  milligramme.  Supposing  that  in  1837,  ^—^=1*50  milligramme 
=0  02315  gr.,  then  91=  15432*34870  grs.  If  ^—^=1*59  milligramme  =0*02454  gr., 
a=15432*.35009  grains. 

By  the  observations  of  1831  and  1835,  ^=  15432*351 12  grains,  of  which  Icon- 
tains  7000*00000.  If  in  April  1835,  ^—^  = 0*41  milligramme  =0*00633  grain, 
91=  15432*35745  grains.  This  difference  of  0*00875  grain  in  the  weight  of  91  between 
1835  and  1837,  is  difficult  to  account  for,  unless  due  to  an  accumulation  of  dust  since 
wiped  off;  for  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  a weight  so  carefully  preserved  as  the 
kilogramme  des  Archives,  could  have  lost  nearly  0*01  grain  of  its  substance  in  the 
course  of  two  years. 

All  the  other  comparisons,  in  which  the  number  of  observations  is  large,  yield 
results  sufficiently  accordant  with  the  value  of  91  deduced  from  the  comparisons  of 
with  (25,  and  of  (25  with  I-f-K-fA,  I-bL-f-B,  I-j-M-t-F,  I-j-N-l-A,  which  gave, — 

Kilogramme  des  Archives  =15432*34874  grains,  of  which  the  new  platinum 
standard  pound  contains  7000.  Or,  kilogramme  des  Archives  = (2*20462125)  standard 
platinum  lb.  Standard  platinum  lb.  =453*5926525  grammes,  of  which  the  kilo- 
gramme des  Archives  contains  1000. 


6 A 2 


894  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


W nght  of  the  Kilogramme  type  laiton. 

This  kilogramme  of  brass,  which  will  be  designated  by  the  letter  JL,  is  deposited  in 
the  Ministere  de  ITnterieure  in  Paris,  and  serves  as  a standard  for  the  purpose  of 
adjusting  the  kilogrammes  used  in  commerce.  In  a paper  in  the  ‘Memorie  di  Mate- 
rnatica  e di  Fisica  della  Societa  Italiana  delle  Scienze  residente  in  Modena,’  t.  xxv. 
p.  1,  it  is  stated  that  in  1850,  9iii:L+89‘5  milligrammes  in  air  (^=  18*90,  6=763*80). 
A bi  ■ass  kilogramme  marked  No.  IV.,  the  volume  of  which  is  assumed  to  be  equal  to 
that  of  £.  (the  grounds  for  this  assumption  are  not  stated),  was  weighed  in  water  at 
16*97-  The  absolute  weight  of  the  water  displaced  by  it  was  124*5536  grammes. 

Hence  i;IL  assumed  = ^;Kilo.  No.  IV.=  volume  of  124*590  grammes  = volume  of 
1922*720  grains  of  water  at  its  maximum  density.  730*078,  1^(20=20*933. 

Therefore  ^91=751*011.  The  volume  of  89*5  milligrammes  or  1*38120  grain  of  pla- 
tinum = volume  of  0*065  grain  of  water.  Therefore  f(91— 89*5  milligr.) =750*946. 
During  the  comparison,  S.  displaced  2*32768  grains  of  air,  and  91  displaced  0*90868 
grain.  Therefore  £=91+0*03780  grain.  L displaces  2*30493  grains,  and  91  dis- 
places 0*89981  grain  of  air  (log  A=7‘07832— 10).  Therefore  11:2:91—1*36732  grain 
in  air  (log  A=7*07832— 10). 

The  commercial  standard  lb.  is  a weight  of  7000  grains,  of  the  same  density  as  the 
lost  standard  troy  pound  U.  Denoting  the  commercial  standard  lb.  by  W,  and  the 
platinum  standard  by  I,  in  air  (log  A=7‘07832— 10)  W:0: 1 — 0*63407  grain.  There- 


. 15432-34874  15432-34874  . , ^ 15432-349  _ . . 

fore  — Wit — I— 1*39/88  grain.  v%—v  — — I = volume  of 


7000 


7000 


7000 


29*599  grains  of  water  of  maximum  density  = volume  of  0*03547  grain  of  air.  There- 


fore ^ + 0*03547  grains 


15432-34874 

7000 


I.  Hence  £ ^ 


15432-34386 

7000 


W,  in  air,  for  which 


log  A=7’07832— 10.  £ appears  to  weigh  15432*344  grains,  of  which  W contains 

7000.  W appears  to  weigh  453*59278  grammes,  of  which  £ contains  1000. 


Received  June  7, — Read  June  12,  1856. 

The  Quartz  Pound. 

The  hardness  of  quartz,  its  capability  of  receiving  a high  polish,  the  absence  of 
any  hygroscopic  properties,  and  its  indestructibility  at  the  ordinary  temperature  of 
the  atmosphere  by  any  chemical  agent  except  hydrofluoric  acid,  are  such  valuable 
qualities  in  a substance  used  for  the  construction  of  weights,  that  Professor  Steinheil 
was  induced  to  adopt  it  as  the  material  for  a copy  of  the  kilogramme.  The  only 
objection  to  the  use  of  a weight  made  of  quartz  is,  that  on  account  of  the  large  amount 
of  air  displaced,  the  barometer  and  thermometer  must  be  observed  with  extreme  care 
during  its  comparison  with  a weight  of  any  ordinary  metal.  Notwithstanding  this 
disadvantage,  it  appeared  desirable  to  the  Committee  that  a weight  of  quartz  should 
be  constructed  sufficiently  near  7000  grains  to  admit  of  readily  deducing  the  pound 
from  it.  They  accordingly  commissioned  Mr.  Barrow  to  construct  a weight  of 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  THE  QUARTZ  WEIGHT.  895 


quartz  of  the  form  of  a cube  of  about  2*2  inches,  having  its  edges  find  angles  rounded. 
Its  apparent  weight  in  air  is  intermediate  between  that  of  a lb.  of  platinum  and  a 
lb.  of  brass,  approaching  more  nearly  to  the  latter  than  to  the  former. 

Weighing  of  the  quartz  weight  in  water. 

The  quartz  weight,  which  will  be  designated  by  the  letter  Q,  was  suspended  in 
water,  from  the  right-hand  pan  of  the  balance,  by  a fine  copper  wire,  one  end  of 
which  was  fastened  to  a thicker  wire  bent  round  Q in  a plane  through  its  centre, 
parallel  to  a pair  of  faces  of  the  cube.  7‘23  inches  of  the  suspending  wire  weighed 
0*96  grain.  Hence  a portion  of  the  wire  corresponding  to  100  parts  of  the  scale 
displaced  0*016  grain  of  water.  When  the  counterpoise  in  the  left-hand  pan  was  in 
equilibrium  with  the  weight  A-}-B-J-D-}-G-t-K-l-M-f-S-l-(16)-l-(2)-|-0*l  grain  in  the 
right-hand  pan,  100  parts  =0*268  grain.  Hence  when  Q is  suspended  in  water 
100  parts  =0*284  grain.  In  the  observations  of  July  15  the  suspending  wire  alone 
immersed  to  the  same  depth  as  when  Q was  suspended  in  water  £!=  12*7029  grains  of 
platinum  in  air.  At  the  close  of  these  observations  the  fine  wire  broke,  and  was 
replaced.  In  the  observations  which  followed,  the  wire  alone  in  water 12*5641 
grains  of  platinum  in  air. 


July  15,  ISiS.  Q and  wire  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


G. 

h. 

gr- 

Scale. 

118-05 

62-85 

3-04 

15-30 

3-05 

21-30 

3-04 

21-45 

3-02 

11-00 

3-02 

17-00 

3-02 

14-00 

118-20 

63-05 

3-04 

20-45 

3-04 

20-40 

3-00 

16-00 

3-00 

13-60 

118-25 

63-30 

3-03 

20-45 

3-02 

19-45 

3-02 

15-50 

3-02 

19*10 

3-02 

19-40 

3-02 

20-30 

118-40 

63-50 

3-00 

17-25 

3-00 

15-70 

3-00 

17-30 

118-22 

63-17 

3-020 

17-71 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and  wire  in  water  (G=118‘40,  L=63'17)  + 3*0237  grains  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

A + B-|-D-fG-l-K-|-M  + S-l-(l6)  + 2-68  24-6 

2*64  12-6 

D=18-35,  C=18*4,  F=761-8,  E=20.  2-67  23-2 

2*66  19-2 


2-6625  19-9 


C.poise  bal.  A-l-B-|-D-l-G-f  K-l-M-t- S-t-(l 6) -|- 2*6601  grs.  in  air  (D=18-35,  C=18-4,  F=761’8,  E=20). 


896 


PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Q and  wire  in  water. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


G. 

L. 

gr- 

Scale. 

118*7 

64*1 

2*94 

7*45 

2*94 

11*00 

2*98 

19-45 

2*98 

18*35 

119-0 

64*5 

2*98 

21*50 

2*94 

17-50 

2*96 

21*70 

118*85 

2*9644 

17*62 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and  wire  in  water  (G^ 

= 118*85, 

L=64*3)-|- 2*9683  grains 

in  air. 

Q and  wire  in  water  (<=17*30)£!: 

A + B + D-hG  + K-l-M-hS  + (l6)-0*3359  gr.  in 

air  (<= 

July  15 

, 1846.  Q and  wire  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

G. 

L. 

gr- 

Scale. 

2*94 

14*80 

2*96 

19-70 

119-25 

64*90 

2*96 

22*90 

2*94 

18*25 

2*94 

20*75 

2*94 

19-65 

119-40 

65*10 

2*94 

21*10 

/ 

2*94 

21*15 

119-32 

65*00 

2*945 

19-79 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and  wire  in 

water  (G 

= 119*32,  L= 65*0) -1-2*9428  grain 

In  right-hand  pan. 

gr- 

Scale. 

A -f  B + D G -f- K -f  M -h  S -h  ( 1 6) -H  2*66 

17-60 

-1-2*67 

19-85 

D=18*5,  C = 18*5, 

F=761*8,  E= 

= 20. 

+ 2*67 

19-97 

2*6667 

19-14 

C.poise  bal.  A + B-hD-l-G-i-K  + M-fS-|-(l6)-f 2*6663 

grs.  in  air  (D=18*5,  C = 

18*5,  F= 

July  15, 

1846.  Q and  wire 

in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

G. 

L. 

gr- 

Scale. 

119*60 

65*50 

2*94 

26*10 

2-90 

20*10 

2*90 

12*10 

2*90 

15*30 

2*94 

21*50 

2*94 

26*50 

119*80 

65*80 

2*90 

18*35 

2*90 

16*25 

119-7 

65*65 

2*915 

19-52 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and  wire  in  water  (G=119*7>  L = 65"15)-f  2*9135  grains  in  air. 

Q and  wire  in  water(#=  17"44)ii:  A + B-fD-fG -t-K-|-M-|-  S-|-(  16)— 0*2618  grain  in  air  (<=18*54,  ^=759*79)> 


July  28. 


Q and  wire  in  water. 


G. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


L. 

gr- 

Scale. 

71*05 

2*24 

18*20 

2*24 

18*00 

2*24 

18*30 

71*10 

2*24 

17-50 

2*24 

17-60 

OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  THE  QUARTZ  WEIGHT.  897 


2*24 

17*10 

2*24 

17*00 

71*05 

2*24 

18*00 

2*24 

17*30 

2*24 

17*90 

71*07 

2*240 

17*69 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and  wire  in  water  (<=18'15)  + 2‘2437  grains  in  air. 

In  right-hand  pan. 


gr- 

Scale. 

A + B-|-D-pG-]-K-pM-hS-f(l6)-h2*10 

23*80 

-h2*08 

16*27 

D=18*45,  C: 

= 18*5,  F=  768*9,  E=19*7. 

-42*09 

20*00 

-1-2*08 

15*15 

+ 2*09 

19*30 

2*088 

18*90 

C.poise  bal.  A-fB-|-D-fG-)-K-+-M-fS-p(l6)-l- 2*0883  grs.  in  air  (D=18*45,  C 

= 18*5,  F: 

Q and  wire  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

G. 

L. 

gr- 

Scale. 

122*9 

70*93 

2*24 

16*4 

2*28 

28*0 

2*24 

10*6 

2*24 

17*0 

2*24 

18*5 

2*24 

18*0 

2*24 

14*7 

122*87 

70*8 

2*24 

17*1 

2*28 

23*2 

2*28 

24*9 

2*24 

14*0 

2*28 

22*5 

2*28 

30*5 

2*24 

14*5 

122*9 

70*90 

2*24 

16*5 

122*89 

70*88 

2*2538 

19*09 

Counter]: 

)oise  balances  Q and  wire  in 

water  (<=18*13)  + 2*2530 

grains  in  a 

Q and  wire  in  water  (t— 

1 8*1 4)  A -1- B -t- D -p  G + K + M -I- S -f  ( 1 6)  - 0*1 603  gr. 

in  air  (t= 

July  29. 

Q and  wire  in  water. 

In  right-hand  pan. 

G. 

L. 

gr- 

Scale. 

119*10 

64*60 

2*54 

17*0 

2*58 

28*9 

2*50 

10*5 

2*54 

22*6 

2*50 

13*1 

2*54 

29*5 

119*30 

64*90 

2*50 

12*5 

2*50 

9-9 

2*54 

28*8 

2*52 

23*1 

119*45 

65*13 

2*50 

20*0 

2*50 

20*8 

2*48 

13*5 

2*50 

19*2 

2*50 

23*5 

2*48 

18*8 

119*28 

64*88 

2*5137 

19*48 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and  wire  in  water  (G=119'28,  L = 64-88)-(- 2*5123  grains  in  air. 


898  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

A + B + D + G + K-t-M-i-S-l-(l6)  + 2-08  20-6 

-I- 2-07  16-3 

D=18-4,  C = 18-4,  F=766-1,  E=20*7.  -h2-08  19*6 


2-0767  18-83 


C.poise  balances  A + B-fD  + G + K + M-fS-|-(l6)-f  2-0772grs.  in  air  (D= 18-4,  C= 1 8-4,  F= 766-1 , E= 20-7). 


Q and  wire  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


G. 

L. 

gr. 

Scale. 

119-8 

65-7 

2-48 

24-2 

2-44 

7-5 

2-48 

27-6 

2-44 

11-8 

2-48 

28-0 

120-0 

66-0 

2-46 

20-2 

2-44 

8-5 

2-46 

19-0 

2-46 

21-8 

2-44 

13-5 

2-46 

22-2 

120-15 

66-3 

2-44 

18-5 

2-44 

20-5 

119-98 

66-0 

2-4554 

18-71 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and 

wire  in 

water  (G=  119*98,  L= 

66-0) + 2-4562  grains 

Q and  wire  in  water  (<=l7-46)ii:A-f  B-f  D-j-G-|-K-|-M-|-S  + (l6)— 0-4070gr.  in  air  (<=18-44,  6=763-99). 
July  29.  Q and  wire  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


G. 

L. 

gr- 

Scale. 

120-30 

66-57 

2-44 

18-9 

2-44 

20-5 

2-44 

24-5 

2-40 

13-0 

2-44 

26-9 

120-45 

66-90 

2-40 

13-6 

2-44 

25-4 

2-40 

13-7 

2-44 

26-7 

120-65 

67-15 

2-40 

15-8 

2-44 

27-5 

2-40 

21-3 

2-40 

20-5 

120-47 

66-87 

2-421 

20-64 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and 

wire  in  water  (G  = 

120-47,  L= 

;66-8)  + 2-4163  grains 

In  right-hand  pan. 


gr.  Scale. 

A-|-B-t-D-t-G-|-K-MVI  + S-t-(l6)-H2-08  20-30 

+ 2-08  18-30 

D = 18-5,  C=18-6,  F = 765-4,  E=20-4.  +2-08  19-02 

+ 2-08  18-52 

+ 2-04  2-95 

+ 2-12  33-57 


2-08  18-78 


C.poise  balances  A + B + D + G + K + M + S+(l6)  + 2-0806 grs.  in  air  (D=  18-5,  C = 18-6,  F=  765-4,  E=20-4). 


OBSERVATIONS  FOR  FINDING  THE  DENSITY  OF  THE  QUARTZ  WEIGHT.  899 


Q and  wire  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


G. 

L. 

gr* 

Scale. 

121*05 

67*80 

2*38 

22*9 

2*34 

9*0 

2*38 

25*6 

2*34 

9*7 

2*38 

26*7 

121*25 

68*05 

2*34 

13*9 

2*38 

26*9 

2*34 

15*5 

2*38 

26*8 

2*34 

17-3 

2*38 

26*1 

121*40 

68*40 

2*34 

18*3 

121*23 

68*08 

2*360 

19*9 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and  wire  in  water  (G=121*23,  L=68*08)-l- 2*3574  grains  in  air. 

Q and  wire  in  water  (<=17*71):i^A-j-B  + D-l-G-l-K-HM-l-S-f  (16)— 0*3062  gr.  in  air(#=18*59,  5=763*33). 


July  30.  Q and  wire  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


G. 

L. 

gr- 

Scale. 

120*10 

66*25 

2*48 

27*5 

2*44 

20*1 

2*40 

6*9 

2*40 

5*0 

2*44 

24*3 

2*40 

8*0 

120*25 

66*50 

2*43 

21*9 

2*43 

20*8 

2*43 

21*2 

120*40 

66*70 

2*42 

19*5 

120*25 

66*48 

2*427 

17*52 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and  wire  in  water  (G=  120*25,  L=66*48)  + 2*4312  grains  in  air. 


In  right-hand  pan. 

gr. 

Scale. 

A -f  B -b  D -f  G -b  K -b  M -f- S + (16) -b  2*08 

18*25 

+ 2*08 

18*45 

18*6,  F= 764*2,  E=22*3. 

+ 2*08 

18*97 

2*08 

18*56 

C.poise  bal.  A-f-B-|-D-|-G-l-K-f-M-(-S-i-(l6)-l-2*0813  grs.  in  air  (D=18*6,  C=18*6,  F=764*2,  E=22*3). 


Q and  wire  in  water.  In  right-hand  pan. 


G. 

L 

gr- 

Scale. 

120*6 

67*2 

2*40 

22*5 

2*37 

12*5 

2*40 

23*1 

2*38 

18*1 

120*85 

67*5 

2*38 

18*2 

2*38 

18*9 

2*38 

21*0 

121*0 

67-8 

2*38 

21*7 

2*36 

16*7 

120*82 

67*5 

2*3811 

19*19 

Counterpoise  balances  Q and 

wire  in  water  (G= 

120*82,  L= 

67’5)  + 2*3806  grains 

Qand  wire  in  water(<=17*65)^  A -l-B-l-D-t-G-fK-fM-i-S-|-(l6)— 0*3246  grain  in  air  (<=18*64,  5=761*90). 

6 B 


MDCCCLVI. 


900  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 
Apparent  weight  of  Q in  water,  weighed  with  platinum  weights. 

Water.  Air. 


t. 

gr- 

t. 

b. 

17*3 

Q 1^2:4362*5201 

18*41 

759*79 

17*44 

Q:r2. 4362*5942 

18*54 

759*79 

18*14 

Q £2=  4362*8345 

18*51 

766*91 

17*46 

Qii:  4362*5878 

18*44 

763*99 

17*71 

Q£2:  4362*6886 

18*59 

763*33 

17*65 

Qii  4362*6702 

18*64 

761*90 

Comparison  of  Q with  PS. 

During  the  comparison  of  Q with  PS,  the  zero  of  the  scale  of  the  barometer  was 
305  millimetres  above  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  weights,  consequently  0’03  mm. 
must  be  added  to  the  reading  of  the  barometer.  F denotes  the  reading  of  the  baro- 
meter, E that  of  its  attached  thermometer.  The  thermometers  C,  D were  suspended 
in  the  balance-case.  PS  will  be  designated  by  the  letter  I.  The  weight  of  0'4  grain 
used  with  Q on  the  3rd  and  10th  of  August,  was  the  0’4  grain  of  Robinson’s  5^-inch 
balance  ; on  the  5th  it  was  the  0’4  grain  of  Barrow’s  balance ; on  the  6th  it  was  the 
sum  of  the  0*3  grain  and  OT  grain  of  Barrow’s  balance ; on  the  7th  it  was  the  0‘4  grain 
of  Robinson’s  10^-inch  balance;  on  the  11th  it  was  the  sum  of  the  0‘3  grain  and 
OT  grain  of  Robinson’s  5|-inch  balance.  Z=0T  gr.-]-0'3  gr.+OT  gr.  of  Robinson’s 
5^-inch  balance-pOT  gr.-l-0'3  gr.+OT  gr.  of  Barrow’s  balance+OT  gr.  of  Robinson’s 
10|^-inch  balance ; (2)  the  2-grain  weight  of  Barrow’s  balance.  The  readings  increase 
on  placing  a small  weight  in  the  left-hand  pan. 


100  parts=0‘399  grain. 


z,  (2). 

(2),  Z. 

3*21 

3*07 

3*22 

3*01 

3*16 

2*90 

¥59 

8*98 

6Z  =6(2) + 0*00243  grain. 

Z=(2)-i-0-000406  gr.,  (2)  = 1-999597  gr.,  Z=2-000003  grains,  iZ=0'4000006  gr. 
Hence  the  mean  value  of  the  0-4  grain  used  may  be  taken  as  exact. 


August  3,  1846. 

100  parts=0*31355  grain. 

D. 

c. 

F. 

E. 

I + Y,  Q + 0*4gr.  + X 

Scale. 

21*16 

21*64 

Q + 0*4gr.  + X,  I + Y 

Scale. 

18*57 

17*93 

17*30 

16*57 

17*51 

16*41 

22*51 

19*41 

19*49 

19*24 

20*4 

20*3 

22*15 

760*0 

21*5 

22*15 

20*6 

20*5 

22*42 

20*65 

20*65 

20*6 

20*6 

760*5 

21*5 

I + X,  Q + 0*4  gr.  + Y 
1+0*02  gr.+X,  Q+0*4gr.+Y 
1+0*01  gr.+X,  Q+0*4gr.+Y 

23*12 

17*09 

19*55 

20*19 

Q + 0'4  gr.  + Y,I  + X 

Q + 0*4  gr.  + Y,  I + 0*02  gr.  + X 
Q+0*4gr.  + Y,  1 + 0*01  gr.  + X 

19*37 

20*57  20*5  760*25  21*5  101  + 0*05  gr.,  10(Q+ 0*4  gr.)  208*84  10(Q+ 0*4  gr.),  101 + 0*05  gr.  184*96 

20(Q + 0*4  gr.)  201  + 0*1  gr. + 23*88  pts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

19-85 

19-8 

764-72 

20 

19-9 

20-05 

19-95 

764-7 

20-15 

20-05 

20-01 

19-92 

764-71 

E. 

20-9 


20-8 


20-85 


I+X,  Q+0-4  gr.  + Y 
I + X,  Q + 0-42  gr.  + Y 
I + X,  Q + 0-4]  gr.  + Y 


I+Y,  Q + 0-41  gr.+X 


WITH  PS. 

901 

5 grain. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

15-55 

Q + 0-4  gr.  + Y,  I + X 

25-50 

22-24 

Q + 0-42  gr.  + Y,  I + X 

19-27 

18-59 

Q + 0-41  gr.  + Y,  I + X 

22-29 

J9-56 

22-20 

19-20 

21-21 

19-94 

Q + 0-41  gr.+X,  I + Y 

20-75 

18-79 

20-47 

18-32 

19-52 

18-96 

20’29 

18-65 

19-50 

189-80 

10(Q+  0-4  gr.)  + 0-1  gr.,  101 

211-00 

101,  10(Q+0-4gr.)  + 0-l  gr. 

20(Q+  0-4  gr.)£i:20I— 0-2  gr.— 21-2  pts. 

40(Q  + 0-4gr.)£^:40I-0-l  gr.  + 2-68pts.  in  air  (D=20-29,  C=20-21,  F=762-48,  E=21-l7). 
Q + 0-4 gr.ib  1 — 0-00229  gr*  in  air  (^=20-31,  6=760-35). 


August  5. 

D. 

C. 

19-7 

19-6 

20-0 

19-87 

20-2 

20-1 

19-97 

19-86 

D. 

C. 

20-5 

20-43 

20-6 

20-5 

20-65 

20-6 

20-58 

20-51 

Auj 

gust  6. 

D. 

c. 

20-7 

20-6 

21 

1 

20-93 

20-85 

20-76  ; 

F. 


E. 


762-2  20-4 


100  parts=  0-31808  grain. 

Scale. 

I + Y,  Q+0-4gr.  + X 17-52 

18-07 

17-55 

18-31 

19-44 

19-00 

19-47 

19-31 

19-35 

19-81 


Q+0-4  gr.  + X,  I + Y 


762-2  20-4 


10(I  + Y),  10(Q+0-4gr.  + X)  187-83  10(Q  + 0-4gr.  + X),  10(I  + Y) 

20(Q  + 0-4  gr,  + X) £2: 20(1 + Y)- 30-03  pts. 


F. 


E. 


I + X,  Q + 0-4  gr.  + Y 


761-8  21 


Scale. 

22-32 

21- 19 

22- 05 

21- 17 

22- 36 
22-11 
20-15 
20-01 
20-04 
19-59 


Q+0-4  gr.  + Y,  I + X 


761-8  21  10(I  + X),  10(Q  + 0-4  gr.  + Y)  210-99  10(Q+0-4gr.  + Y),  10(I  + X) 

20(Q+  0-4  gr.  + Y)  £2: 20(1  + X)  + 27-09  pts. 
40(Q+0-4gr.)£!;40I-2-94pts.  in  air  (D  = 20-27,  C = 20-18,  F=762-0,  E=20-7). 

Q+ 0-4 gr. £1:1  — 0-00023  grain  in  air  (#=20-29,  6=759-93). 


E. 


100  parts=  0-31 808  grain. 

Scale. 


760-9  21-95 


I + X,  Q+0-4  gr.  + Y 


I + O-Ol  gr.  + X,  Q+0'4gr.  + Y 


21-24 

21- 17 

22- 05 
22-05 
18-57 
18-21 
18-92 
18-55 

18- 65 

19- 59 


Q + 0-4  gr.  + Y,  I + X 


Scale. 

23-05 

22-82 

22-06 

22-44 

22-47 

22-01 

22-06 

21-19 

20-11 

19-65 

217-86 


Scale. 

19-42 

18-55 

18-31 

18-21 

18- 46 

19- 97 
18-10 
17-60 
17-71 
17-57 

183-90 


Q + 0-4  gr.  + Y,  I + O-Ol  gr.  + X 


Scale. 

16-51 

16- 71 
18-66 
15-84 
20-01 

17- 92 
17-54 
17-57 
17-34 
17-00 


20(Q  + 0-4  gr.  + Y)  £1: 20(  I + X)  + 0- 1 2 gr.  + 23-9  pts. 
6 B 2 


902 


PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


D. 

21-1 


21-2 


C F E 

1 + 0*02 gr.+Y,  Q+0*4gr.+X 

21*06  

1 + 0*01  gr.+Y,  Q+0*4  gr.+  X 
760*9  22  

21*15  


Scale.  Scale. 

16*69  Q+0*4gr.  + X,  I + 0*02gr.+Y  22*27 

16*37  20*55 

16-32  21*22 

16-79  20-72 

20-10  Q+0*4  gr.  + X,  1 + 0*01  gr.+Y  18*49 

19*99  18-19 

20-52  18*34 

19*75  17*44 

20-61  17-25 

19*56  18*77 


pr.  gr.  ^r. 

21*15  21*1  760*9  22  10(I+Y)+0*14,  10(Q+0*4+X)  186*70  1 0(Q+0*4+X),  10(I+Y)+0*14  193*24 

20(Q + 0*4  gr.  + X)  iCi:  20(1 + Y)  + 0*28  gr. — 6*54  pts. 

40(Q+ 0*4 gr.)iJ:40I  + 0*4  gr.  + 17*36  pts.  in  air  (D=21,  C=20-93,  F=760*9,  E=21*97). 

Q+ 0*4 gr.£!:I  + 0-01 138  grain  in  air  (<=21*03,  5=758*68). 


August  7- 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

20*2 

20-1 

20*35 

20*3 

757*7 

20-95 

20-55 

20-45 

20-6 

20-5 

20-7 

20-6 

20*85 

20-7 

757*6 

21*2 

20-95 

20-9 

20-6 

20*51 

757*65 

21*07 

D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

20-92 

20-85 

757*3 

21*4 

20-93 

20-85 

20*97 

20-9 

757*2 

21*5 

20*97 

20-9 

756-83 

21*5 

20-95 

20-9 

20*95 

20-88 

757*11 

21*47 

I + Y,  Q+0-4  gr.  + X 
1 + 0*01  gr.  + Y,  Q+0-4  gr.+X 


100  parts  = 0*31 299  grain. 

Scale. 
25-40 
22-02 
23-20 
20*20 
20-05 

20-49 
20-17 
20-17 

20- 91 

21- 25 


Q + 0-4  gr.  + X,  I + Y 
Q+0-4  gr.  + X,  1 + 0*01  gr.+Y 


1+0*02  gr.  + Y,  Q+0-4  gr.  + X 


Q+0-4  gr.  + X,  1 + 0*02  gr.  + Y 


20(Q+ 0*4  gr.  + X)^! 20(1  + Y)  + 0*32  gr.+ 16*81  pts, 
1 + 0*02  gr.  + X,  Q+0-4  gr.  + Y 


Scale. 

20-82  Q + 0-4  gr.  + Y,  I + 0*02  gr.  + X 


21*42 

21*31 

21-76 

22-11 

22-56 

21*37 

21*67 

23*00 

21*65 


Scale. 

16*72 

18*61 

18*06 

22*12 

20*45 

21*22 

19*90 

20-89 

19*72 

19*36 


Scale. 

19*54 

18- 45 
19*76 
18*67 

19- 42 
19*30 
19*51 

20- 60 
19*46 
18-44 


(I+X)+0-2,  10(Q+0++Y)  217*67  10(Q+0*4+Y),  10(I+X)+0*2  193-15 
20(Q  + 0-4  gr.  + Y)^20(I  + X)  + 0-4  gr.+24-52  pts. 

40(Q  + 0*4gr.)i2:40l  + 0-72gr.+41-33  pts.  in  air  (D=20-77,  C=20*7,  F=757*38,  E=21*27). 

Q + 0-4gr.£tI  + 0-02123  grain  in  air  (<=20-8,  5=755-26). 


August  11.  100  parts= 0*31299  grain. 

D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

19-4  19*3  I + Y,  Q + 0-42gr.  + X 20-55  Q + 0-42gr.  + X,  I + Y 

20-06  

19*6  19*5  765-52  20-6  19*97  

19*87  

19*9  19*77  19*52  

19*05  

19-98  19*85  20-61  

765-42  20-8  19-90  

20  19*87  19*39  

2019  


19-78  19*66  765-47  20-7  10(I  + Y),  10(Q  + 0-42  gr.  + X)  199*11  10(Q  + 0-42  gr.  + X),  10(I  + Y) 


Scale. 

22-32 

20-12 

19*37 

18*82 

18-60 

16-22 

16-50 

16*09 

17*22 

16*50 


181*76 


20(Q  + 0*4  gr. + X)  20(1  + Y)— 0-4  gr.  + 17*35  pts. 


COMPARISON  OF  Q WITH  PS. 


903 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

20-1 

20 

765-5 

20-9 

20-15 

20-03 

765-58 

20-95 

20-2 

20-1 

20-25 

20-1 

765-43 

20-9 

20-25 

20-13 

20-2 

20-07 

765-5 

20-91 

I + X,  Q + 0-42gr.  + Y 


Scale. 

20-51 

20-90 

20-49 

20-81 

20-87 

20-47 

20-31 

20-95 

20-79 

20-62 


Q + 0-42gr.  + Y,  I + X 


20-2  20-07  765-5  20-91  10(I  + X),  10(Q+0-42gr.  + Y)  206-72  10(Q+0-42  gr.  + Y),  10(1  + Y) 


Scale. 

19-01 

17-91 

17-27 

17-40 

17-01 

16-45 

16-95 

16- 31 
16-20 

17- 05 


171-56 


20(Q+ 0-4  gr.  + Y)  20(1  + Y)— 0-4  gr.  + 35-16  pts. 
40(Q+0-4gr.)il40l-0-8gr.  + 52-51  pts.  in  air  (0=19-99,  C = 19-86,  F=765-48,  E=20-8). 
Q + 0-4 gr.£!; I— 0-01589  grain  in  air  (<=19-99,  ^=762-92). 


gr- 

t. 

b. 

Q£!:  I- 0-40229 

20-31 

760-35 

Qi2:I-0-40023 

20-29 

759*93 

Q£iI-0-38862 

21-03 

758-68 

Q £1:1-0-37877 

20-80 

Q£1:I-0-41589 

19*99 

762-92 

According  to  Steinheil,  the  density  of  quartz  at  0°  is  2'650962  of  the  inaxitnuin 
density  of  water,  and  its  cubic  expansion  for  1°  C.  is  0*00003255. 


The  weighings  of  Q in  water  give 


Water  at  18°  displaced  by  Q. 

Logarithms. 

2639-831 

3-4215760 

2639-809 

3-4215725 

2639-838 

3-4215774 

2639-825 

3-4215751 

2639-819 

3-4215742 

2639-814 

3-4215733 

Mean  ... 

...  2639-823 

3-4215748 

Maximum  density  of  water:  A water  at  18  ... 

0-0005867 

rQ  at  18  

...  2643-391 

3-4221615 

Q 

...  7002-368 

3-8452449 

AQ  at  18  : maximum  density  of  water  

2-649009 

0-4230834 

AQ  at  18  : a water  at  18  

2-652590 

0-4236701 

The  density  of  Steinheil’s  kilogramme  of  quartz  at  18°  in  terms  of  the  density  of 
water  at  18°  is  2*652908. 

The  logarithm  of  the  volume  of  Q at  f,  in  volumes  of  a grain  of  water  at  its 
maximum  density,  will  be  3*422161 5 18)  X 0*00001413.  The  comparisons  of  Q 
with  I in  air,  reduced  with  this  value  of  the  volume  of  Q,  give  for  the  absolute 


weight  of  Q in  a vacuum, 

gr. 

Q=I  + 2-36801 
Q=I  + 2-36871 
Q=I  + 2-368l7 
Q=I  + 2-36782 
Q=I  + 2-36715 


No.  of  comparisons. 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 


Mean 


Q=I+2-36797 


200 


904  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Secondary  Standards. 

The  comparison  of  different  brass  weights  with  platinum  weights,  shows  that, 
however  carefully  preserved,  they  are  liable  to  gain  from  0*01  grain  to  0’02  grain  or 
more  in  the  course  of  a few  years.  Brass,  therefore,  unless  very  well  protected  by 
gilding,  is  quite  unfit  to  be  used  in  the  construction  of  weights  having  that  degree  of 
accuracy  which  is  required  in  secondary  standards.  Electro -gilding  was  tried  in  the 
first  instance.  It  failed,  however,  to  afford  a sufficient  protection  to  the  metal 
underneath,  and  the  weight  of  the  pound  when  the  gilding  was  completed,  was  so 
very  uncertain  as  to  render  its  adjustment  an  extremely  troublesome  process.  It 
was  afterwards  discovered  that  these  evils  were  due  to  the  want  of  skill  of  the  person 
employed  as  a gilder  by  Mr.  Barrow,  and  not  to  any  inherent  defect  in  electro-gilding 
itself.  Mr.  Barrow  then  resorted  to  amalgam  gilding.  In  order  to  adjust  a weight, 
its  under  surface,  which  was  slightly  concave,  was  more  thickly  coated  with  gold  than 
the  rest  of  its  surface.  If  too  heavy,  a little  of  the  gold  was  removed  by  rubbing  it 
with  charcoal;  if  too  light,  more  amalgam  was  added,  and  the  mercury  driven  off  by 
heat.  Directions  had  been  given  that  the  weights  should  be  made  of  the  alloy  used 
by  Mr.  Baily  for  the  standard  yard  bars,  consisting  of  thirty-two  parts  of  copper, 
five  of  tin,  and  two  of  zinc.  The  densities,  however,  of  the  greater  part  of  them 
indicate  that  these  proportions  have  not  been  strictly  observed.  The  lbs.  numbered 
31  up  to  36,  protected  by  electro-gilding,  were  constructed  by  Messrs.  Ladd  and 
Streathfield.  The  weighings  were  reduced  with  the  expansions  given  in  Table  III. 

The  observations  for  finding  the  densities  of  the  secondary  standards,  and  for  com- 
paring them  with  the  platinum  standard,  were  made  in  a room  in  the  basement  of 
my  own  house  in  Cambridge,  the  brick  floor  of  which  afforded  a perfectly  firm 
foundation  for  a strong  table  on  which  the  balance  was  mounted. 

The  weights  employed  in  some  of  the  weighings  are  of  bronze,  for  which 
log  A=0-92250. 


Apparent  weights  of  the  secondary  standards  in  water. 


Water. 

Platinum. 

Bronze. 

Air. 

No.  of  lb. 

t. 

gr. 

gr- 

t. 

b. 

1 

15-11 

6163-2354 

17-03 

755-10 

2 

18-41 

6161-5534 

19-86 

760-32 

3 

17-75 

6157-7809 

19-94 

753-04 

4 

15-35 

6163-6422 

15-62 

767-02 

5 

14-69 

6132-0586 

16-45 

755-40 

6 

14-31 

6155-7369 

16-34 

758-92 

7 

14-24 

6138-4869 

15-17 

760-01 

8 

17-48 

6143-1594 

19-10 

760-86 

9 

16-31 

6047-7747 

17-01 

763-14 

10 

14-71 

6155-3347 

16-88 

758-12 

11 

17-80 

6163-6244 

18-49 

750-29 

12 

15-28 

6159-0015 

16-09 

767-20 

13 

10-79 

6169-9472 

12-20 

734-36 

14 

14-42 

6161-9845 

15-54 

755-94 

15 

10-23 

6162-9240 

11-01 

751-19 

16 

17‘43 

6133-5979 

17-93 

754-30 

17« 

11-15 

38-3615 

6099-9740 

12-42 

758-02 

SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


905 


\lh 

10-75 

6182-2705 

11-44 

738-69 

18 

17*20 

6157-6295 

19*82 

757*27 

19 

15-39 

6161-0862 

17*01 

767-23 

21 

15-59 

6122-6308 

15-94 

771*23 

22 

17*59 

6146-8491 

19*45 

756-99 

23 

16*08 

6141-7878 

16-34 

76.3-64 

24 

17*46 

6140*9677 

19*42 

758-65 

25 

17*91 

6136-6810 

20-04 

758-03 

26 

12-21 

6141-5668 

14-10 

754-92 

27 

16-27 

6142-9019 

16-52 

763-47 

28 

17*28 

6139*2058 

18*23 

761-17 

29 

11*35 

45-4802 

6099*9740 

13*35 

758-40 

30 

16-18 

6141-9389 

17*06 

763-07 

31 

14*53 

78-7565 

6099*9776 

15-05 

741-30 

32 

14-53 

72-5862 

6099*9776 

15-11 

741-50 

33 

14-63 

75-3351 

6099*9776 

15-11 

741-88 

34 

15-03 

78-8455 

6099*9776 

15-01 

752-51 

35 

15-03 

74-5158 

6099*9776 

15-41 

752-88 

36 

14-93 

77*0155 

6099*9776 

15-31 

753-07 

Densities  and 

volumes 

of  the  secondary  standards 

at  0°  C.,  the  density  being  ex- 

pressed  in  terms  of  the  maximum 

density  of  water,  and  the  volume  in  volumes 

of  a grain 

of  water  at  its  maximum  density. 

No. 

AG. 

wG. 

log  vG. 

1 

8*36134 

837*186 

2-922822 

2 

8-34161 

839*162 

. 2-923846 

3 

8-30462 

842-904 

2*925778 

4 

8-36500 

836-820 

2-922632 

5 

8-06122 

868-356 

2*938698 

6 

8-28779 

844-614 

2*926658 

7 

8-12163 

861*898 

2*935456 

8 

8*16317 

857*512 

2-933240 

9 

7*37614 

952-897 

2-979046 

10 

8*28375 

845-024 

2-926869 

11 

8*36302 

837*013 

2-922732 

12 

8-31919 

841-426 

2-925016 

13 

8-43179 

830-187 

2-919176 

14 

8-34955 

838-365 

2-923433 

15 

8-36107 

837*211 

2*922835 

16 

8-07354 

867*028 

2-938033 

17a 

8*11718 

862-365 

2-935691 

17^- 

8*55888 

817*858 

2-912678 

18 

8-30369 

842-999 

2-925827 

19 

8-33969 

8.39-358 

2-923947 

21 

7*97370 

877*890 

2-943440 

22 

8-19859 

853-804 

2-931358 

23 

8-15141 

858-748 

2-933866 

24 

8*14286 

859*645 

2-934319 

25 

8*10164 

864-022 

2-936525 

26 

8*15218 

858-665 

2-933824 

27 

8*16186 

857*650 

2-933310 

28 

8-12604 

861-428 

2-935219 

29 

8*18446 

855-279 

2-932108 

30 

8-15292 

858-588 

2*933785 

31 

8-51444 

822-129 

2*914940 

32 

8-47042 

828-302 

2*918189 

33 

8-47902 

825-563 

2*916750 

34 

8-51472 

822-103 

2*914926 

35 

8-47019 

826-424 

2-917203 

36 

8-49601 

823-912 

2-915881 

906  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Secondary  standards  weighed  in  air. 

The  small  weights  R were  made  by  winding  fine  silvered  brass  wire,  to  whieh  a 
weight  was  attached  nearly  as  heavy  as  the  wire  could  sustain,  round  a piece  of  steel 
pinion-wire.  The  pinion-wire,  with  the  brass  wire  wound  round  it,  and  still  stretched 
by  the  weight,  was  then  clamped  between  two  pieces  of  wood,  and  the  rings  sepa- 
rated by  placing  the  back  of  a sharp  penknife  in  one  of  the  grooves  of  the  pinion-wire, 
and  pushing  it  on  in  the  groove  till  all  the  coils  of  the  fine  wire  were  cut  through. 
The  weight  of  eighty-eight  of  the  rings  was  found  to  be  0'99595  grain.  Hence 
R=0’011313  grain.  The  weights  8 of  0'01136  grain  each,  used  in  two  of  the 
observations,  were  made  in  the  same  manner.  I ^JiT-j-Q-j-D— -0'00077  grain  in 
air  (^=  19-63,  ^»  = 764-43),  log  t;(I-Q)  = 2-51960,  log  <r-}-D) =2-5 1942.  Hence 
I=T-fQ-{-D— 0-00060  gr,  T4-D=I— 0-64449  gr.  Let  W be  taken  to  denote  the 
commercial  lb.  Then,  in  air,  at  65°-66  F.,  bar.  29-75  inches  (^=:18'7,  ^ = 755-64), 
at  Somerset  House,  or  in  air  for  whieh  log  A=7-07832— 10,  W^^I— -Q-j-O'Ol  102  gr. 
Also,  since  T-f  Q-|-D£!:I-j-0-00077gr.,  W^T-j-D-f-0-01025  grain.  I — Q displaces 
0-39641  grain,  and  T-f-D  displaces  0-39624  grain  of  air,  for  which  log  A=7‘07832— • 10. 
M denotes  the  mean  of  the  readings  of  the  thermometers  D,  C. 


G=lb.  No.  1. 


D. 


13-15 


13-3 


D. 


13-5 


13-55 


C. 

13-2 


13-35 


F. 


752-4 


100  parts  -t- 0-27297  grain. 


E. 

T + D + R + Y,  G-l-X 


13*85  T+D-)-2R-|-Y,  G-l-X 


S c^l0 

28-10  G-l-X,  T-FD-fR-l-Y 

24-96  

26-60  

27- 77  

28- 34  

21-12  G-fX,  T-fD-F2R-fY 
19-90  

18- 57  ; 

19- 47  

21-77  


236-60 


20(G-f  X)£2:20(T-t-D-t-Y)-l-30R-|-43-57  parts. 


Scale. 

18- 87 

19- 45 

17- 14 

18- 81 

20- 32 

22-47 

19*34 

19-31 

17-77 

19-55 


193-03 


C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T-|-D  + 2R-fX,  G-fY  17-52  G-fY,  T-fD-h2R-fX 

19-25  

13-5  20-00  

19-67  

20-06  

751-75  14  20-82  

21-55  

13-55  20-50  

22-27  

23-22 


204-86 

20(G  + Y)  20(T  + D + X)  + 40R  - 1 3-54  parts. 

40G^40(T  + D)  + 70R  + 30-03  parts,  M = 13-39,  F=752-07,  E = 13-92. 
G£!:T+D  + 0-021 83  grain  in  air  (^=13-42,  i=750-83). 

G = I-0-00732  grain. 

GiiW  + 0-01956  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7-07832  — 10). 


Scale. 

18-95 

20-47 

22*09 

23-02 

22-66 

20-39 

22-15 

22- 75 

23- 37 
22-55 

218-40 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


907 


G=  lb.  No.  2. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

12- 9  12-95 

748-5  13-4 

13- 1  13-13 


100  parts  =0-27039  grain. 

Scale. 

T+D  + X,  G + R + Y 19-86 

22-37 

21-82 

19-64 

17-72 

18-00 

T+D  + X,  G + Y 13-06 

13-27 

13-96 

14-97 

15-60 

190^ 


G + R + Y,  T + D + X 19-05 

18-31 

18-95 

17-31 

13-54 

13-36 

G + Y,  T + D + X 19-32 
18-47 

19-71 

19-10 

18-87 

195-99 


22(G + Y)  + 1 2 R :2: 22(T  + D + X)  - 5-72  parts. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

13-45  13-48 

748-9  13-65 

13-4  13-45 


Scale. 

T+D+Y,  G + X 18-00 

20-61 

18-47 

18-55 

18-84 

19-70 

17-44 

17-22 

18-24 

18-17 

16-81 


202-05 


Scale. 

G+X,  T + D + Y 23-42 

22-85 

21-16 

22-22 

22-49 

22-22 

20-54 

19-47 

22-22 

21-35 

22-67 

240-61 


22(G  + X)£1:22(T  + D + Y)— 38-56  parts. 

44G:ii:44(T  + D)-12R-44-28 parts,  M=13-23,  F=748-7,  E=13-52. 
G — T + D — 0-00587  grain  in  air  (#=13-26,  &=746-51). 

G = I — 0-03582  grain. 

GiiW  — 0-01132  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832  — 10). 


G=  lb.  No.  3. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

12-55  12-55 

755-8  13-3 

12-85  12-85 


100  parts=0-27397  grain. 

Scale. 

T + D + R + Y,  G + X 28-30 

28-00 

29-51 

27-62 

28-07 

T+D  + 2R  + Y,  G + X 23-04 

24-89 

21-67 

22-80 

22-16 

256-06 


Scale. 

G + X,  T+D  + R + Y 23-15 

19-65 

21-54 

20-90 

18-70 

G + X,  T + D + 2R  + Y 2464 

24-05 

20-79 

20-29 

20-30 


214-01 


20(G  + X)  A:  20(T  + D + Y)  + 30R  + 42-05  parts. 


6 c 


MDCCCLVI. 


908  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


D. 

C. 

F.  E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

T + D + 2R  + X,  G + Y 19*74  G + Y,  T+D  + 2R  + X 

19-60 

22*09  

22-70 

13 

13*05 

23*47  

22*87 

20*30 

21-32 

23*27  

22*47 

756*3  13*6 

22*25  

21*30 

23*35  

20*89 

13*4 

13*45 

20*16  

22*34 

20*62  

21-24 

19-62  

18*97 

214*87 

213*70 

20(G  + Y)ii20(T4-D  + X)  + 40R  + l-l7  part. 

40G:C1:40(T  + D)  + 70R  + 43-22  parts,  M=12-96,  F=756-05,  E=13-45. 
G:!1T  + D + 0*02276  grain  in  air  (#=12*99,  6=754*86). 

G = I + 0*00510  grain. 

G:ii:  W + 0*02512  grain  in  air  (log  A=7'07832  — 10). 


G = lb.  No.  4. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

12*75  12*78 

764*6  13*5 

13*25  13*25 


100  parts=  0*27450  grain. 

Scale. 

T + D + R + X,  G + Y 30*12 

22*02 

25*09 

23*71 

21*66 

22*77 

T + D + 2R  + X,  G + Y 15'*36 

15*14 

]7'54 

15*86 

16*65 


225*92 


Scale. 

G+Y,  T + D + R + X 23*31 

17-34 

16*42 

13*98 

15*15 

14*45 

G + Y,  T + D + 2R  + X 14*84 

14*35 

15*31 

16*81 

13*57 

175*53 


22(G  + Y)  22(T  + D + X)  + 32R  + 50*32  parts. 


D. 

C.  F.  E. 

Scale. 

Seale. 

T + D + 2R  + Y,  G + X 17-09  G + X,  T + D + 2R  + Y 

16*57 

16-90  

16*45 

13*2 

13*25 

17-29  

14*69 

15*44  

15*50 

14*87  

14*94 

762*8  13-8 

16*12  

13*61 

17-60  

15*07 

14*97  

14*47 

13*4 

13*4 

15*95  

15*10  

14*94 

12*30 

14*45  

14*72 

175-78 

163*26 

22(G  + X) £1: 22(T  + D + Y)  + 44R  + 1 2*52  parts. 

44G:G:44(T  + D)  + 76R  + 62*84  parts,  M=13*l6,  F=763*7,  E=13*65. 
G£!:T  + D + 0*02346  grain  in  air  (#=13*19,  6=762*47). 

G=I  + 0*00425  grain. 

G:iiW  + 0*03157  grain  in  air  (logA=7-07832— 10). 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


909 


G = lb.  No.  5. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

13  13-03 

767-55  13-8 

13-45  13-45 


100  parts=  0-27485  grain. 

Scale. 

T + D + Y,  G + R + X 16-60 

19-16 

18-36 

15-47 

16-62 

T + D + Y,  G + X 18-25 

16-22 

18-75 

18-15 

19*32 

176-90 


Scale. 

G + R + X,  T + D + Y 16-00 

15-17 

12-96 

10-62 

10-46 

G + X,  T + D + Y 17*74 

19*70 

21*37 

21*35 

21*15 


166-52 


20(G  + X)£120(T+D  + Y)-10R  + 10-38  parts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

13*7 

13-75 

767*5 

13*87 

13-87 

E 

T + D + X,  G+Y 


14-1 


C a 

15- 50  G + Y,  T + D + X 

17*69  

16- 21  

15- 30  

16- 90  

16-35  

14-67  

16-95  

16-60  

14-95  


Scale. 

20-17 

19*17 

17*95 

18*06 

17*57 

19*62 

19*17 

19*42 

19*15 

18-87 


161-12  189*15 

20(G+ Y)ii20(T  + D + X)-28*03  parts. 

40Gil40(T+D)-10R  — 17*65  parts,  M=13*51,  F=767*52,  E=13-95. 

GiiT  + D — 0*00404  grain  in  air  (^=13*54,  &=766*24). 

G=I  + 0*01783  grain. 

G:2:W  + 0*00734  grain  in  air  (log A=7*07832-10). 


G = lb.  No.  6. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

14-35  14-35 

764-85  14-9 

14-6  14-6 


100  parts=:0*28770  grain. 

T+D  + X,  G + Y 17*49 

20-07 

18-75 

18-49 

18-56 

18*61 

19*65 

T+D  + X,  G+R  + Y 23-04 

21*77 

21-16 


Scale. 

G + Y,  T + D + X 23-77 

23-05 

20-84 

19*84 

22*10 

22-77 

2S’Sl 

G + R + Y,  f+D  + X 18-54 

18-62 


17*37 

197*59  210*21 

20(G+  Y) A:20(T  + D + X)-6R-12-62  parts. 


6 c 2 


910  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T+D  + Y,  G+X  17-65 

18-20 

15  15  19-61 

17-54 

17-60 

764-6  15-3  18-65 

18-62 

15-1  15-3  15-72 

16-90 

16-50 


176-99 

20(G  + X)£i:20(T  + D + Y)— 23-04  parts. 

40G£1:40(T  + D)-6R-35-66  parts,  M=  14-77,  F=764-72,  E=15-l. 
G:^!:T  + D— 0-00426  grain  in  air  (<=14*79)  6=763-30). 
G=I-0-01714  grain. 

G£i:W  + 0-00083  grain  in  air  (log  A=7'07832  — 10). 


G=lb.  No.  7- 

100  parts= 0*26008  grain. 

D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T + D + R + Y,  G + X 18-15 

21-24 

14-2  14-2  20-66 

19-31 

18-46 

766-4  15-2  20-11 

21-06 

14-6  14-6  20-77 

19-32 

20-36 


199-44  208-28 

20(G  + X)£!:20(T  + D + Y)  + 20R  — 8-84  parts. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

T + D + R + X,  G + Y 18-22 

G + Y,  T+D  + R + X 19-10 

18-72 

19-19 

14-83  14-83 

15-92 

17-21 

17-34 

1 7*72 

17-62 

19-79 

765-9  15-2 

18-66 

20-21 

16-44 

20-20 

15  15 

18-30 

19-95 

16-19 

19-72 

16*39 

20-10 

173-8O 

193-19 

20(G+Y)£::20(T+D  + X)  + 20R-19-39  parts. 

40G:0:40(T  + D)  + 40R-28-23  parts,  M=14-66,  F=766-15,  E=15-2. 
Gib T + D + 0*00948  grain  in  air  (<=14-68,  6=764-72). 

G=I  + 0-01933  grain. 

G:ii:W  + 0-0 1658  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832  — 10). 


Sc&lc 

G + X,  T+D  + R + Y 20-82 

22-49 

22-74 

21*29 

19-34 

21-54 

20-34 

21-36 

18-69 

19-67 


Scale. 

G + X,  T + D + Y 21-09 

; 21-02 

21-05 

20-52 

19*56 

19-72 

20-19 

19-12 

18-64 

19-12 


200-03 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 

G=ll).  No.  8. 


D. 


14-8 


C. 


14-8 


F. 


15-25  15-25 


E. 


752-4  15-5 


100  parts=  0-28329  grain. 
T + D + R + X,  G + Y 


T+D  + 2R  + X,  G + Y 


Scale. 

30-32 

20-42 

25-95 

24-67 

23-59 

20- 24 

21- 17 
19-71 

19- 76 

20- 34 


G + Y,  T + D + R + X 


G + Y,  T + D + 2R  + X 


226-17 

20( G + Y)ii 20(T  + D + X)  + 30R  + 32-8  parts. 


D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T + D + 2R  + Y,  G+X  1822  G + X,  T + D + 2R  + Y 

17-50  

15- 95  15-95  18-31  

16-31  

16-27  

753-0  16  14-76  

14-07  

16- 35  16-35  14-56  

16-40  

13-77  


160-17 

20(G  + X):!i  20(T  + D + Y)  + 40R  + 1 7-53  parts. 

40G£i:40(T  + D)  + 70R  + 50-33  parts,  M=15-59,  F=752-7,  E=15-75. 
G:iiT+D  + 0-02336  grain  in  air  (<=15-6l,  6=751-24). 

G=I  + 0-01428  grain. 

G:Ch  W + O-01679  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832— 10). 


G = lb.  No.  9. 


100  parts=0-40919  grain. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I + Y,  G + Q+X 

Scale. 

24-34 

23-52 

9-9 

9-9 

740-6 

11 

23-17 

22-55 

21-87 

10-27 

10-3 

740-0 

11-1 

21-47 

20-94 

20-57 

10-53 

10-57 

739-95 

11-4 

17-94 

17-34 

213-71 

G + Q + X,  I + Y 


20(G  + Q+X)£l:20(r  + Y)  + 42-38  part* 


91  i 


Scale. 

24-32 

12-95 

19- 30 
17-Bl 
16-55 
21-62 

20- 57 
20-37 

20-56 

19-32 

193-37 


Scale. 

15- 90 

16- 85 

17- 54 
15-22 

13- 00 

14- 10 
12-54 
12-82 
12-46 
12-21 

142-64 


Scale. 

21-67 

20-59 

19-27 

18-57 

17-36 

16-66 

16-31 

15-49 

12-92 

12-49 

171^ 


912  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I + R + X,  G + Q+Y  18*77 

G+Q+Y,  I + R + X 19-70 

10*87 

10*83 

741*6 

11*6 

18*87 

19*67 

17*32 

19*02 

17*72 

18*55 

11*1 

11*1 

17*30 

19*17 

742*0 

11*6 

16*82 

18*09 

16*46 

18*39 

16*55 

18*24 

11*15 

11*2 

742*9 

11*7 

16*05 

17*36 

15*89 

17-74 

171-75 

185-93 

20(G  + Q+  Y)iJ:20(I  + X)  + 20R  — 14*18  parts. 

40(G  + Q)ii40I  + 20R  + 28*2  parts,  M=10*64,  F=  741*17,  E=ll*42. 
G + 0^1:1  + 0*00854 grain  in  air  (^=10*65,  6=740*25). 

G=I  + 0*ll6ll  grain. 

Gib  W + 0*00426  grain  in  air  (log  A=7‘07632— 10). 


G = lb.  No.  10. 


May  28,  1854. 

D.  C.  F.  E. 

14*6  14*6 

756*2  15 

14*9  14*87 


100  parts=0*28329  grain. 

Scale. 

T+D  + Y,  G + 2R  + X 21*55 

23*96 

24*06 

22*36 

22-62 

T + D + Y,  G+R  + X 18*17 

18*79 

17-95 

17*15 

17-92 


204*53 


Scale. 

G + 2R  + X,  T+D  + Y 19*56 

21*32 

21*27 

19-46 

20*05 

G + R + X,  T + D + Y 24*45 

24*76 

24*06 

23*40 

23*05 


221*38 


20(G  + X)ib20(T  + D + Y)-30R-l6*85  parts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E.  Scale. 

Scale. 

T + D + X,  G + 2R  + Y 19-82 

G + 2R  + Y,  T + D + X 17-85 

15*06 

15*05 

20*87 

18-61 

21*75 

20*41 

22*16 

20*15 

23*66 

20*34 

756*3 

15*4  22*85 

20*20 

21*69 

19-75 

19*79 

17-37 

15*2 

15*2 

20*71 

17-49 

21*24 

18*70 

214*54 

19^ 

20(G  + Y)ii:20(T  + D + X)  — 40R  + 23*67  parts. 

40Gib40(T  + D)-70R  + 6*82  parts,  M=14*94,  F=756*25,  E=15*2. 
GibT  + D — 0*01931  grain  in  air  (^=14*96,  6=754*84). 

G =1—0*03910  grain. 

Gib W— 0*02162  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832— 10). 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


913 


G = lb.  No.  11. 


January  6,  1853.  100  parts=0*41459  grain. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I + X,  G + Q+2R  + Y 

25-89  G + Q+2R  + Y,  I + X 

24-55 

10 

10 

749-9 

10-8  

25-85  

23-57 

25-57  

22-34 

24-59  

21-65 

24-52  

21-04 

10-27 

10-27 

749-6 

10-9  

22-55  

20-85 

23-19  

19-86 

22-55  

19-75 

10-45 

10-45 

749-03 

10-9  

22-27  

19-62 

22-51  

19-32 

239-49 

212-55 

20(G  + Q+Y)£!:20(I  + X)-40R  + 26-94  parts. 

D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I + Y,  G + Q+R  + X 

18-57  G+Q+R  + X,  I + Y 

20-96 

10-53 

10-6 

748-8 

11  

19-01  

21-40 

18-15  

20-30 

17-57  

20-86 

17-21  

19-17 

10-8 

10-8 

748-8 

11-1  

17-25  

19-42 

16-37  

18-12 

16-26  

18-75 

10-85  10-85  748-75  11-5  

lb-04  

15-35  

17-74 

17-32 

171-78 

194-04 

20(G  + Q + X) 20(1  + Y)  - 20R - 22-26  parts. 

40(G  + Q)il:40I-60R  + 4-68  parts,  M=10-49,  F=749-14,  E=ll-03. 
G + Q— I — 0-01648  grain  in  air  (i=10-49,  6=748-25). 

G=I  — 0-04208  grain. 

GiiW— 0-01499  grain  in  air  (log  A=7'07832  — 10). 


G = lb.  No.  12. 


December  28,  1852.  100  parts=  0-39337  grain. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I+Y,  G + Q+X 

Scale. 

17-57 

16-66 

G + Q + X,  I + Y 

Scale. 

19-24 

17-70 

10-4 

10-4 

752-4 

11-4 

17-92 

17-77 

20-52 

' 

19-00 

18-54 

21-50 

10-8 

10-8 

752-5 

11-5 

19-99 

19-57 

19-79 

20*17 

19-70 

19-59 

10-73 

10-73 

752-5 

11-5 

19-40 

18-72 

187-91 

18-62 

18-90 

192-96 

20(G  + Q + X)£b20(I  + Y)— 5-05  parts. 


914  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I + X,  G + Q+Y 

Scale. 

16*96 

17*02 

11*3 

11*3 

752*9 

11*65 

18*06 

18*61 

17*29 

11*5 

11*5 

753*3 

12 

16*70 

19*31 

17*45 

11*6 

11*55 

753*65 

12 

16*72 

16*77 

] 74*89 

G + Q + Y,  I + X 


20(G  + Q-|- Y)£!:20(r  + X)  — 15'58  parts. 

40(G  + Q)=!1  401- 20-63  parts,  M=1M,  F=752'88,  E=ll-69. 
G+Q:ii: I -0*00203  grain  in  air  (#=11-11,  i=751-9). 

G= 1 — 0*02060  grain. 

G £!:W  + 0-00118  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832— 10). 


G=lb.  No.  13. 


December  29,  1852.  100  parts= 0*38625  grain. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I + X,  g + q + r + y 

Scale. 

23*04 

22-84 

9*95 

9*95 

755*3 

10*6  

20*79 

20-90 

20-22 

10*45 

10*5 

754*4 

10*9  

19*19 

19*45 

19*00 

10*52 

10*52 

754*29 

10*95  

19*01 

19*82 

204-26 

G + Q+R  + Y,  I + X 


20(G  + Q + Y)£i:20(I  + X)-20R  + 30-15  parts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I + Y,  G + Q + R + X 

Scale. 

19*26 

19*70 

18*45 

G + Q + R + X,  I + Y 

10-65 

10*65 

753*85 

11*1 

18*30 

10*8 

10*8 

753*7 

11*3 

I + Y,  G + Q + X 

14*89 

14*49 

G + Q + X,  I + Y 

I + R + Y,  G + Q+X 

11*41 

1 2*54 

G + Q + X,  I + R + Y 

11 

11 

753*6 

11*2 

I + Y,  G + Q+X 

14*11 

G + Q + X,  I + Y 

15-19 

158-34 


20(G  + Q+X):#i:20(I  + Y)— 4R  + 9-28  parts. 

40(G  + Q)£i:40I— 24R  + 39-43  parts,  M = 10-67,  F=754-00,  E=ll-07. 
G + Qsil— 0*00298  grain  in  air  (#=10*68,  ^=753*21). 

G=I— 0*03331  grain. 

G£b  W + 0 00195  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832— 10). 


Scale. 

18*99 

18*89 

19*40 

20*12 

19*34 

19*50 

18*71 

18*85 

18*76 

17*91 


190*47 


Scale. 

20*54 

20*85 

19*35 

18*17 

17*50 

16*82 

15*65 

15-27 

15*25 

14*71 


174*11 


Scale. 

15*19 

13*60 

12*29 

12*64 

14*94 

14*61 

18*45 

18*01 

14*92 

14*41 


149*06 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS.  915 

G=lb.  No.  14. 


January  5,  1853. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

10-43 

10-47 

75.3-85 

11-3 

10-75 

10-8 

754-1 

11-6 

11 

11 

754-0 

11-8 

100  parts= 0*42206  grain. 

Scale. 

I + Y,  G + Q+X  17-67 

17-20 

15-97 

16-19 

14-34 

14-39 

I + Y,  G + Q+R+X  16-40 

16-40 

16-10 

16-10 

160-76 


Scale. 

G + Q+X,  I + Y 21-62 

21-20 

19-99 

19-24 

18-17 

17-70 

G + Q + R + X,  I + Y 15-35 

14-50 

14-31 

14-39 

176-47 


20(G  + Q+X)£i:20(I  + Y}-8R-15-71  parts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

11-35 

11-35 

754-0 

12 

11-35 

11-35 

754-2 

12 

11-45 

11-45 

754-25 

12 

Scale. 

I + X,  G + Q+R  + Y 21-02 

21-41 

20-50 

20-71 

21-32 

21-05 

20-59 

20-01 

19-89 

19-90 

20~^0 


Sc£ll6 

G + Q+R  + Y,  I + X 19-56 

19-59 

18-84 

19-49 

18-70 

18-22 

17-52 

17-55 

17-05 

16-74 

183-26 


20(G+  Q+ Y) 20(1  + X) - 20R  + 23-14  parts. 

40(G  + Q)£i40I-28R  + 7-43  parts,  M = ll-07,  F=754-06,  E=ll-78. 
G + Q:iil  — 0-00713  grain  in  air  (<=11-08,  6=753-07). 

G = I — 0-02844  grain.. 

Gi^W  — 0-00297  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832— 10). 


G=lb.  No.  15. 


January  30,  31,  1851.  100  parts=0-34349  grain. 


D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale.  Scale. 

I+Y,  G + Q + X 18-80  G + Q + X,  I + Y 18-90 

17-84  17-04 

17-26  16-46 

17-66  15-89 

10-15  10-2  749-7  11  18-30  15-54 

18-22  15-00 

16-89  15-01 

17-49  14-70 

16-35  13-69 

16-07  13-07 

174-88  155-30 


20(G  + Q + X):!::20(I+Y)  + 19-58  parts. 


6 D 


MDCCCLVI, 


916  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

I + X,  G + Q + Y 


9-0  9-03  742-75  9-5  I + O-Ol  gr.  + X,  G + Q + Y 


Scale.  Scale. 

22- 60  G + Q + Y,  I + X 16-50 

24-50  16-98 

23- 96  17*96 

23-75  18-21 

19-55  G + Q + Y,  I + O-Olgr.  + X 19-95 

19- 79  20-50 

20- 50  19-30 

20-82  19*74 

20- 92  21-31 

21- 75  20-45 


218-14  190-90 


20(G  + Q+ Y) £1:20(1 + X)  + 0-12  gr.  + 27-24  parts. 

40(G  + Q)£i40I  + 0-12gr.  + 46-82  parts,  M=9-59,  F=746-22,  £ = 10-25. 
G + Q:^I  + 0-00702  grain  in  air  (t=9-59,  ^=745-43). 

G=I  — 0-01864  grain. 

Gib  W+ 0-00820  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832  — 10). 


G=lb.  No.  15. 


March  18,  1854. 


100  parts=  0-25957  grain. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 


10-15  10-2 


764-0  10-9 


Sc3.1p 

T + D + X,  G + 2R  + Y 20-12 

21-75 

22-95 

21-20 

T + D + X,  G + R + Y 17-20 
17-42 

16-47 

18-50 

16-30 

15-55 


Scale. 

G + 2R  + Y,  T + D + X 15-65 

14-62 

15-50 

16-15 

G+R  + Y,  T + D + X 18-65 

20-20 

17-02 

17*95 

17*45 

18-17 


189*46  171-36 

20(G  + Y)£i:20(T+D  + X)—28R  + 18-10  parts. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

764-0  10-9 


10-48  10-53 


Scale. 

T + D + Y,  G + R + X 18-80 

18-39 

19-54 

21-42 

T + D + Y,  G + X 14-57 

18-82 

16-06 

14-95 

16-15 

15-72 

170-42 


Scale. 

G + R + X,  T + D + Y 16-29 

14-27 

16-00 

16-25 

G + X,  T + D + Y 20-87 

19-56 

20-95 

20-12 

19*50 

20-51 


184-32 


20(G  + X)£b20(T+D  + Y)-8R-13-9  parts. 

40G£i:40(T  + D)-36R  + 4-2  parts,  M=10-34.  F=  764-0,  E = 10-9. 
G— r + D — 0-00991  grain  in  air  (<=10-34,  Z<=763-1). 

G = I — 0-02180  grain. 

G — W + 0-00504  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7*07832  — 10). 

Means  of  both  series  of  comparisons ; — 

G = I — 0-02022  grain. 

G—W  + 0-00662  grain  in  air  (log  A= 7*07832  — 10). 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


917 


G=lb.  No.  16. 


December  31,  1852.  100  parts  = 0’38541  grain. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I + X,  G + Q + 5R+ Y 

Scale. 

24-06  G + Q + 5R  + Y,  I + X 

22-67  

10-4 

10-4 

766-2 

11-1  

c>c}^(\4. 

21-89  

21-70  

10-75 

10-75 

765-87 

11-5  

17-86  

23-24  

21-85  

11-07 

11-07 

765-7 

11-7  

.21-62  

22'19 


219T2 


20(G  + Q+ Y) £120(1 + X)—100R  + 19-96  parts. 

D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I + Y,  G + Q+4R  + X 

Scale. 

19-42  G + Q + 4R  + X,  I + Y 

17-55  

11-35 

11-3 

765-6 

11-8  

17-96  

17-77  

18-82  

11-4 

11-4 

765-5 

11-8  

18-84  

17-95  

17-07  

11-5 

11-5 

765-35 

11-9  

17-15  

17-59  

180-12 


20(G  + Q + X)£:=20(I  + Y')-80R-26-99  parts. 
40(G+Q)i5:40I-180R-7-03  parts,  M=ll-07,  F=765-7,  E=ll-6l. 
G + Q£1I-0-05159  grain  in  air  (<=11'08,  764-71). 

G = I — 0-02747  grain. 

G£!:W  — 0-03636  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832  — 10). 


Scale. 

24-01 

21-71 

21-29 

19-82 

18- 44 
16-67 

20-17 

19- 97 
18-71 
18-37 


199-16 


Scale. 

22-02 

22-55 

19- 89 

20- 22 

19- 19 
21-27 

21-50 

20- 57 

19- 65 

20- 25 


207-11 


G = lb.  No.  ]7«- 


April  8,  1854. 

D.  C.  F.  E. 

14-2  14-2 

767-1  14-7 


100  parts= 0-30837  grain. 

Scale. 

T + D + Y,  G + 2R  + X 14-39 

15-44 

16-15 

16-17 

15-65 

T + D + Y,  G + 3R  + X 18-64 

18-69 

18-47 

18-65 

17-37 

168-59 


Scale. 

G + 2R  + X,  T + D + Y 24-65 

25-15 

24-29 

23-70 

24-47 

G + 3R  + X,  T+D  + Y'  19-80 

20-37 

20-04 

18-67 

16-20 


217-34 


20(G  + X)  + 50R£;20(T  + D + Y)-47-75  parts. 


6 D 2 


918  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

767-1  14-7 


14-5  14-55 


Scale. 

T + D + X,  G + 3R  + Y 14-32 

15-20 

15-27 

15-15 

16-45 

15-41 

15-42 

14-40 

13-90 

15-00 

150-52 


Scale 

G + 3R  + Y,  T + D + X 19-57 

20-25 

19-20 

20-15 

20-47 

19-50 

18-80 

17-31 

19-25 

18-32 


192-82 


20(G  + Y)  + 60Rd2:20(T  + D + X)— 42-3  parts. 

40G  + 110R£2=40(T  + D)-90-05  parts,  M = 14-36,  F=767-l,  E = 14-7. 
G — T + D— 0-03811  grain  in  air  (<=14-38,  6=765-72). 

G=I  — 0-02614  grain. 

G — W — 0-02944  grain  in  air  (log  A=7‘07832  — 10). 


G = lb.  No.  17^. 

100  parts  = 0-291 33  grain. 


Scale.  Scale. 

T+D  + X,  G + Y 16-97  G + Y,  T+D  + X 19-52 

19-65  20-65 

18-15  20-07 

T+D  + Y,  G + X 20-82  G + X,  T+D  + Y 14-12 

T + D + R + Y,  G + X 17-10  G + X,  T + D + R + Y 21-55 

T+D  + Y,  G + X 21-15  G + X,  T + D + R + Y 21-01 


113-84  116-92 


12G:A12(T  + D)  + 3R-3-08  parts,  M = ll-91,  F=755-l,  E=12-6. 
Gi:iT  + D + 0-00208  grain  in  air  (<=11-93,  6=754-01). 

G = I — 0-04475  grain. 

G— W + 0-00529  grain  in  air  (log  A=7‘07832— 10). 

100  parts=  0-27861  grain. 


D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale.  Scale. 

T + D + X,  G + Y 19-97  G + Y,  T + D + X 13-44 

19-15  12-12 

18-30  13-85 

20-05  14-44 

13-15  13-2  19-52  14-16 

749-1  13-65  T + D + R + X,  G + Y 16-41  G + Y,  T + D + R + X 16-87 

13-89  14-95 

16-11  15-26 

17-76  15-59 

14-71  17-81 


172-87  148-49 


20(G  + Y):A20(T+D  + X)  + 10R  + 24-38  parts. 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


919 


D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T+D  + R + Y,  G + X 22-82  G+X,  T+D  + R + Y 


23-50 

23-74 

25-00 

13-45  13-45  23-41 

749-3  13-8  21-66 


24-37  

22-85  

25-50  

26-22  

239-07 

20(G  + X) 20(T  + D + Y)  + 20  R + 5-07  parts. 

40G£i40(T+D)  + 30R  + 29-45  parts,  M=13-31,  F=749-2,  E=13-72. 
G^T  + D + 0-01054  grain  in  air  (#=  13-34,  ^>=747-99)- 
G=I— 0-04413  grain. 

Gil!:  W + 0-00591  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7"07832— 10). 

Means  G = I — 0-04427  grain. 

GiiW  + 0-00577  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832— 10). 


Scale. 

23-71 

23- 90 
25-10 

24- 09 
23-62 
21-80 

21- 55 

23- 91 

22- 32 

24- 00 


234-00 


G = lb.  No.  18. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

11-2 

11-2 

752-75 

12 

11-37 

11-37 

752-8 

11-9 

11-5 

11-5 

752-8 

11-95 

11-55 

11  >55 

752-83 

12 

100  parts  = 0-41249  grain. 

* 

I + S + Y,  G + Q+X  16-34 

16-25 

16-59 

16-35 

15-57 

14-77 

15-06 

14-47 

14-66 

14-47 


154-53 


Scale. 

G + Q + X,  I + S + Y 17-80 

18-25 

18-02 

17-54 

17-82 

15-14 

15-84 

16-00 

14-90 

15-82 


167-13 


20(G  + Q + X)ii20(I  + Y)  + 20s + 12-6  parts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

11-65 

11-65 

753-6 

12-1 

11-75 

11-75 

753-7 

12-2 

11-9 

12 

753-7 

12-5 

12 

12 

753-7 

12-5 

I + S + X,  G + Q+Y  20-34 

21-20 

I + 2S  + X,  G + Q + Y 17-55 

17-74 

17-07 

16-86 

15-69 

14-52 

15-90 

16-41 


SCtll6 

G + Q + Y,  I + S + X 18-12 

16-65 

G + Q + Y,  I + 2S  + X 18-92 

19-89 

18-21 

19-29 

17-97 

17-40 

17-84 

17-62 


173-28 


181-91 


20(G  + Q+ Y)£h20(I  + X)  + 36S  — 8-63  parts. 

40(G  + Q):Ci:40I  + 56S  + 3-97  parts,  M=ll-6l,  F=753-23,  E=12-13. 
G+Q:!iI  + 0-0l631  grain  in  air  (<=11-63,  6=752-2). 

G=I — 0-00129  grain. 

G:AW  + 0-01862  grain  in  air  (log  A=7"07832— 10). 


920  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


G = lb.  No.  19 


100  parts=0’40766  grain. 


J). 

C. 

F. 

E.  Scale. 

Scale. 

I + S + Y,  G + Q + X 19-66  G + Q+X,  I + S + Y 

18-52 

18-54  

17-50 

1 1*55 

11-6 

747-6 

12-6  17-76  

17-34 

I8-75  

17-57 

19-04  

17-8O 

11-93 

11-93 

747-4 

12-6  17-50  

16-52 

16-96  

15-60 

16-92  

16-44 

12-07 

12-15 

747-5 

12-9  15-17  

15-55 

16-16  

14-74 

176-46 

167-58 

20(G  + Q+ X) :Ci;20(I  + Y)  + 20s  + 8-88  parts. 

O. 

C. 

F. 

E.  Scale. 

Scale. 

H-2S  + X,  G + Q+Y  18-80  G + Q+Y,  I + 2S  + X 

17-69 

12-8 

12-8 

736-9 

13-35  18-72  

17-54 

17-44  

18-07 

1^50  

16-12 

17-02  

16-92 

12-95 

12-95 

737-1 

16-62  

17-44 

16-01  

17-27 

17-54  

16-87 

13 

13-05 

737-2 

13-1  15-81  

16-45 

17-87  

16-27 

173-33 

170-64 

20(G  + Q+Y)£1:20(I  + X)  + 40S  + 2-69  parts. 

40(G  + Q)^40I  + 60S  + ll-57  parts,  M=12-4,  F=742-28,  E = 12-87. 

G + Q:^iI  + 0-01822  grain  in  air  (^=12-42,  6=741-22). 

G=I- 

0-01473  grain. 

GiiW  + 0-00954  grain  in  air  (log  A=  7-07832  — 10). 

G=lb.  No.  21. 

100  parts= 0-38653  grain. 

J). 

C. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I + Y,  G + Q + X 22-66 

G + Q+  X,  1+  Y 

18-64 

22-77 

18-89 

11-25 

11-25 

750-9 

11-8 

I + R + Y,  G + Q + X 19-71 

G + Q + X,  I + R + Y 

20-71 

19'69 

21-15 

19*15 

20-87 

1 1-4 

11-4 

750-8 

12 

19-17 

21-00 

18-80 

20-56 

19-35 

20-20 

11-5 

11-5 

750-45 

12 

19-14 

20-85 

19-12 

20-04 

199-53 

202-91 

20(G + Q+X):2:  20(1  + Y)  + 16R -3-38  parts. 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


921 


D. 

C. 

F.  E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I + X,  G + Q + Y 

18-21  G + Q + Y,  I + X 

17-90 

19-07  

17-22 

10-5 

10-5 

751-63  11-4  

18-87  

16-16 

18-09  

15-85 

18-52  

15-96 

10-9 

10-9 

751*33  11*6  

16-75  

14-95 

17-06  

14-10 

16-82  

13-62 

11-05 

11-05 

751-20  11*7  

16-27  

13-50 

16-36  

13-25 

176-02 

152-51 

20(G  + Q + Y)£1:20(I  + X)  + 23-51  parts. 

40(G  + Q) 401 + 16R  + 20-1 3 parts,  M=ll-1,  F=751-05,  E=ll-76. 

G + Q— 1 + 0-00647  grain  in  air  (<=11-2,  b 

=760-07). 

G=I  + 0-03971  grain. 

G^  W + O-01779  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7*07832  — 10). 

G=lb.  No.  22. 

100  parts=  0-38541  grain. 

D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I + Y,  G + Q+R  + X 23-66  G + Q + R + X,  I + Y 

24-26 

10-87 

10-87 

756-65 

11-8 

20-81  

22-32 

21-47  

22-30 

20-87  

21-62 

11-35 

11*35 

756-85 

11-8 

19-40  

20-37 

18-45  

20-29 

19-39  

19-45 

11-45 

11-47 

757-30 

11-9 

19-45  

19-62 

18-84  

18-35 

20-21  

18-92 

202-55 

207-50 

20(G  + Q+X)  + 20Rii20(I  + Y)— 4-95  parts. 

D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I+X,  G + Q + R + Y 17-39  G + Q + R + Y,  I + X 

19-59 

18-72  

19-37 

11-55 

11-57 

758-63 

12-1 

17-41  

17-49 

.‘ 16-92  

17-19 

16-65  

16-36 

11-7 

11*7 

758-65 

12-2 

17-96  

16-99 

17-74  

17-82 

18-02  

18-12 

11-85 

11-8 

758-73 

12-3 

17-96  

18-12 

17-52  

17-96 

176-29 

30(G  + Q + Y)  + 20R£120(I  + X) —2-72  parts. 

40(G  + Q)  + 40R£h40I— 7-67  parts,  M = 11'46,  F=757-77,  E=12-06. 
G + Qiil— 0-01205  grain  in  air  (<=1T47,  6=756-74). 

G=I  — 0-01214  grain. 

G^hW— 0-00519  grain  in  air  (log  A=7’07832— 10). 


922  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

10-53 

10-6 

759-15 

11-2 

11 

11 

759-39 

11-6 

11-2 

11-2 

759-7 

11-6 

G=lb.  No.  23. 

100  parts=0’38429  grain. 

Scale. 

I + Y,  G + Q+X  19-82  G + Q+X,  I + Y 

18-96  

18-55  

18-50  

15-56  

14-80  

14-15  

14-67  

20-57  

20-82  

173-40 

20(G  + Q + X)£120(I+Y)  + 34-78  parts. 


Scale. 

16-15 

15-99 

15- 10 
13-62 
12-00 
11-57 
10-59 
10-63 

16- 59 
16-36 

138-62 


I + R + X,  G + Q + Y 


G + Q + Y,  1 + R + X 


Scale. 

18-02 

17-87  

17-65  

17-94  

17-72  

17-21  

17-79  

17-27  

17-01  

17-01  

175-49 

20(G  + Q+Y)£i20('I  + R + X)  — 21-09  parts. 

40(G+Q)£!i: 401  + 20R  + 13-69  parts,  M = 11-15,  F=  759-85,  E=  11-48. 
G + Q^I  + O-00697  grain  in  air  (#=ll-l6,  6=758-88). 

G=I  + 0-01557  grain. 

G:iiW  + 0-0l659  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832— 10). 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

11-25 

11-25 

759-9 

11-4 

11-4 

11-4 

760-3 

11-5 

11-5 

11-5 

760-65 

11-6 

Scale. 

19-60 

20-19 

20-15 

20-02 

20-25 

19-49 

19-65 

19-55 

18-97 

18-71 

196-58 


G = lb.  No.  24. 

100  parts=  0-40700  grain. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I + X,  G + Q + 4R  + Y 22-24 

G + Q + 4R  + Y,  I + X 22-84 

9-6 

9-65 

747-9 

10-6 

22-27 

22-74 

22-02 

21-02 

20-24 

21-97 

20-47 

18-56 

10 

10 

747-9 

10-6 

20-47 

20-32 

19-75 

19-41 

20-50 

19-07 

10-15 

10-15 

747-8 

10-8 

19-12 

18-20 

19-25 

206-33 

20(G  + Q + Y)  + 80R £i: 20(1  + X)  + 4-03  parts. 


18-17 


202-30 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


923 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

10-4 

10-4 

747-8 

11 

10-55 

10-6 

747-7 

11-1 

10-65 

10-7 

747-7 

11-2 

Scale. 

I + Y,  G + Q4-4R  + X 20-41 

20-36 

19-90 

20-02 

I + Y,  G+Q  + 3R  + X 15-47 

14-56 

14-71 

14-72 

14-24 

15-09 

169-48 


Scale. 

G + a + 4R  + X,  I + Y 16-90 

16-67 

16-42 

16-79 

G + Q + 3R  + X,  I + Y 16-36 

16-55 

16-41 

16-05 

15-69 

15-85 


163-69 


20(G  + Q + X)  + 68R£!:20(I  + Y)  + 5-79  parts. 

40(G  + Q)  + 148R£b40I  + 9-82  parts,  M=10-23,  F=747-8,  E=ll. 
G + Q£bI-0-04086  grain  in  air  (^=10-23,  5 = 746-91). 

G=I  — 0-03932  grain. 

G£I:W— 0-03937  grain  in  air  (log  A=:  7-07832  — 10). 


G=lb.  No.  25. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

10-52 

10-55 

768-7 

11-5 

10-85 

10-85 

769-4 

11-65 

11-1 

11-1 

769-7 

11-9 

100  parts= 0-39825  grain. 

Scale. 

I + X,  G + Q + 2R  + Y 17-65 

17-00 

15-40 

15-61 

17-21 

16-11 

18-01 

17-84 

16-86 

18-62 


170-31 


Sc3>lc 

G + Q + 2R  + Y,  I + X 16-42 

15-80 

14-55 

13-94 

16-42 

15-86 

18-65 

18-59 

18-07 

18-20 

166-50 


20(G+Q  + 2R)ii20(I  + X)  + 3-81  parts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

I + Y,  G + a+2R  + X 18-35 

18-91 

Scd-ls 

G + Q + 2R  + X,  I + Y 18-09 

17-57 

11-3 

11-3 

770-2 

11-9 

16-17 

18-04 

18-06 

18-01 

17-82 

17-70 

11-45 

11-45 

770-3 

12 

18-26 

17-37 

17-22 

16-91 

17-70 

17-00 

11-6 

11-6 

770-5 

12-1 

15-77 

14-80 

14-51 

15-64 

172-77 

171-13 

20(G  + Q + 2R  + X)i:20(I  + Y)  + 1-64  part. 

40G  + Q + 2RA40I+ 5-45  parts,  M=ll-13,  F=769-8,  E=ll-84. 
G + Q— I — 0-02218  grain  in  air  (^=11-14,  5=768-77)- 
G=  I + 0-00163  grain. 

G AW  — 0-00368  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832  — 10). 


6 E 


MDCCCLVI. 


924  PROF.  W.  H.  MIL[-ER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


G=lb.  No.  25. 


100  parts=0'39510  grain. 


U.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

I + Y,  G + Q + R + X 24-76  G + Q+R  + X,  I+Y 

24-41  

9-35  9-35  751-3  10-2  24-32  

24-12  

23-01  

9-55  9*6  750-9  10-5  22-61  

22-32  

21-91  

9-9  9-9  749-8  10-6  21-30  

21-44  


230-20 

20(G+Q+X)  + 20R£i20(I  + Y)  + l 4-22  parts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

10-2 

10-2 

748-5 

10-6 

10-35 

10-35 

748-0 

10-65 

10-4 

10-4 

747-55 

10-65 

I + X,  G + Q+Y 


Scale. 

16-95  G + Q + Y,  I + X 

16-72  

15-85  

1.5-22  

15- 51  

16- 04  

15- 64  

16- 24  

17- 52  

16-64  


162-33 


20(G  + Q + Y)^20(I  + X)— 20-42  parts. 

40(G  + Q)  + 20Rii:40I-6-2  parts,  M=9-96,  F=  749-34,  E=  10-53. 
G + Qii:I— 0-00627  grain  in  air  (^=9-96,  6=748-51). 

G= I + 0-00265  grain. 

GiiW  — 0-00266  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832  — 10). 


G = Ib.  No.  25. 


D.  C.  F. 


8-55  8-6 


762-8 


100  parts=0-26918  grain. 


E.  Scale. 

T + D + X,  G + 3R  + Y 17-50 

T + D + X,  G+R  + Y 7-12 

T+D  + X,  G + 2R  + Y 18-80 

19-09 

22-35 

22-24 

22-10 

19-49 

T + D + X,  G + 3R  + Y 23-37 

9-3  23-25 


194-31 


G + 3R  + Y,  T+D  + X 
G+R  + Y,  T + D + X 
G + 2R  + Y,  T + D + X 


G + 3R  + Y,  T+D  + X 


20(G  + Y)  + 44R  £1 20(T  + D + X)  - 1 4-53  parts. 


Scale. 

24-95 

24-65 

23-77 

23-04 

21-67 

20-61 

19-95 

19-86 

18-89 

18-59 


215-98 


Scale. 

18-52 

18-64 

18-66 

18-11 

17- 77 

18- 56 
17-96 

17- 95 

18- 37 
18-21 


182-75 


Scale. 

13-80 

19-19 

22- 75 

24- 15 

25- 40 

23- 15 
22-65 

22-72 

17- 8I 

18- 24 


208-84 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


925 


D. 


»-9 


c. 


8-93 


F.  E.  Scale. 

762-8  9-3  T + D+Y,  G + 2R  + X 19-27  G + 2R  + X,  T+D  + Y 

20-49  

21-62  

20-50  

20-65  

20-70  

20-99  

20-49  

22-22  

22-02  


208-95 

20(G  + X)  + 40R  .2: 20(T  + D + Y)  + 17-93  parts, 

40G  + 84Rii:40(T  + D)  + 3-4  parts,  M=8-74,  F=762-8,  E=9-3. 
Gi2iT  + D— 0-02353  grain  in  air  (<=8-73,  6=762-1). 

G=I  + 0-00113  grain. 

G:2:W  — 0-00418  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7’07832  — 10). 

Means  of  the  three  series  of  comparisons: — 

G=I  + 0-00180  grain. 

GiiW — 0-00351  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832  — 10), 


G = lb.  No.  26. 

100  parts=0-281l6  grain. 


D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T + D + X,  G + Y 21-20  G + Y,  T+D  + X 

14-3  14-35  20-32  

20-97  

22-27  

21-47  

753-9  14-8  18-75  

19-15  

20-20  

18-62  

14-55  14-55  18-25  

19-91  


221-12 

22(G  + Y)£!:22(T+D  + X)+16-58  parts. 


D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T + D + Y,  G + X 17-16  G + X,  T + D + Y 

14- 9  14-87  19-72  

19-97  

19-60  

18-54  

754-4  15-2  19-29  

20-31  

19-67  

18-86  

15- 3  15-3  16-87  

19-02  


209-01 

22(G  + X)il:22(T+D  + Y)  + 37-77  parts. 

44G2i:44(T+D)  + 53-35  parts,  M=14-76,  F=754-15,  E=15. 
G:AT  + D + 0-00347  grain  in  air  (<=  14-78,'6=752-77). 

G=I — 0-00112  grain, 

G2iW  + 0-00002  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832  — 10). 

6 E 2 


Scale. 

20-91 

19- 02 

20- 00 
18-87 

18- 45 

19- 07 
18-81 

17- 77 

19-32 

18- 80 


191-02 


Scale. 

19-67 

18-80 

19-42 

19-46 

19-67 

17-71 

17- 26 

18- 81 
18-07 
18-27 
17-40 


204-54 


Scale. 

16- 56 
15-00 

15- 16 
14-45 

17- 47 

18- 56 

16- 69 
16-29 

13-37 

13-92 

13-77 


171-24 


9-26  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

G = lb.  No.  27. 


100  parts=0‘39809  grain. 


D. 

C. 

. F. 

E. 

11-8 

11-8 

742-6 

12 

11-93 

11-95 

743-6 

12-1 

12 

12 

744-4 

12-2 

Scale. 

I + 2R  + Y,  G+Q  + X 18-09 

18-32 

16-30 

' 16-15 

16-76 

17-12 

16-36 

15-91 

14-85 

14-65 


164-51 


G + Q + X,  I + 2R+Y 


20(G  + Q + X)ii20(I  + 2R  + Y)  + 2-91  parts. 


Scale. 

17-52 

17-06 

16-75 

16- 41 

17- 07 

13- 97 
15-24 

14- 84 

15- 40 
15-34 


161-60 


D. 

c. 

F. 

E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

I + 2R  + X,  G + Q + Y 

18-46 

G + Q + Y,  I + 2R  + X 

17-12 

17-13 

16-05 

11-05 

11-1 

739-83 

12  

14-47 

12-70 

13-45 

13-91 

19-89 

18-46 

11-47 

11-5 

740-7 

12  

18-46 

19-22 

17-14 

17-47 

18-30 

18-02 

11-6 

11-63 

740-97 

12  

17-11 

17-25 

18-31 

15-51 

172-74  167-71 


20(G  + Q + Y)ii:20(I  + 2R  + X)  + 5-03  parts. 

40(G  + Q)2i40(I  + 2R)  + 7-94  parts,  M = ll-65,  F=742-01,  E=12-05. 
G + Q— 1 + 0-02342  grain  in  air  (^=  11-67?  &=741''02). 

G = I + 0-01405  grain. 

G£!:W  + 0-01640  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7-07832  — 10). 


G = lb.  No.  28. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 


14-4  14-4 


772-7  14-1 


100  parts  =0-30166  grain. 

Scftlc 

T + D + X,  G + 2R  + Y 20-67 

20-21 

19-37 

20-55 

20-22 

17-62 

18-75 

19-57 

17-46 

20-50 


194-92 


Scale. 

G + 2R  + Y,  T + D + X 20-67 

22-60 

21-49 

19-46 

18-54 

19-52 

18-80 

21-97 

21-19 

20-72 


20(G+ Y)  + 40R£1:20(T  + D + X)-10-04  parts. 


204-96 


D. 


13-95 


D. 


.13-3 


D. 


13-65 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

772-7  14-1  T + D + Y,  G + 2R  + X 21-59 

21-65 

21-47 

21-46 

20-44 

13-95  T+D  + Y,  G + R + X 17*70 

17*30 

16-71 

15*39 

15-81 


189*52 


G + 2R  + X,  T + D + Y 


G + R + X,  T + D + Y 


20(G  + X)  + 30R:O:20(T  + D + Y)  + 3-14  parts. 

40G  + 70R:ii:40(T+D)-6-9  parts,  M=14-17,  F=:772*7,  E^H-l. 
G:2:T  + D — 0-02032  grain  in  air  (^=14-19,  ^=771*39). 

G = I— 0-00416  grain. 

G — W — 0-00635  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7*07832— 10). 


G = lb.  No.  29. 


100  parts=  0-29084  grain. 

C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T + D + X,  G + R + Y 20-79  G+R  + Y,  T+D  + X 

22-06  

21-35  

20-75 

19*75  

13-3  768-8  13-85  22-22  

21-07  

21-25  

20-67  

21-07  

20-35  

231-33 

22(G  + Y)  + 22R  ^22(T  + D + X)  — 24-55  parts. 


C.  F.  E. 


13-65  767-8  14 


Scale. 

T+D  + Y,  G + R + X 22-19 

23-92 

24-87 

25-59 

23-96 

T + D + Y,  G + X 19-92 

20-27 

19*24 

19*24 

20-24 

19*95 

238-39 


G + R + X,  T + D + Y 


G+X,  T+D  + Y 


22(G  + X)  + 1 OR  22( T + D + Y)  + 1 8-0  parts. 

44G  + 32R:0:44(T  + D)-6-55  parts,  M=13-47,  F=768-3,  E = 13-92. 
G:2:T  + D — 0-00867  grain  in  air  (^=13-5,  6=767*04). 

G=I  — 0-00222  grain. 

Gi2:W  + 0*00296  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832— 10). 


9*27 


Scale. 

18-40 

17*57 

16-25 

18-16 

16-97 

21-74 

19*05 

19*22 

19*66 

19*36 

186-38 


Scale. 

22- 32 

24- 92 

25- 32 

23- 36 
21-85 

24- 47 
20-56 
23-87 
22'7 1 
23-31 
23-19 

255-88 


Scale. 

20-37 

19- 62 
19*45 
18*32 
16-42 

20- 35 
20-97 
20-59 
23-22 
20-88 
20-20 

126-21 


9-28  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


G = lb.  No.  30. 


100  parts=0’41249  grain. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I + X,  G + Q + Y 

Scale. 

17-00 

G + Q + Y,  I + X 

Scale. 

20-96 

11-65 

11-65 

754-7 

12-8 

18-65 

17-57 

20-11 

20-35 

11-93 

11-93 

755-0 

12-9 

16-87 

16-20 

16-10 

19-82 

19-86 

18-70 

12-10 

12-10 

755-0 

12-9 

15-36 

14-97 

18-09 

17-04 

12-25 

12-3 

754-9 

13 

14-79 

14-37 

161-88 

17-76 

17-84 

190-53 

20(G  + Q + Y)£120(I  + X)— 28-65  parts. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

E. 

I+Y,  G + Q + X 

Scale. 

16-10 

G + Q+X,  I + Y 

Scale. 

16-75 

12-55 

12-55 

754-5 

13-05 

15-79 

14-90 

16-97 

16-50 

12-55 

12-6 

754-25 

13-1 

14- 77 

15- 06 
15-05 

16-42 

15-24 

15-71 

12-65 

12-7 

754-1 

13-1 

15-32 

14-74 

15-51 

14-45 

12-75 

12-8 

754-1 

13-0 

14-62 

14-87 

151-22 

14-67 

14-99 

157-21 

20(G  + Q+X)2i:20(I  + Y)  — 5-99  parts. 

40(G  + Q):ii40I-34-64  parts,  M=12-31,  F=754-57,  E = 12-98. 
G + Q— 1 — 0-00357  grain  in  air  (t=12-33,  6=753-42). 

G = I — 0-00269  grain. 

G^W  — 0-00140  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832  — 10). 


G = lb.  No.  30. 


D.  C.  F.  E. 

7-55  7-6 

762-2  8-3 


100  parts= 0-24737  grain. 

Scale. 

T + D + Y,  G + 2R  + X 20-32 

21-12 

19-79 

19-31 

T + D + Y,  G + R + X 15-86 

15-37 

14-62 

16-02 

16-67 

16-10 


175-18 


Scale. 

G + 2R  + X,  T + D + Y 17-90 

16-85 

14-86 

1 5*8£ 

G + R+'X,  T + D + Y 21-00 

20-59 

21-20 

20-15 

21-00 

19-57 


20(G  + X)  + 28R£b  20(T  + D + Y)  — 13-76  parts. 


188-94 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


929 


D.  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

762-2  8-3  T + D + X,  G + 2R  + Y 14-95  G + 2R  + Y,  T + D + X 

14-74  

15-31  

16-15  

7-9  7-93  16-26  

16-02  

17-05  

16-75  

15-60  

15-30  


158-12 

20(G  + Y)+  40Rii20(T  + D + X)  — 7-22  parts. 

40G  + 68R£1:40(T  + D)-20-98  parts,  M=7-74,  F=762-2,  E=8-3. 
GilT  + D — 0-02053  grain  in  air  (^=7*72,  Z)=76l-62). 

G = I — 0-00072  grain. 

Gill  W + 0-00052  grain  in  air  (log  (\=7-07832  — 10). 

A mean  of  the  two  series  of  comparisons  gives — 

G = I — 0-00170  grain. 

GiiW  — 0-00044  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7*07832— 10). 


G=lb.  No.  31. 

100  parts  =0-28531  grain. 


D. 

c. 

F. 

7-6 

7-6 

739-7 


7-9  7-85 

8 8 

739-6 


D. 

C. 

F. 

8-13 

8-1 

8-2 

8-2 

739-65 

8-3 

8-25 

739-65 

8-35 

8-3 

E. 

T + D + X,  G + Y 


8-2 


8-4 


24(G  + Y)  24(T  + D + X)  - 
E 

T + D + Y,  G + X 


8-6 


8-6 


Scale. 

18-60  G + Y,  T + D + X 

18- 57  

19- 04 

18-40  

17-55  

17-44  

17-04  

17-86  

17-67  

16-70  

16- 60  

17- 01  


212-48 
;-3  parts. 


Scale. 

15- 80  G + X,  T + D + Y 

16- 16  

16-85  

14- 84  

16-70  

15- 46  

16- 79  

15- 02  

16- 41  

15-21  

15-57  

15-75  

190-56 


24(G  + X)0:24(T  + D + Y)+ 17-55  parts. 

48G^48(T  + D)  + 15-25  parts,  M=8-01,  F=739-65,  E=8-45. 
Gi!:T  + D + 0-00091  grain  in  air  (<=8-0,  §=739-08). 

G = I — 0-04410  grain. 

G£iW+ 0-00088  grain  in  air  (logA=7-07832  — 10). 


Scale. 

15-34 

15-55 

1 5- 06 

16- 41 
18-32 

17- 14 

16- 45 

17- 97 
16-45 
16-65 


165-34 


Scale. 

19-81 

19-26 

19-11 

19-06 

18-46 

18-.52 

17-22 

17-39 

16-47 

16-45 

16-92 

16-11 


214-78 


Scale. 

15-45 

15-16 

14-75 

14-41 

14-90 

14-02 

14-67 

14-02 

13- 45 

14- 70 
13-59 
13-89 

173-01 


930  PROF.  W.  H,  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


G = ]b.  No.  32. 


D.  C. 

15-9  15*8 

](}-03  15-95 

]6  15-9 

1).  C. 

15- 85  15-8 

16  15-95 

16- 15  16-05 


100  parts=  0-31 852  grain. 


T + D + Y,  G + X 

T + D + R + Y,  G + X 

Scale. 

17-60 

18-42 

18-60 

G + X,  T + D + Y 

G + X,  T + D + R + Y 

18-61 

T + D + Y,  G + X 

21-56 

21-86 

G + X,  T + D + Y 

22-50 

T + D + R + Y,  G + X 

18-97 

18-07 

17-35 

17-92 

22-29 

20-90 

G + X,  T + D + R + Y 

T + D + Y,  G + X 

G + X,  T + D + Y 

254-65 

26(G  + X)il26(T  + D + Y)  + 14R  + 2-1  parts. 


758-9  16-4 


Scale. 

T + D + X,  G+Y  24-36 

24-32 

23-51 

24-89 

23-80 

23-69 

T + D+R  + X,  G + Y 19-82 

20-35 

19-42 

20-62 

20-11 

20-04 

19-01 

283-94 


G + Y,  T + D + X 


G + Y,  T+D  + R + X 


26(G  + Y)£!:26(T  + D + X)  + 14R  + 3-48  parts. 

52G=i52(T  + D)  + 28R  + 5-58  parts,  M=15-94,  F=758-35,  E=l6-2. 
G£!:T  + D + 0-00643  grain  in  air  (<=15-96,  6=756-81). 

G = I-0-03431. 


G=:lb.  No.  32. 

100  parts  = 0-31974  grain. 


]).  C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T + D + X,  G + Y 24-51 

26-07 

15-3  15-2  26-04 

26-12 

15-4  15-4  26-41 

26-19 

15-55  15-5  25-81 

764-1  16  24-31 

15-7  15-65  25-00 

25-10 

15-8  15-75  24-12 

24-04 

25-05 


328-77 


G + Y,  T + D + X 


Scale. 

13-85 

20- 95 

21- 72 
21-22 
18-04 
18-65 
18-94 
20-12 
21-66 
21-96 
20-42 
17-97 
17-05 

252-55 


Scale. 

19-81 

21-04 

21-35 

19-42 

21- 05 
19-55 

22- 54 

21- 74 

22- 47 
22-59 

22- 49 

23- 10 
23-31 


280-46 


Scale. 

26-27 

26-64 

26-74 

26-10 

26-61 

26-66 

25-47 

24- 99 

25- 22 
25-52 

23- 97 

24- 22 
24-70 


26(G  + Y)£!:26(T  + D + X)-4-34  parts. 


333-11 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


D. 

C. 

F. 

15-25 

15-2 

15-5 

15-4 

15-6 

15-5 

768-S 

15-75 

15-7 

15-95 

15-85 

16-03 

15-98 

26(G  + X) 

£i26(T 

52Gil52(T  + D)- 

G^T  + D 

-0-001 

Mean  ...G 

= 1-0' 

D. 

C. 

F. 

13-05 

13-0 

13-3 

13-25 

761-1 

13-5 

13-5 

761-0 

13-7 

13-65 

13-75 

13-7 

D. 

C. 

F. 

12-85 

12-8 

13-0 

13-0 

759-7 

13-25 

13-2 

13-4 

13-35 

13-5 

13-45 

E. 


16 


T + D + Y,  G + X 


Scale. 

25-15 

25- 72 

26- 32 

24- 44 

25- 21 
24-84 

24- 55 

25- 40 
24-79 
24-50 
24-76 
24-05 
24-35 

325-08 


G + X,  T + D + Y 


E. 


14-1 


14-4 


G = lb.  No.  33. 

100  parts  = 0*3 1374  grain. 

Scale. 

T + D + Y,  G + X 17-00 

15-95 

16-09 

16-70 

16-77 

16-45 

16-84 

20-40 

19- 79 

20- 80 
20-52 
19-39 
19-91 
16-95 


G + X,  T + D + Y 


T + D + Y,  G + R + X 


G + R + X,  T+D  + Y 


T + D + Y,  G + X 

253-56 

28(G  + X)  + 12R£i:28(T  + D + Y)-0-81  part. 


G + X,  T + D + Y 


E. 


14 


T + D + X,  G + Y 
T + D+’X,G  + R + Y 


T + D + X,  G + Y 


758-5 


14-4 


Scale. 

19-19  G + Y,  T+D  + X 

19-85  

23-47  G+R  + Y,  T + D + 5 

22-44  

22-20  

22-37  

21-57  

21-25  

18-01 

16- 72 

17- 77 

18- 57 
17-20 
17-16 


G+Y,  T + D + X 


277-77 


MDCCCLVI. 


28(G  + Y)  + 1 2 R 28(T  + D + Y)  + 2-74  parts. 

56G  + 24R:ii56(T  + D)  + l-93  pa'rt,  M=:13-31,  F=:760-07,  E=14-22. 

G ^T  + D — 0-00474  grain  in  air  13-34,  6 = 758-77)- 
G = I — 0-04144  grain.  GiUW— 0-00063  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832— 10). 

6 F 


931 


Seale. 

27-26 

27-59 

27-80 

26-40 

26-85 

26-37 

25- 45 

26- 56 
26-46 

25-12 

25-26 

24-75 

24-47 

340-34 


Scale. 

20-30 

19- 35 

20- 39 
19-27 
19-97 

19- 89 

20- 50 
17-05 

16-65 

16-02 

16-27 

14- 15 

15- 54 

19-02 


254-37 


Scale. 

23- 41 

24- 49 

19- 09 
18-21 
18-79 
18-51 

18- 52 

16-90 

20- 46 

19- 65 

19- 62 

20- 75 

18-34 

18-29 

2^-03 


932  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


G = lb.  No.  34. 


D. 

6- 85 

7- 05 
7*25 
7-5 
7*1 
7*4 


D. 

6’35 

6‘35 


6-63 

6-65 

6-85 

6*5 

6-7 


D. 
14*8 
15 
1 5 

15-05 

14-93 


100  parts=  0-28057  grain. 


C. 

6-8 

7-0 

7-25 

7*45 

7-1 

7-35 


F E 

T + D + X,  G + R + Y 
T + D + X,  G + 2R  + Y 


760-0  7-8 


759-8  8 


QJpolp 

20-10  G + R + Y,  T + D + X 

25-47  G + 2R  + Y,  T + D + X 

24-92  

24-96  

22-87  

22-60  

20-92  

20-72  

20- 15  

21- 42  

21-25  

20-64  

20- 99  

21- 50  


308-51 


28(G  + Y)  + 52R  28(T  + D + X)  + 1 0-84  parts. 


C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

6-3  T+D  + Y,  G + 2R  + X 28-31  G + 2R  + X,  T + D + Y 

28-52  

6-5  20-42  

20-65  

18-99  

6-6  18-47  

6-6  T + D + Y,  G + R + X 13-35  G + R + X,  T + D + Y 

757-3  7-1  14-25  

13-16  

6-8  15-27  

13-50  

6-5  18-02  

17-92  

6-65  19-35  


260-18 

28(G  + X)  + 40R  £1: 28(T  + D + X )- 1 9-72  parts. 

56G+92R:ii:56(T  + D)  — 8-88  parts,  M=6-87,  F=758-7,  E=7-45. 
G:2:T  + D — 0-01904  grain  in  air  (<=6-84,  6=738-23). 

G = I — 0-04584  grain. 

Gil:  W — 0-00089  grain  in  air  (log  A=  7-07832  — 10). 

G=  lb.  No.  35. 


100  parts=0-30126  grain. 

C.  F.  E.  Scale. 

T+D  + X,  G + Y 21-55  G + Y,  T + D + X 
14-7  T+D  + X,  G + R + Y 25-27  G + R + Y,  T + D + X 

25-50  

15  24-47  

23-45  

14- 95  24-11  

771-9  15-6  24-57  

23-92  

15- 05  24-82  

23-89  

23-81  

14-9  24-40  

24-42  


315-18 


Scale. 

28-05 

23-94 

23-44 

23-62 

20- 95 

21- 32 
19-29 

19- 47 
19-86 

20- 17 

19- 52 

20- 05 
19-55 
18-44 


297-67 


Scale. 

26-89 

26-29 

16-22 

17-15 

17- 17 
15-84 
19-14 

18- 75 

17- 32 

18- 69 
17-81 
22-20 
23-11 
23-32 


279-90 


Scale. 

27-80 

25-90 

24- 81 

25- 29 
23-77 

22- 99 

23- 46 

24- 04 

23- 22 

24- 51 
24-10 
23-66 
23  56 

317-11 


26(G  + Y)  + 24  R ii  26(T  + D + X)  - 1 -93  part. 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS.  933 


D. 

C. 

F.  E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

T + D + Y,  G + X 

21-72  G + X,  T + D + Y 

27-60 

14-7 

14-6 

T + D+Y,G  + R + X 

25-81  G + R + X,  T + D + Y 

24-32 

25-66  

25-32 

24-35  

24-16 

14-9 

14-85 

26-31  

25-01 

24-80  

24-60 

772  15-6  

24-45  

24-26 

15-05 

15 

25-42  

24-16 

24-02  

23-64 

24-29  

23-12 

15-13 

15-1 

24-59  

23-52 

25-40  

24-25 

24-90  

23-56 

321-72 

317-52 

26(G  + X)  + 24R£h26(T+D  + Y)  + 4-2  parts. 

52G4-48R£h52(T+D)  + 2-27  parts,  M=14-92,  F=77l'95,  E=15-6. 

Gi^T  + D — 0-01031  grain  in  air  (<=14-95, 

, 5=770-45). 

G = I — 0-04019  grain. 

G£bW  — 0-00041  grain  in  air  (log  A=7‘07832  — 10). 

G=lb.  No.  36. 

100  parts= 0-307298  grain. 

D. 

C. 

F.  E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

14-8 

14-7 

T + D + Y, G+R  + X 

24-50  G + R + X,  T+D  + Y 

26-19 

25-12  

25-70 

25-31  

26-95 

25-17  

26-07 

15-15 

15-1 

23-89  

26-46 

24-86  

25-65 

772-4  16-2  

25-05  

26-60 

15-35 

15-25 

25-61  

24-61 

26-57  

26-56 

772-4  16-4  

24-52  

24-94 

15-35 

15-25 

25-25  

26-05 

25-77  

26-11 

25-75  

24-92 

327-37 

336-81 

26(G  + X)  + 26R  ^ 26(T  + D + Y)  -9-44  parts. 

D. 

C. 

F.  E. 

Scale. 

Scale. 

T + D + X,G  + R+Y 

18-24  G + R + Y,  T + D + X 

22-09 

14-55 

14-5 

17-56  

20-46 

18-91  

20-46 

776-3  15-5  

16-92  

18-44 

16-11  

19-29 

14-7 

14-6 

15-76  

18-11 

T + D + X,G  + 2R  + Y 

19-71  G + 2R  + Y, T + D + X 

15-59 

19-66  

15-31 

14-9 

14-8 

20-56  

14-60 

776-1  15-5  T + D + X,  G + R + Y 

16-15  G + R + Y, T + D + X 

18-60 

16-99  

19-12 

15 

14-9 

16-67  

19-34 

17-05  

18-40 

230-29 

239-81 

26(G  + Y)  + 32R£2:26(T  + D + X)-9-52  parts. 

52G  + 58R£i:52(T  + D)  — 18-96  parts,  M = 

14-93,  F=774-3,  E=15-9. 

G — T+ D— 0-01374  grain  in  air  (<=14-95, 

5=772-76). 

G = I — 0-04488  grain.  G — W— 0-00209  grain  in  air  (log  A=7‘07832  — 10). 

6 F 2 


934  PUOF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


G = lb.  No.  36. 


D. 

c. 

F. 

7-4 

7-35 

755-6 

7-55 

7-5 

D. 

c. 

F. 

7-65 

7-6 

755-6 

7-8 

7-75 

E. 


8 


100  parts=0'28057  grain. 

Scfllc 

T + D + Y,G+R  + X 23-57  G + R + X,T  + D + Y 

19-09  

18-51  

19-22  

17-69  

17-90  


115-98 


1 2(G  + X + R)  1 2(T  + D + X)  - 22-37  parts. 


E. 

T + D + X,  G+R  + Y 


8-2 


Scale. 

16-91  G + R+Y,  T+D  + X 

16- 97  

17- 64  

17-76  

16-61  

16-54  


102-43 


12(G  + Y+R)£:hl2(T  + D + X)  — 19-24  parts. 

24(G  + R)£h24(T+Dj— 41-61  parts,  M=7-5,  F=755-6,  E=8-l. 

G£hT  + D — 0-01618  grain  in  air  (^=7-48,  6=755-05). 

G = 1 — 0-04480  grain, 

G — W — 0-00206  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832  — 10). 

Mean...G=I  — 0-04484  grain.  G^W— 0-00207  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832— 10). 


Scale. 

28-29 

23-11 

22-09 

21-70 

22-11 

21-05 


138-35 


Scale. 

20-04 

20-06 

20-52 

20-50 

20-45 

20-10 

121-67 


The  10-/6.  Weight. 

A weight  of  10  lbs.,  or  the  weight  of  a gallon  of  water,  protected  by  electro-gild- 
ing, was  constructed  by  Mr.  Oertling.  Let  D denote  the  sum  of  the  secondary 
standards.  Nos.  9,  11,  12,  13,  14,  16,  \7a,  176,  29,30;  E the  sum  of  Nos.  18,  19, 
21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  27,  28,  together  with  a weight  Pd,  for  which  t>Pd=822-792, 
Pd  ibW-p 0-00169  grain  in  air  (log  A = 7'07832— 10) ; F the  sum  of  Nos.  1,  2,  3, 
4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  10,  26;  T the  weight  of  10  lbs.  The  balance  employed,  made  by 
Mr.  Oertling  and  lent  by  him  for  the  purpose  of  weighing  T,  has  pans  capable  of 
being  interchanged  without  taking  out  the  weights  contained  in  them.  The  weights 
of  the  pans  will  be  denoted  by  X and  Y.  Each  end  of  the  beam  carries  a pointer, 
behind  which  is  fixed  an  ivory  scale  with  about  50  divisions  to  an  inch.  Every  fifth 
division  is  marked  by  a longer  line.  The  interval  between  two  such  consecutive  lines 
is  one  part  of  the  scale.  The  reading  increases  on  placing  a small  weight  in  the 
left-hand  pan.  The  index  and  scale  were  viewed  through  a telescope  placed  at  a 
distance  of  about  12  feet  from  the  scale.  The  absolute  weight  of  water  (/=  14-87) 
displaced  by  T was  8378-8  grains.  Hence  Fr=8379-4.  i;D  = 8561-006, 17E.-8538-336, 
yF  = 8492-141.  In  air  for  which  log  A = 7‘07832— 10,  D:£2:10W  — 0-06794  grain, 
E:i2:  lOW-f-0‘02612  grain,  F ^ lOW-1-0-08487  grain. 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


935 


1 part=0‘1355  grain. 


Scale. 

T + Y,  D + 0-06gr.  + X 10*27 

9-75 

9*84 

9*45 

9*65 

T + X,  D + 0*06  gr.  + Y 8*93 

9*21 

8*60 

8*71 

8*78 

T + Y,  D + X 10-51 

9*58 

9*72 

11*11 

10*82 

10*79 

T + X,  D + Y 10*49 

10*71 

T+X,  D + 0*lgr.  + Y 10*10 

9*71 

T + X,  D + 0*2gr.  + Y 9*06 

9-54 

T + Y,  D + 0*lgr.+X  10*91 

11*01 

T + Y,  D + 0*2gr.  + X 10*17 

10*51 

10-10 

9-97 

T + X,  D + 0*2  gr.  + Y 10*65 

10*94 

10*46 

; 10*67 

10*89 

10*15 


341*78 


Scale. 


D + 0*06  gr.  + X,  T + Y 9*65 

9*34 

9-14 

9*28 

9-12 

D + 0*06  gr.+ Y,  T+ X 9*36 

9-60 

9*74 

9*33 

9*43 

D + X,  T + Y 7*37 

5*62 

8*16 

6*12 

7*75 


D + Y,  T + X 8*47 

8*01 

D + 0*1  gr.  + Y,  T + X 8*87 

8*60 

D + 0*2gr.  + Y,  T+X  9*04 

8*72 

D + 0*01  gr.  + X,  T + Y 8*70 

8*06 

D + 0*2gr.  + X,  T + Y 9*22 

9*36 

8*91 

9*06 

D + 0*2gr.+ Y,  T + X 9*93 


10*17 

9*65 

10*05 

10*10 

10*24 

302*56 


68T£!:68D  + 6*8  grain + 39*22  parts. 

T:^i:D  + 0*l781  grain  in  air  (<=16*9,  &=759'4). 
Til:  10VV  + 0*1080  grain  in  air  (log  A=7*07832- 


Scale. 

T + Y,  E + X 11*45 

11*21 

11*27 

10*76 

10*91 

T + X,  E + Y 10*96 

10*44 

10-85 

11*96 

12*92 


112*73 


10). 


Scale. 

E + X,  T + Y 9*55 

9-65 

9-42 

9*70 

9*46 

E + Y,  T + X 9*47 

10*62 

9*90 

10*09 

10*00 

97^6 


20Tii20E  + 14*87  parts. 

T£!:E  + 0*1007  grain  in  air  (i=17*2,  6=755*0). 
Tii:10W  + 0*1262  grain  in  air  (log  A=7'07832  — 10). 


936  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Scale. 

T+X,  F + Y 10-41 

10-52 

11-30 

10-89 

10-86 

T + Y,  F + X 10-96 

10-00 

10-30 

10-94 

10-40 

106-58 


Scale. 

F + Y,  T + X 10-36 

11-76 

11-84 

10-41 

11-67 

F + X,  T+Y  10-15 

9-91 

9-62 

9-35 

9-45 


104-52 


20T ^ 20F + 2-06  parts. 

T£1:F+0-0140  grain  in  air  (^=17-6,  5 = 754-9). 
T£i:10W  + 0-0986  grain  in  air  (log  A=  7-07832  — 10). 

Mean T£h  10  VV+ 0-1 11  grain  in  air  (log  A=7-07832— 10). 


Hence  the  10-ib.  weight  appears  to  be  O’l  11  grain  heavier  than  ten  commercial 
pounds  of  the  density  of  the  lost  standard,  weighed  in  air,  thermometer  65°‘67  F., 
barometer  29'78  inches,  the  mercury  being  reduced  to  the  freezing-point  (5=18'7, 
6=:755'64)  at  Somerset  House. 


Exchequer  Kilogramme. 

A kilogramme  of  gun-metal  protected  by  electro-gilding,  was  constructed  by 
Mr.  Oertling  for  the  use  of  the  Exchequer.  The  absolute  weight  of  the  water 
(5=17*29)  displaced  by  it  was  1852*212  grains.  Hence,  denoting  this  kilogramme 
by  1852*82,  logtiBl  = 3*267834,  Al^=8*32910.  Let  91  denote  the  Kilogramme 

des  Archives,  C the  English  kilogramme  of  platinum.  L the  kilogramme  type 
laiton,  and  let  (B  denote  together  with  a bit  of  platinum  wire,  the  weight  of  which 
was  1*40002  grain,  by  a mean  of  six  comparisons  with  the  following  weights  belong- 
ing to  Barrow’s  balance: — 1 gr.-l-0*4  gr.,  and  1 gr. -1-0*3  gr.-f- 0*1  gr. 


100  parts=0-68159  grain. 


®+Y. 

®+X,  <9+Y. 

C9+Y,  ®+X. 

e+X,  (S+Y. 

13-76 

14-07 

15-72 

18-26 

19-24 

16-94 

17-17 

18-42 

18-70 

C=  14-7,  D=14-65 

18-05 

II 

D=15-3 

18-17 

18-05 

17-50 

16-69 

18-24 

18-61 

19*25 

17*96 

17*72 

17-94 

19-29 

15-27 

18-15 

17-64 

F=762-6,  E=15-5 

19-19 

17*00  F=762-6, 

E=15-6 

17*99 

18-10 

18-05 

16-07 

16-31 

18-01 

17-70 

14-51 

15-47 

17*17 

C=  15-1,  D=15-l 

18-54 

14-45  C=  15-55, 

D = 15-57 

18-21 

16-50 

18-45 

15-87 

16-19 

17-99 

1 8-36 

15-89 

17*00 

211-71 

215-39 

191-72 

210-13 

48(©  A:  48®  + 22-09  parts. 

ia+l-39687grain  A®  in  air  (^=  15-17,  5=761-13). 
displaces  2*26684  grs.  of  air;  (0 — 1*39687  gr.  of  platinum  displaces  0*89281  gr.  of 
air.  Therefore  1^  = 0 — 0*02284  gr.  But  C=9[— 0*02412  gr.  Hence 

1^  = 91  — 0*04696  grain. 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


937 


In  air  for  vvhicli  log  A=7‘07832— 10,  displaces  2‘2211grs.,  and  91— r4gr.  of 
platinum  displaces  0*8998 1 gr.  Therefore  IBv+r3683  gr.  91,  But  9i:0:IL-l-T3673  gr. 
Hence,  when  weighed  in  air  of  the  above-mentioned  density,  iBv  appears  to  beO'OOlOgr. 
lighter  than 

Troy  Ounce  fVeights. 

A series  of  troy  ounce  weights  from  500  ounces  down  to  0*001  ounce,  of  gun-metai 
protected  by  electro-gilding,  was  constructed  by  Messrs.  Ladd  and  Streathpield  for 
the  use  of  the  Exchequer.  Each  weight  will  be  designated  by  the  number  expressing 
its  approximate  value  in  troy  ounces,  with  a letter  to  distinguish  it  from  other 
weights  of  nearly  the  same  value.  For  the  weights  marked  s,  t,  z log  A = 0*92768  ; 
for  those  marked  m,  n log  A=0*92501.  T denotes  the  platinum  troy  pound  ; U the 
lost  standard  troy  pound,  or  12  troy  ounces.  The  comparisons  of  different  combina- 
tions of  these  weights  with  T,  and  with  one  another,  gave  the  following  results: — 


No.  of  Comp. 

S'"* 

t. 

b. 

28 

An  + At-\-2n  + 2t  bib T— 0*02166 

18*6 

754*6 

24 

\Qn  + ^{2n  + 2t)  biT-|- 0*00078 

19*14 

739*47 

20 

lO^  + ls-hla;  £bT-F0*01370 

17*13 

751*52 

24 

56--|-4it+ls-t-2if  biT-l- 0*00228 

17*78 

760*1 

48 

10s+ls-(-lx  £1:T+ 0*00774 

17*9 

755*68 

32 

\Qm  + 2m  £i:T  + 0*00060 

17*66 

763*62 

32 

4s  + 4»j  + 2s  + 2rrtbiT  — 0*0031 1 

16*5 

763*44 

In  air  for  which  log  A = 

7*07832-10, 

gr. 

An-\-Al+2n  + 2t  biT-0-02133 
\Qn  + \{2n  + ^t)  £bT-h0*00253 

10«+ls-)-lir  £bT  + 0-01387 
bs  + U+Xs  + ’Zt  £bT  + 0-00688 
10s+ls+l:c  £}:T  + 0-00925 
10?w  + 2>w  £bT-|-0*00781 

+ + £bT-l- 0*00639 

T ^U-0*00745 


Since  these  weights,  the  densities  of  which  do  not  differ  much  from  that  of  the  lost 
standard  U,  are  intended  for  use  as  commercial  weights  without  applying  any  correc- 


►r  the  weight  of  the 

air  displaced,  = may  be  substituted  for 

allies  in 

terms  of  U 

in  air  for  which  log  A=7'07832—  10. 

oz.  gr. 

4n  + 4if4-2w-|-2/!  =12  — 0*02878 

1 

\t)n  + \(2n-{-2t)  =12  — 0*00492 

2 

lOf-l-ls+la;  =12-1-0*00642 

3 

5s+4^-f  ls-t-2^  =12-0*00057 

4 

lOs+ls-t-la:  =12-1-0*00180 

5 

10m-|-2/»  =12  + 0*00036 

6 

4s  + 4/?i  + 2s  + 2;n  =12  — 0*00106 

7 

No.  of  Comp. 

gr- 

10 

At 

= 2f  + 2w 

+ 0*01685 

8 

10 

An 

= 2#+2w 

— 0*00090 

9 

26 

2t 

= 2w 

+ 0*01121 

10 

24 

10« 

= 5s+5m 

+ 0*00188 

11 

16 

5s 

+ 0*00041 

12 

10 

Is 

= Im 

+ 0*00046 

13 

938  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


50 

la; 

= ls 

+ 0-00074 

12 

4<+ls 

= 5s 

+ 0-00224 

12 

lOi! 

= 5s+4^+  Is 

+ 0-00270 

12 

u 

= 2t+  ls  + la; 

+ 0-00217 

28 

l5+  la; 

= 2t 

+ 0-00322 

8 

3s 

— 2t-\-  la; 

+ 0-00125 

16 

Zni 

= 2m+  Is 

+ 0-00030 

10 

Is 

= lz 

+ 0-00017 

20 

4m 

= 2s  + 2m 

+ 0-00059 

20 

4s 

= 2s+2m 

+ 0-00059 

36 

2m 

= 2s 

+ 0-00032 

20 

ls+  la; 

= 2(0‘5s  + 0'5m) 

+ 0-00040 

20 

0”5s 

= 0’5m 

+ 0-00001 

6 

0'4m  + 0’4s 

=2{0'2n+  0"2s) 

+ 0-00013 

10 

Is 

= 0-4s+0-4m+0-2s 

+ 0-00016 

16 

0‘2s 

= 0'271 

+ 0-00049 

10 

0-4s 

= 0"4m 

+ 0-00029 

10 

0-2s 

= 0‘ls  + 0‘lm 

+ 0-00024 

10 

O’lm 

= 0-ls 

+ 0-00070 

6 

0‘3s+  0'3m 

= 2 X 0'2s  + 0'ls  + 0'lm 

+ 0-00045 

6 

0'ls+  0'1»M 

= 2(0-05s+0-05m) 

+ 0-00019 

10 

0'05/rt 

= 0-05s 

+ 0-00005 

6 

0'05s 

= 0"025s  + 0‘025m 

— 0-00013 

6 

0'025m 

= 0-025s 

+ 0-00018 

4 

0-ls 

= 0-04S+  0-04m  + K^'O^s  + 0-02m)  + 0-00020 

0-02S 

= 0-02m 

+ 0-00022 

0-04s 

= 0-02s+0-02m 

+ 0-00017 

0'04m 

= 0”04s 

+ 0-00010 

4 

0-02s 

= 0-01s+0*01m 

— 0-00051 

4 

O-Ols 

= 0-01m 

+ 0-00038 

8 

0*03s 

= 0-02s+  O-Ols 

+ 0-00054 

20 

O-Ols 

= 0-004s4-0'004m  + 

i(0-002s  + 0-002m)  +0-00030 

10 

0'004s 

= 0-002s+0-002m 

— 0-00041 

10 

0‘004m 

= 0-002s+0-002m 

— 0-00032 

6 

0-002S 

= 0-001s  + 0-00l7* 

— 0-00004 

6 

O’OOlm 

=:0-001s 

+ 0-00003 

4 

0-003S 

= 0-002s  + K(1‘001«  + 0’0<^1^) 

+ 0-00007 

8 

O-OOSs 

= 0•004s^-i(0•001s  + 0•001?^) 

-0-00068 

oz. 

gr. 

(3),  (14),  (15),  (16),  (17),  (18) 

2t 

= 2 

— 0-00175 

(4),  (14),  (15),  (17),  (18) 

2t 

= 2 

— 0-00193 

(1),  (8),  (9),  (10) 

2t 

= 2 

-0-00185 

Mean 

2t 

= 2 

— 0-00184  53 

(18),  (53) 

Is+la; 

= 2 

+ 0-00138  54 

(5),  (54) 

10s 

= 10 

+ 0-00042  55 

(14),  (54) 

Is 

= 1 

+ 0-00032  56 

(7),  (22),  (23),  (24) 

2m 

= 2 

-0-00022  57 

2s 

= 2 

-0-00053  58 

4 m 

= 4 

— 0-00016  59 

4s 

= 4 

-0-00016  60 

(6), (60) 

10m 

= 10 

+ 0-00058  61 

(10),  (53) 

2n 

= 2 

-0-01305  62 

(53),  (62),  (2) 

lOw 

= 10 

+ 0-00253  63 

(14),  (53) 

la; 

= 1 

+ 0-00106  64 

(3),  (54) 

10^ 

= 10 

+ 0-00504  65 

(63),  (11),  (12) 

5s 

= 5 

+ 0-00053 

(65),  (15),  (16) 

5s 

= 5 

+ 0-00005 

(4),  (15),  (53) 

5s 

= 5 

— 0-00048 

Mean 

5s 

= 5 

+ 0-00003  66 

(12),  (66) 

5m 

= 5 

— 0-00038  67 

(20),  (56),  (57) 

3m 

= 3 

+ 0-00040  68 

(19),  (53),  (64) 

3s 

= 3 

+ 0-00047  69 

(21),  (56) 

\z 

= 1 

+ 0-00015  70 

(25),  (26),  (54) 

0-5s 

= 0-5 

+ 0-00013  71 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 

50 

51 

52 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


939 


(56),  (27),  (28),  (29),  (30) 

0*4s 

= 

0*4 

+ 0*00013 

72 

0*2s 

= 

0*2 

+ 0*00018 

73 

(32),  (33),  (73) 

0*lw 

= 

0*1 

+ 0*00032 

74 

0*ls 

= 

0*1 

-0*00038 

75 

(45),  (73),  (75) 

0*3s 

= 

0*3 

+ 0*00037 

76 

(74),  (75),  (35),  (36) 

0*05s 

= 

0*05 

-0*00008 

77 

(77),  (37),  (38) 

0*025iS 

= 

0*025 

-0*00007 

78 

(39),  (75),  (40),  (41) 

0*02s 

= 

0*02 

-0*00066 

79 

0*045 

= 

0*04 

+ 0*00015 

80 

(79),  (43),  (44) 

0*0l5 

= 

0*01 

+ 0*00012 

81 

(45),  (79),  (81) 

0*035 

= 

0*03 

+ 0*00000 

82 

(81),  (46),  (47),  (48) 

0*0045 

= 

0*004 

-0*00019 

83 

0*0025 

= 

0*002  + 0*00018 

84 

(84),  (49),  (50) 

0*0015 

= 

0*001+0*00012 

85 

0*001« 

= 

0*001  +0*00009 

86 

(51),  (84),  (85),  (86) 

0*0035 

= 

0*003  + 0*00036 

(52),  (83),  (85),  (86) 

0*005s 

= 

0*005 

-0*00076 

By  a mean  of  12  comparisons  20^=  10a-{- 10m  — 0'00386  gr.=  20  ounces— 0’00286  gr. 
By  a mean  of  12  comparisons  305=205+ lOm+0‘00361  gr.=  30  ounces+0‘00133  gr. 

Let  W denote  a commercial  lb.  of  the  same  density  as  the  lost  standard  troy 
pound.  In  air  for  which  log  A=7‘07832— 10,  the  lb.  Pd  appears  to  be  equal  to 
W+0'00169gr.  Let  (1000),  [1000]  denote  two  brass  weights  of  nearly  1000  grains 
each  ; (2000),  (4000)  two  brass  weights  of  nearly  2000  and  4000  grains  each  respect- 
ively. Then. 


No.  of  Comp. 
12 
12 
10 
4 


gr- 

(4000)-f(2000)  + i{(1000)  + [1000]}  = Pd  -0*00582 

(4000)  =(2000)  + (1000)+  [1000]  -0*00550 

(2000)  =(1000)+ [1000]  +0*00154 

(1000)  =[1000]  +0*01360 


Hence  gr. 

[1000]  = 999*99296 

(1000)  = 1000*00656 

(2000)  = 2000*00105 

(4000)  = 3999*99506 


The  bronze  weight  (200)  =199‘9971  grains  (in  air). 


By  a mean  of  28  comparisons,  405=  sum  of  secondary  standard  lbs.  Nos.  9 and  11 
+ (4000)  + (1000)  + (200)  — 0‘0171  grain  = 40  ounces— 0'0298  grain. 

By  a mean  of  40  comparisons,  505=  sum  of  secondary  standard  lbs.  Nos.  9,  11,  12 
+ (2000)  + (1000)+0'0073  grain=50  ounces+0'0054  grain. 

By  a mean  of  60  comparisons,  1005=  sum  of  secondary  standard  lbs.  Nos.  9,  11, 
12,  13,  14,  16  + (4000)  + (2000)+0‘0701  grain=100  ounces+0’0193  grain. 

By  a mean  of  68  comparisons,  2005=  sum  of  secondary  standard  lbs.  Nos.  9,  11, 
12,  13,  14,  16,  17«,  17^,  29,  30,  19,  21,  28  + (4000)  + (1000)+0-023  grain  = 200  ounces 
— 0'022  grain. 

By  a mean  of  26  comparisons,  3005=  2005+ 1005+  0‘0304  gr.=300  oz.+0‘027  gf. 
By  a mean  of  20  comparisons,  4005=  3005+1005—  0*046  gr.=400  oz. +0*000  gr. 
By  a mean  of  20  comparisons,  5005=3005+2005-0*059  gr.  = 500  oz.  — 0*054  gr. 
The  troy  ounce  weights  marked  5 are  deposited  in  the  Exchequer. 

6 G 


MDCCCLVI. 


940  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


The  weights  (12800),  (6400),  (3200),  (1600),  (800),  (400),  (200),  (100),  and  a 
weight  of  100  grains  unmarked,  which  accompany  Barrow’s  balance,  are  of  bronze, 
for  which  log  A=0'92260.  Let  them  be  denoted  by  W,  V,  U,  T,  S,  R,  Q,  P,  O 
respectively.  It  was  found  that 

No.  of  Comp.  gr. 


4 

P =0 

-0-0001 

4 

Q=P  + 0 

-0-0037 

4 

R =Q+p  + 0 

+ 0-0108 

4 

S =R  + Q+P  + 0 

-0-0009 

4 

T =S  + R + Q + P + 0 

-0-0155 

4 

U=T  + S + R + Q+P+0 

-0-0207 

4 

V=U+T  + S + R + Q+P  + 0 

-0-0030 

4 

W=V+U+T+S+R+Q+P+0 

—0-0516 

Hence  gr. 

P = 0-0-0001 

Q = 20-0-0038 

R=  40  + 0-0069 
S = 80  + 0-0021 

T=  160-0-0104 
U=  320-0-0260 
V=  640-0-0343 
W=128O-0-1172 


By  a mean  of  4 comparisons,  the  bronze  weights  U+T+S+PH- platinum  weights 
(32)  + (16)-i-(8)  + (4)+0'0133gr.:i!:  platinum  troy  pound  T in  air  (^=10‘45,&=:768’28). 
Hence  U+T+S+P=5699'9724  grains. 

U+T4-S-l-P=570— 0*0344  grain.  Therefore  570=5700*0068  grains.  Hence 


gr. 

(100)  = 100-0000 
(200;  = 199*9964 
(400)  = 400-0074 
(800)  = 800-0031 


gr- 

(1600)  = 1599-9915 

(3200)  = 3199*9778 
(6400)  = 6399-9733 
(12800)  = 12799*8981 


The  values  assigned  to  these  weights  in  computing  the  densities  of  some  of  the  old 
troy  pounds  and  secondary  standard  lbs.,  were  obtained  upon  the  supposition  that 
the  absolute  weight  of  the  platinum  troy  pound  T was  about  0*002  grain  less  than  it 
afterwards  appeared  to  be  on  reducing  the  observations  with  the  weight  of  air  as 
determined  by  Regnault.  The  error,  which  was  not  discovered  till  after  going  to 
press,  is  much  too  small  to  affect  the  last  figure  of  the  calculated  densities. 


Probable  Errors  of  the  Platinum  Weights. 


Probable  errors  of  the  comparisons  of  T,  and  of  the  auxiliary  weights. 


Page. 

Weights  compared. 

No.  of  comparisons  (n). 

Probable  error  of  one  comparison. 

Probable  error  of  n comparisons. 

168 

gr- 

gr. 

815 

T,  Sp 

0-000982 

0-000076 

818 

T,  RS 

78 

0-000727 

„ 0-000083 

824 

T,  A + B + C + D + F 

40 

0-000540 

0-000086 

825 

A,  F+G 

22 

0-000287 

0-000061 

825 

B,  F + G 

22 

0-000560 

0-000123 

826 

C,  F+G 

22 

0-000521 

0-000114 

826 

D,  F + G 

22 

0-000669 

0-000146 

826 

F,  G+H 

31 

0-000458 

0-000084 

821 

G,  H + K 

10 

0-000170 

0-000057 

821 

G,  H + L 

10 

0-000154 

0-000051 

SECONDARY  STANDARDS.  941 


822 

G,  H + M 

10 

0*000159 

0*000053 

822 

G,  H + N 

10 

0*000111 

0*000037 

822 

H,  K + L + M + N + R 

17 

0*000298 

0*000073 

822 

H,  K-i-L  + M + N+S 

17 

0*000241 

0*000060 

822 

K,  R + S 

12 

0*000134 

0*000040 

822 

L,  R + S 

12 

0*000178 

0*000054 

823 

M,  R + S 

12 

0*000139 

0*000042 

823 

N,  R + S 

12 

0*000122 

0*000037 

828 

R,  Y + Z 

6 

0*000072 

0*000032 

828 

S,  Y + Z 

6 

0*000063 

0*000028 

828 

Y,  W + V + Q 

20 

0*000097 

0*000022 

828 

Z,  W + V+Q 

20 

0*000046 

0*000034 

829 

W,  V+IOQ 

6 

0*000053 

0*000024 

829 

V,  lOQ 

6 

0*000119 

0*000053 

According  to  the  300  comparisons  of  U,  the  lost  troy  pound,  with  Sp,  and  the  140 
comparisons  with  RS,  made  in  1829,  RS=Sp+0’00515  grain.  According  to  the 
comparisons  of  T with  Sp  and  RS  in  1845,  RS=Sp+0'00534  gr.,  a result  which 
differs  from  the  former  by  only  0*00019  gr.  Giving  to  the  comparisons  of  U and  T 
with  Sp  twice  the  weight  of  their  comparisons  with  RS,  because  the  number  of  com- 
parisons of  U and  T with  Sp  is  about  twice  as  great  as  the  number  of  comparisons 
with  RS,  the  probable  error  of  T,  in  terms  of  Sp  and  RS,  will  be  0*000058  gr.  The 
probable  error  of  l^(A-l-B-l-C-l-D)  is  0*000026  gr.,  and  that  of  Q is  0*000004  gr. 
Hence  the  probable  error  of  T-f-Q+i(A-|-B-l-C-j-D)  is  0*000064  gr. 


Probable  errors  of  the  comparisons  of  I with  T and  the  auxiliary  weights. 


Page. 

Weights  compared. 

No.  of  comparisons  («). 

Probable  error  of  one  comparison, 
gr. 

Probable  error  of  n comparisons. 

gr* 

858 

I,  T+Q+A 

40 

0*000569 

0*000091 

859 

I,  T + Q + B 

40 

0*000504 

0*000081 

859 

I,  T+Q+C 

40 

0*000648 

0*000104 

860 

I,  T + Q+D 

50 

0*000618 

0*000083 

Hence  the  probable  error  of  the  comparison  of  I with  T-|-Q+i(A-|-B-l-C-i-D)  is 
0*000038  gr.  But  the  probable  error  of  T-l-Q-l-|^(A-f-B-l-C+D)  is  0*000064  gr. 
Therefore  the  probable  error  of  I is  0*000074  grain.  If  we  substitute  for  A,  B,  C,  D 
their  values  in  terms  of  F-f  G,  the  resulting  values  of  I will  be  affected  by  the  errors 
of  the  comparisons  of  A,  B,  C,  D with  F-j-G,  combined  with  the  errors  of  the  com- 
parisons of  I with  T-}-Q+A,  T-j-Q-j-B,  T-f-Q+C,  T-j-Q-l-D.  The  differences  of 
these  values  of  I from  the  mean  are  —0*00097  grain,  -1-0*00008  grain,  -)-0*0001 1 grain, 
-f-0*00078  grain  respectively. 


Probable  errors  of  the  comparisons  of  I with  K,  L,  M,  N,  the  platinum  lbs.  Nos.  1, 
2,  3,  4,  and  with  Sp-f-V,  Professor  Schumacher’s  lb. 


Page. 

Weights  compared. 

No.  of  comparisons  (w). 

Probable  error  of  one  comparison. 

gr- 

Probable  error  of  n con 

gr- 

862 

I,  K 

100 

0*000514 

0*000052 

864 

I,L 

108 

0*000659 

0*000064 

866 

I,  M 

102 

0 000485 

0*000048 

868 

I,  N 

102 

0*000555 

0*000055 

872 

I,  Sp  + V 

100 

0*000495 

0*000050 

6 G 2 


942  PROF.W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 


Probable  errors  of  the  weights  (64),  (32),  (16),  (8),  (4),  (2),  J. 


Page. 

Weights  compared. 

No.  of  com- 
parisons (w). 

Probable  error  of 
one  comparison. 

Probable  error  < 
n comparisons. 

829 

(64)  + l6,  y(K  + L-l-M+N  + R + S) 

10 

^•000150 

0-000050 

830 

(64),  (32)  + (l6)  + (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 2J 

5 

0-000144 

0-000072 

830 

(32),  (l6)  + (8)  + (4)  + (2)+2J 

5 

0-000095 

0-000047 

830 

(16),  (8)  + (4)  + (2)  + 2J 

5 

0-000082 

0-000041 

830 

(8),  (4)  + (2)  + 2J 

5 

0-000036 

0-000018 

830 

(4),  (2)  + 2J 

5 

0-000031 

0-000016 

830 

(2),  2J 

5 

0-000141 

0-000070 

The  probable  error  of  K+L+M-j-N-j-R+S  is  O'OOOOlO  grain,  and  the  probable 
error  of  J is  0’000015  grain. 


Probable  errors  of  the  comparisons  of  91,  the  Kilogramme  des  Archives,  with 
K+L+B,  and  with  the  platinum  kilogramme  (B,  and  of  the  comparisons  of 
^ with  I+K-}-A,  I+L+B,  I+M+r,  I-j-N+A. 


Page. 

Weights  compared. 

No.  of  comparisons  (n). 

Probable  error  of  one  comparison. 

gr- 

Probable  error  of  n comp 

gr- 

891 

H,  K + L + B 

60 

0-001769 

0-000230 

882 

% e 

200 

0-001594 

0-000113 

886 

e,  i+k+a 

34 

0-001296 

0-000226 

886 

CB,  I -)-L-)- B 

40 

0-000790 

0-000127 

887 

(£,  i+M+r 

40 

0-001333 

0-000213 

888 

(£,  I + N+A 

42 

0-000987 

0-000154 

Probable  errors  of  the  auxiliary  weights  used  in  obtaining  the  value  of  C in  terms  of  L 


Page. 

Weights  compared. 

No.  of  comparisons  (w). 

Probable  error  of  one  comparison. 

gr- 

Probable  error  of  n comparisons. 

gr- 

889 

I,  A4-B-f~r-i-A 

24 

0-000469 

0-000097 

889 

A,  z+e 

10 

0-000373 

0-000124 

889 

B,  z + e 

10 

0-000510 

0-000170 

890 

r,  z + e 

10 

0-000372 

0-000124 

890 

A,  z+e 

10 

0-000467 

0-000146 

0 = sum  of  weights  L,  M of  neaidy  80  grains  each,  J,  the  mean  of  two  grain 
weights,  and  Q,  the  mean  of  the  ten  weights  of  0'64509  grain,  the  probable  errors  of 
which  are  0*000083  grain,  0*000066  grain,  0*000015  grain,  0*000004  grain  respect- 
ively. Therefore  the  probable  error  of  0 is  0*000107  grain.  Hence  the  probable 
error  of  (B  in  terms  of  I is  0*000193  grain.  But  the  probable  error  of  the  com- 
parison of  (B  with  91  is  0*0001 13  grain.  Therefore  the  probable  error  of  the  value  of 
91  in  grains  of  which  I contains  7000*00000,  is  0*000224  grain. 

The  four  different  values  of  (B  obtained  by  substituting  for  K,  L,  M,  N their  values 
in  terms  of  I,  and  for  A,  B,  F,  A their  values  in  terms  of  Z-j-0,  are  affected  by  the 
errors  of  the  comparisons  of  (B  with  I-f-K-f-A,  I-j-L+B,  I-j-M-l-r,  I-|-N-)-A,  com- 
bined with  the  errors  of  the  comparisons  of  A,  B,  F,  A with  Z-j-0.  Their  differences 
from  the  mean  are  -|-0*00176  grain,  -f-0*00026  grain,  —0*00105  grain,  —0*00098 
grain  respectively. 

The  probable  error  of  the  value  of  91  in  grains  of  which  I contains  7000*00000, 
obtained  by  comparing  it  with  K-j-L-j-B,  is  0*000334  grain. 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


943 


The  differences  between  two  or  more  series  of  comparisons  of  the  same  weights, 
though  small,  are  larger  than  the  probable  error  of  each  series  would  lead  us  to 
expect.  Of  the  errors  which  affect  the  results  of  weighing,  some  partake  too  much 
of  the  nature  of  constant  errors  to  be  fairly  estimated  by  the  method  of  least  squares. 
Of  this  kind  is  the  error  due  to  small  differences  of  temperature  of  the  weights. 
Whenever  it  was  practicable,  the  weights  to  be  compared  were  left  in  the  balance- 
case  during  the  night  previous  to  the  day  on  which  they  were  compared.  This  pre- 
caution, however,  was  in  some  measure  defeated,  when  a single  weight  was  compared 
with  the  sum  of  several  others ; for  the  latter  would  be  in  advance  of  the  former  in 
following  the  changes  of  temperature  during  the  time  occupied  by  the  comparisons. 
The  effect  of  temperature  on  the  apparent  weight  of  any  object  appears  to  be  due  to 
currents  of  air  ascending  or  descending,  according  as  the  weight  is  hotter  or  colder 
than  the  air  in  the  balance-case.  A brass  kilogramme  that  had  been  left  for  several 
hours  in  the  balance-case  where  the  temperature  was  5°’2  C.,  appeared  to  be  about 
5 milligrammes  lighter  after  it  had  been  heated  up  to  16°‘4  C.  The  hygroscopic 
matter  contained  in  some  of  the  auxiliary  weights,  from  which  it  was  difficult  to  free 
them  entirely  by  digestion  in  boiling  water,  may  also  have  introduced  a small  error 
in  one  direction.  In  order  to  diminish,  as  much  as  possible,  any  inaccuracy  result- 
ing from  this  cause,  all  the  more  important  weighings  into  which  these  weights 
entered,  were  made  within  the  narrowest  practicable  limits  of  time.  Many  observa- 
tions that  could  not  be  brought  within  such  limits  of  time  as  were  considered  satis- 
factory, were  rejected,  the  chance  of  a larger  irregular  error  belonging  to  a small 
number  of  comparisons  being  considered  less  injurious  to  accuracy  than  the  error  in 
one  direction  to  be  apprehended  in  a larger  number,  extending  over  a considerable 
interval  of  time.  That  part  of  the  weighing  which  depended  upon  the  performance 
of  the  balances  was  most  satisfactory.  When  the  large  balance,  constructed  by 
Mr.  Barrow,  was  loaded  with  a pound  in  each  pan,  the  probable  error  of  a single 
comparison,  by  Gauss’s  method,  was  0‘00056  grain,  or  less  than  one-12  millionth  of 
the  weight  in  either  pan ; with  a kilogramme  in  each  pan,  the  probable  error  of  a 
single  comparison,  by  Borda’s  method,  was  0'00]62  grain,  or  less  than  one-9  millionth 
part  of  the  weight  in  either  pan;  by  Gauss’s  method  it  was  0‘00112  grain,  or  one- 
14  millionth  of  the  weight  in  either  pan. 

Legalization  of  the  new  Standards. 

Legal  authority  has  been  given  to  the  new  Standard  lb.  and  its  four  copies  in  pla- 
tinum by  an  Act  of  Parliament,  entitled  ‘‘An  Act  for  legalizing  and  preserving  the 
restored  Standards  of  Weights  and  Measures.”  The  most  important  of  those  pro- 
visions of  the  Act  which  relate  exclusively  to  the  Standards  of  Weight,  are  contained 
in  the  following  extracts  : — 

“Whereas  by  an  Act  of  the  Fifth  Year  of  the  Reign  of  King  George  the  Fourth, 
Chapter  Seventy-four,  ...  it  was  enacted  ...  that  from  and  after  the  First  Day  of  May 


944  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND. 

1825j  the  Standard  Brass  Weight  of  One  Pound  Troy  Weight  made  in  the  Year  1758, 
then  in  the  Custody  of  the  Clerk  of  the  House  of  Commons,  should  be  and  the  same 
was  thereby  declared  to  be  the  original  and  genuine  Standard  Measure  of  Weight, 
and  that  such  Brass  Weight  should  be  the  ‘ Imperial  Standard  Troy  Pound,’  and 
should  be  and  the  same  was  declared  to  be  the  Unit  or  only  Standard  Measure  of 
Weight  from  which  all  other  Weights  should  be  derived,  computed,  and  ascertained, 
and  that  of  the  said  Troy  Pound  should  be  an  Ounce,  and  that  ^ of  such  Ounce 
should  be  a Pennyweight,  and  that  of  such  Pennyweight  should  be  a Grain,  so 
that  5760  such  Grains  should  be  a Troy  Pound,  and  that  7000  such  Grains  should  be 
and  they  were  thereby  declared  to  be  a Pound  Avoirdupois  : And  whereas  by  the  said 
Act  Provision  was  made  for  restoring  the  said  Imperial  Troy  Pound,  in  case  of  Loss, 
Destruction,  Defacement,  or  other  Injury,  by  Reference  to  the  Weight  of  a Cubic 
Inch  of  Water : And  whereas  the  said  Standard  Pound  Troy  (was)  destroyed  in  the 
Fire  at  the  Houses  of  Parliament : And  whereas  by  the  Researches  of  Scientific  Men 
Doubts  were  thrown  on  the  Accuracy  of  the  Methods  provided  by  the  said  Act  for 
the  Restoration  of  the  said  Standard  ; And  whereas  there  exist  Weights  which  had 
been  accurately  compared  with  the  said  Standard  Pound  Troy,  which  afforded  suffi- 
cient Means  for  restoring  such  original  Standard : And  it  having  been  deemed 
expedient  that  the  Standard  for  Reference  as  a Measure  of  Weight  should  be  a Pound 
Avoirdupois,  there  has  been  constructed  a Pound  Weight  Avoirdupois  equivalent  to 
the  Pound  Avoirdupois  of  7000  such  Grains  as  are  mentioned  in  the  said  recited  Act, 
and  Four  accurate  Copies  of  the  said  Pound  Avoirdupois  so  constructed : And 
whereas  the  Standard  Pound  Avoirdupois  so  constructed  as  aforesaid,  and  the  Copies 
thereof,  are  of  Platinum,  the  Form  being  that  of  a Cylinder  nearly  1’35  Inch  in  Height 
and  1'15  Inch  in  Diameter,  with  a Groove  or  Channel  round  it  whose  Middle  is 
about  0 34  Inch  below  the  Top  of  the  Cylinder,  for  insertion  of  the  Points  of  the 
Ivory  Fork  by  which  it  is  to  be  lifted;  the  Edges  are  carefully  rounded  off:  And 
whereas  the  said  Standard  of  Weight  marked  P.S.  1844,  1 lb.  has  been  deposited  in 
the  Office  of  the  Exchequer  at  PFestminster,  and  One  of  the  said  Copies  of  the 
Standard  of  Weight  marked  No.  1.  P.C.  1844,  1 lb.  has  been  deposited  at  the  Royal 
Mint;  and  One  other  of  the  said  Copies  of  the  Standard  of  Weight  marked  No.  2. 
P.C.  1844,  1 lb.  has  been  delivered  to  the  Royal  Society  of  London-,  and  One  other 
of  the  said  Copies  of  the  Standard  of  Weight  marked  No.  3.  P.C.  1844,  1 lb.  has  been 
deposited  in  the  Royal  Observatory  of  Greenwich  ; and  the  other  of  the  said  Copies 
of  the  Standard  of  Weight  marked  No.  4.  P.C.  1844,  1 lb.  has  been  immured  in  the 
Cill  of  the  Recess  on  the  East  Side  of  the  lower  Waiting  Hall  in  the  New  Palace  at 
Westminster  \ And  whereas  it  is  expedient  to  legalize  the  Standards  so  constructed 
and  to  provide  for  the  Preservation  thereof:  Be  it  therefore  enacted. ..as  follows: — 
I.  So  much  of  the  said  Act  of  the  Fifth  Year  of  King  George  the  Fourth  as  relates 
to  the  Restoration  of  the  Standard  Troy  Pound,  in  case  of  Loss,  Destruction,  Deface- 
ment, or  other  Injury,  shall  be  repealed. 


SECONDARY  STANDARDS. 


945 


III.  The  said  Weight  of  Platinum  marked  P.S.  1844,  1 lb.,  deposited  in  the  Office  of 
the  Exchequer  as  aforesaid,  shall  be  the  legal  and  genuine  Standard  Measure  of 
Weight,  and  shall  be  and  be  denominated  the  Imperial  Standard  Pound  Avoirdupois, 
and  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  only  Standard  Measure  of  Weight  from  which  all 
other  Weights  and  other  Measures  having  Reference  to  Weight  shall  be  derived, 
computed,  and  ascertained,  and  One  equal  Seven  Thousandth  Part  of  such  Pound 
Avoirdupois  shall  be  a Grain,  and  Five  Thousand  seven  hundred  and  sixty  such 
Grains  shall  be  and  be  deemed  to  be  a Pound  Troy. 

VII.  If  at  any  Time  hereafter  the  said  Imperial  Standard  Pound  Avoirdupois  be 
lost,  or  in  any  Manner  destroyed,  defaced,  or  otherwise  injured,  the  Commissioners 
of  Her  Majesty’s  Treasury  may  cause  the  same  to  be  restored  by  Reference  to  or 
Adoption  of  any  of  the  Copies  so  deposited  as  aforesaid,  or  such  of  them  as  may 
remain  available  for  that  Purpose.” 


Densities,  Errors,  and  Distribution  of  the  Standards  of  W dght. 

The  first  column  of  the  following  Table  contains  the  mark  or  designation  of  the 
weight ; the  second,  its  density  at  the  temperature  of  melting  snow  (with  one  excep- 
tion) in  terms  of  the  maximum  density  of  water;  the  third,  its  error,  in  grains,  when 
compared  in  a vacuum  with  PS,  the  new  Imperial  Standard  lb. ; the  fourth,  its  error, 
in  grains,  when  compared  with  W,  the  Commercial  Standard  lb.,  in  air  of  the  tempera- 
ture 65°'55  Fahr.,  under  the  pressure  of  29*750  inches  of  mercury  at  the  temperature 

mm 

of  melting  snow  (t=l8°‘7  C.,  ^=755*64),  in  Somerset  House,  or  in  air  for  which 
log  A=7’07832— 10.  The  last  column  contains  the  name  of  the  place  of  deposit,  or 
of  the  country  to  which  the  weight  has  been  sent. 


Designation. 

Density. 

In  a vacuum. 

In  air  for  which 

log  A= 7-07832 -10. 

gr- 

gr- 

P.S. 

21-1572 

0-00000 

0-63407  too  heavy. 

No.  1.  P.C. 

21-1671 

0-00051  too  heavy. 

0-63477  too  heavy. 

No.  2.  P.C. 

21-1640 

0-00089  too  light. 

0-63331  too  heavy. 

No.  3.  P.C. 

21-1615 

0-00178  too  light. 

0-63237  too  heavy. 

No.  4.  P.C. 

21-1516 

0-00314  too  light. 

0-63090  too  heavy. 

Sp.+v. 

21-1321 

0-00023  too  light. 

0-63336  too  heavy. 

Troy  Pd.  T. 

21-1661 

0-52934  too  light. 

0-00745  too  light. 

Gilt  lb.  No. 

1. 

8-36134 

0-00732  too  light. 

0-01956  too  heavy. 

No. 

2. 

8-.34161 

0-03582  too  light. 

0-01132  too  light. 

No. 

3. 

8-30462 

0-00510  too  heavy. 

0-02512  too  heavy. 

No. 

4. 

8-36500 

0-00425  too  heavy. 

0-03157  too  heavy. 

No. 

5. 

8-06122 

0-01783  too  heavy. 

0-00734  too  heavy. 

No. 

6. 

8-28779 

0-01714  too  light. 

0-00083  too  heavy. 

No. 

7. 

8-12163 

0-01933  too  heavy. 

0-01658  too  heavy. 

No. 

8. 

8-16317 

0-01428  too  heavy. 

0-01679  too  heavy. 

No. 

9. 

7-37614 

0-11611  too  heavy. 

0-00426  too  heavy. 

No.  10. 

8-28375 

0-03910  too  light. 

0-02162  too  light. 

No.  11. 

8-36302 

0-04208  too  light. 

0-01499  too  light. 

No. 

12. 

8-31919 

0-02060  too  light. 

0-00118  too  heavy. 

No.  13. 

8-43179 

0-03331  too  light. 

0-00195  too  heavy. 

No. 

14. 

8-34955 

0-02844  too  light. 

0-00301  too  light. 

Distribution. 


Exchequer. 

Royal  Mint. 

Royal  Society. 

Royal  Observatory,  Greenwich. 
New  Palace,  Westminster. 
Observatory,  Altona. 

Royal  Observatory,  Greenwich. 
India. 

Russia. 

Prussia. 

Bavaria. 

U.S.  America. 

Edinburgh. 

Austria. 

Dublin. 

Canada. 

Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

Sydney. 

Portugal. 

Spain. 

Holland. 


946  PROF.  W.  H.  MILLER  ON  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  THE  NEW  STANDARD  POUND 


Gilt  lb.  No.  15.  8-36107 

No.  16.  8-07354 

No.  17a.  8-11718 

No.  17^'.  8-55888 

No.  18.  8-30369 

No.  19.  8-33969 

No.  21.  7-97370 

No.  22.  8-19859 

No.  23.  8-15141 

No.  24.  8-14286 

No.  25.  8-10164 

No.  26.  8-15218 

No.  27.  8-16186 

No.  28.  8-12604 

No.  29.  8-18446 

No.  30.  8-15292 

No.  31.  8-51444 

No.  32.  8-47042 

No.  33.  8-47902 

No.  34.  8-51472 

No.  35.  8-47019 

No.  36.  8-49601 

Quartz  lb.  (at  18°C.)  2-649009 
Platinum  Kilogr.  <£.  21-13791 

Gilt  Kilogramme  41.  8-32910 

10-lb.  weight.  8-35382 

Auxiliary  weights 


0-02022 

0-02747 

0-02614 

0-04428 

0-00129 

0-01473 

0-03971 

0-01214 

0-01557 

0-03932 

0-00180 

0-00112 

0-01405 

0-00416 

0-00222 

0-00170 

0-04410 

0-03448 

0-04144 

0-04584 

0-04019 

0-04484 

2-36797 

0-02412 

0-04696 


too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  heavy, 
too  light, 
too  heavy, 
too  light, 
too  heavy, 
too  light, 
too  heavy, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  light, 
too  heavy, 
too  light, 
too  light. 


0-00667  too  heavy. 

France. 

0-03640  too  heavy. 

Belgium. 

0-02948  too  light. 

Hanover. 

0-00542  too  heavy. 

Saxony. 

0-01857  too  heavy. 

Sweden. 

0-00930  too  heavy. 

Denmark. 

0-01777  too  heavy. 

Switzerland. 

0-00523  too  light. 

Sardinian  States. 

0-01655  too  heavy. 

Papal  States. 

0-03941  too  light. 

Naples. 

0-00354  too  light. 

Turkey. 

0-00001  too  light. 

Brazil. 

0-01635  too  heavy. 

Buenos  Ayres. 

0-00638  too  light. 

Chili. 

0-00293  too  heavy. 

Melbourne. 

0-00050  too  light. 

Hobarton. 

0-00080  too  heavy. 

1 

0-00304  too  heavy. 

1 Royal  Observatory,  Greenwich. 

0-00063  too  light. 

( Still  disposable. 

0-00089  too  light. 

J 

0-00041  too  light. 

Exchequer. 

0-00207  too  light. 

R.  Obs.,  Gr.  Still  disposable. 

0-40147  too  light. 

Royal  Observatory,  Greenwich. 

Royal  Observatory,  Greenwich. 

0-0010  too  light. 

Exchequer. 

0-111  too  heavy. 

Exchequer. 

.Royal  Observatory,  Greenwich. 

Troy  ounce  weights  deposited  in  the  Office  of  the  Exchequer. 


Troy  ounces. 

gr. 

Troy  ounces. 

gr- 

500 

0-054 

too  light. 

0-5 

0-00013 

too  heavy. 

400 

0-000 

0-4 

0-00013 

too  heavy. 

300 

0-027 

too  heavy. 

0-3 

0-00037 

too  heavy. 

200 

0-022 

too  light. 

0-2 

0-00018 

too  heavy. 

100 

0-0193 

too  heavy. 

0-1 

0-00038 

too  light. 

50 

0-0054 

too  heavy. 

0-05 

0-00008 

too  light. 

40 

0-0298 

too  light. 

0-04 

0-00015 

too  heavy. 

30 

0-00138 

too  heavy. 

0-03 

0-00000 

20 

0-00286 

too  light. 

0-025 

0-00007 

too  light. 

10 

0-00042 

too  heavy. 

0-02 

0-00066 

too  light. 

5 

0-00003 

too  heavy. 

0-01 

0-00012 

too  heavy. 

4 

0-00016 

too  light. 

0-005 

0-00076 

too  light. 

3 

0-00047 

too  heavy. 

0-004 

0-00019 

too  light. 

2 

0-00053 

too  light. 

0-003 

0-00036 

too  heavy. 

1 

0-00032 

too  heavy. 

0-002 

0-00018 

too  heavy. 

oz. 

0-00015 

too  heavy. 

0-001 

0-00012 

too  heavy. 

INDEX 


TO  THE 


PHILOSOPHICAL  TRANSACTIONS 

FOR  THE  YEAR  1856. 


A. 

Acids,  on  the  conjugate  sulpho-,  sulphometholic,  &c.,  453. 

Airy  (G.  B.,  Esq.).  Account  of  Pendulum  Experiments  undertaken  in  the  Harton  Colliery,  for 
the  purpose  of  determining  the  Mean  Density  of  the  Earth,  297. — Introduction  and  history, 
297 ; description  of  experiments,  308 ; deduced  proportion  of  gravity  at  the  two  stations, 
330 ; observations  and  calculations  relating  to  the  difference  of  attraction  of  the  Earth’s 
shell  on  the  two  pendulums,  upon  an  assumed  value  of  density,  332;  deduced  mean  density, 
342. 

Discussion  of  the  Observed  Deviations  of  the  Compass  in  several  Ships, 

Wood-built  and  Iron-built ; with  a General  Table  for  facilitating  the  examination  of  Compass- 
deviations,  53. 

■ Supplement  to  the  “ Account  of  Pendulum  Experiments  undertaken  in  the 

Harton  Colliery,”  being  an  Account  of  Experiments  undertaken  to  determine  the  correction 
for  the  Temperature  of  the  Pendulum,  343. — Alteration  in  the  value  of  the  earth’s  mean  den- 
sity, 352 ; effect  of  the  earth’s  rotation  and  ellipticity,  353. 

Andrews  (Dr.  Thomas).  On  the  Constitution  and  Properties  of  Ozone,  1. 

Arthur’s  Seat,  deflection  of  the  plumb-line  at.  591. 

Attraction,  on  the  effect  of  local,  31  (see  Pratt). 

B. 

Bakerian  Lecture,  On  the  Electro-dynamic  Qualities  of  Metals,  649  (see  Thomson). 

Barlow  (Rev.  John).  On  the  Formation  and  some  of  the  Properties  of  Cymidine,  the  Organic 
Base  of  the  Cymole  Series,  15. 

Barometer,  construction  of  a standard,  &c.,  507. 

Beale  (Dr.  Lionel  S.).  On  the  ultimate  arrangement  of  the  Biliary  Ducts,  and  on  some  other 
MDCCCLVI.  6 H 


948 


INDEX. 


points  in  the  Anatomy  of  the  Liver  of  Vertebrate  Animals,  375. — Of  the  ducts  of  the  liver, 
384. 

Biliary  ducts,  on  the  ultimate  arrangement  of  the,  375. 

Buckton  (George  B.,  Esq.)  and  Dr.  A.  W.  Hofmann.  Researches  on  the  Action  of  Sulphuric 
Acid  upon  the  Amides  and  Nitriles,  together  with  Remarks  upon  the  Conjugate  Sulpho-acids, 
453. — Acetonitrile,  454 ; disulphometholic  acid,  457  ; ethyl-series,  disulphoetholic  acid,  463  ; 
propyl-series,  disulphopropiolic  acid,  467 ; butyl-  and  phenyl-series,  and  corresponding  acids, 
469;  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on  aniline,  sulphanilic  and  disulphanilic  acids,  475. 

C. 

Carpenter  (Dr.  W.  B.).  Researches  on  the  Foraminifera,  181. — Monograph  of  the  genus  Orbi- 
tolites,  history,  187;  general  plan  of  organization,  193;  physiology,  206;  variations,  213; 
essential  characters,  &c.,  223;  species,  224;  concluding  remarks,  226. 

Researches  on  the  Foraminifera,  Part  II.,  547. — Genus  Orhiculina,  547 ; 

Alveolina,  552;  Cyclopeus,  555;  Heterostegina,  562. 

Cayley  (A.,  Esq.).  A Second  Memoir  upon  Quantics,  101. 

Researches  on  the  Partition  of  Numbers,  127. 

A Third  Memoir  upon  Quantics,  627. 

Challis  (Rev.  J.).  On  the  Problem  of  Three  Bodies,  523. 

Clarke  (Captain).  Computation  of  the  Mean  Specific  Gravity  of  the  Earth,  from  the  observed 
deflection  of  the  Plumb-line  at  Arthur’s  Seat,  591 ; of  the  Figure  of  the  Earth  as  derived 
from  the  Ordnance  Survey  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  610. 

Compass  deviations  in  ships,  53  (see  Airy). 

Convection  of  heat,  electric,  651. 

Crystalline  forms,  261  (see  Rankine). 

Cymidine,  formation  of,  from  nitrocymole,  16;  salts  of,  17. 

D. 

Datisea  cannabina,  chemical  examination  of,  141;  datisciiie,  142;  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on 
datiscine,  datiscetine,  143;  analysis  of  datiscine  and  datiscetine,  144;  action  of  nitric  acid, 
&c.,  147 ; note,  156. 

Davy  (Dr.  John).  Some  Observations  on  the  ova  of  the  Salmon,  in  relation  to  the  distribution 
of  Species,  21. — Effect  of  exposure  to  the  atmosphere,  22 ; to  moist  air,  23 ; to  a temperature 
below  the  freezing-point,  24;  to  a temperature  above  70°  in  water,  25 ; effect  of  salt  and  brack- 
ish water,  27 ; remarks,  28. 

Dentinal  tubes,  on  the  presence  of  fibrils  of  soft  tissue  in  the,  515. 

Diamagnetic  polarity,  237  (see  Tyndall). 

Distribution  of  species,  21  (see  Davy). 

E. 

Elasticity , axes  of,  261  (see  Rankine). 

Elasticity  of  solids,  a mathematical  theory  of,  481  (see  Thomson). 

Electro-dynamic  investigations,  649  (see  Thomson). 


INDEX. 


949 


F. 

Faraday  (Michael,  Esq.).  Experimental  Researches  in  Electricity,  Thirtieth  Series,  159. — 
Constancy  of  magnecrystallic  force  in  different  media,  159;  action  of  heat  on  magnecrystals, 
168;  effect  of  heat  upon  the  absolute  magnetic  force  of  bodies,  176. 

Figure  of  the  earth,  618. 

Foraminifera,  researches  on  the,  181,  547  (see  Carpenter). 

G. 

Gardenia  lucida,  gum  of,  gardenine,  155;  note,  157. 

Gosse  (Philip  Henry,  Esq.).  On  the  Structure,  Functions,  and  Homologies  of  the  Manducatory 
Organs  in  the  Class  Rotifera,  419. 

H. 

Heat,  effect  of,  on  magnecrystals,  &c.,  168  (see  Faraday). 

Hofmann  (Dr.  A.  W.)  and  Buckton  (George  B.,  Esq.)  (see  Buckton). 

J. 

James  (Lieut.-Colonel).  On  the  Deflection  of  the  Plumb-line  at  Arthur’s  Seat,  and  the  Mean 
Specific  Gravity  of  the  Earth,  591. 

On  the  Figure,  Dimensions,  and  Mean  Specific  Gravity  of  the  Earth,  as 

derived  from  the  Ordnance  Trigonometrical  Survey  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  607. 

Joule  (J.  P.,  Esq.).  Introductory  Research  on  the  Induction  of  Magnetism  by  Electrical  Cur- 
rents, 287. 

K. 

Kilogramme  des  Archives,  comparison  of,  with  English  Standard  Pound,  874. 

Kirkman  (Rev.  Thomas  P.).  On  the  Enumeration  of  x-edva  having  Triedral  Summits,  and  an 
(a;— l)-gonal  Base,  399. 

On  the  Representation  of  Polyedra,  413. 

L. 

Fight,  action  of  crystals  on,  283. 

Liver,  on  the  structure  of  the,  384. 

Luminiferous  force,  compared  with  elasticity  of  solids,  282. 

Lunar-diurnal  magnetic  variations  at  Toronto,  499. 

M. 

Magnecrystallic  force,  159  (see  Faraday). 

Magnetic  disturbances,  on  periodical  laws  discoverable  in  the  mean  effects  of,  357  (see  Sabine). 
Magnetic  variation,  lunar-diui’nal,  499. 

Magnetism,  induction  of,  by  electrical  currents,  287. 

Magnetization,  effects  of,  on  the  thermo-electric  qualities  of  metals,  &c.,  709  (see  Thomson). 

6 H 2 


950 


INDEX. 


Mean  density  of  the  earth,  determination  of,  by  pendulum  experiments,  297  (see  Airy)  ; deduced 
value,  342,  352,  355. 

Mean  specif  c gravity  of  the  earth  derived  from  observations  at  Arthurs  Seat  (Colonel  James), 
606,  609;  from  the  Ordnance  Trigonometrical  Survey,  607  (Colonel  James). 

Megatherium,  on  the,  571. 

Miller  (Professor  W.  H.).  On  the  Construction  of  the  New  Imperial  Standard  Pound,  and  its 
Copies  of  Platinum ; and  on  the  Comparison  of  the  Standard  Pound  with  the  Kilogramme 
des  Archives,  753. 

O. 

Orhitolites,  monograph  of  the  genus,  187  (see  Carpenter). 

Owen  (Professor).  On  the  Megatherium  [Megatherium  Americanum,  Cuvier  and  Blumenbach). 
Part  III.— The  Skull,  571. 

Ozone,  on  the  constitution  and  properties  of,  1. 


P. 

Partition  of  numbers,  127. 

Pendidum  experiments  for  determining  the  earth’s  mean  density,  297  (see  Airy). 

Polar-magnet  deviations,  table  of,  83. 

Polarity  of  the  diamagnetic  force,  237  (see  Tyndall). 

Polyedra,  on  a class  of,  399 ; on  the  representation  of,  413. 

Pound,  on  the  construction  of  the  new  imperial  standard,  753. 

Pratt  (Venerable  John  Henry).  On  the  Effect  of  Local  Attraction  upon  the  Plumb-line  at 
Stations  on  the  English  Arc  of  the  Meridian,  between  Dunnose  and  Burleigh  Moor ; and  a 
Method  of  computing  its  Amount,  31. — Calculation  of  the  ellipticity  of  the  arc  without  taking 
account  of  local  attraction,  31;  formula  for  calculating  local  attraction  at  any  station,  36; 
application  of  the  formula  to  obtain  a rough  approximation  to  the  meridian  deflection  at 
Burleigh  Moor,  44 ; Appendix,  &c.,  48. 

Problem  of  three  bodies,  on  the,  523. 

Ptychotis  Ajowan,  chemical  examination  of,  149;  note,  156. 


Q. 

Quantics,  101,  267. 

Quartz  pound  weight,  comparison  of,  with  standard,  894. 


R. 

Rankine  (W.  J.  M.).  On  Axes  of  Elasticity  and  Crystalline  Forms,  26. — General  definition  of 
axes  of  elasticity,  261 ; strains,  stresses,  potential  energy,  and  coefficients  of  elasticity,  262 ; 
thlipsimetric,  &c.  &c.  surfaces  and  invariants,  264 ; different  kinds  of  isotropy  and  symmetry, 
269;  various  transformations,  271  ; on  real  and  alleged  differences  between  the  laws  of  the 
elasticity  of  solids,  and  those  of  the  luminiferous  force,  282 ; on  the  action  of  crystals  on 
light,  283. 

Rotifera,  on  the  manducatory  organs  in  the  class,  419. 


t 


INDEX. 


951 


S. 

Sabine  (Major-General  Edward).  On  Periodical  Laws  discoverable  in  the  Mean  Effects  of  the 
larger  Magnetic  Disturbances. — No.  III.,  357. — General  conclusions,  decennial  period,  361  ; 
annual  period,  364 ; diurnal  variation,  366. 

On  the  Lunar-Diurnal  Magnetic  Variation  at  Toronto,  499. 

Salmon,  observations  on  the  ova  of  the,  21  (see  Davy). 

Stenhouse  (Dr.  J.).  Examination  of  select  Vegetable  Products  from  India,  141. 

T. 

Thomson  (Professor  William).  Elements  of  a Mathematical  Theory  of  Elasticity,  481. — Part  I. 
On  stresses  and  strains  (perfect  and  imperfect  concurrences  between  stresses  and  strains,  &c.), 
481 ; Part  II.  On  the  mechanical  conditions  of  relation  between  stresses  and  strains,  expe- 
rienced by  an  elastic  solid  (reduction  of  the  potential  function  ; six  principal  strains  of  an 
elastic  solid,  &c.),  493. 

Bakerian  Lecture,  On  the  Electro-dynamic  Qualities  of  Metals, 

649. — On  the  electric  convection  of  heat,  651 ; on  thermo-electric  inversions,  698  ; effects  of 
mechanical  strain,  and  of  magnetization,  on  the  thermo-electric  qualities  of  metals,  709 ; 
methods  for  comparing  and  determining  galvanic  resistances,  illustrated  by  preliminary  expe- 
riments on  the  effects  of  tension  and  of  magnetization  on  the  electric  conductivity  of  metals, 
730;  on  the  effects  of  magnetization  on  the  electric  conductivity  of  metals,  736. 

Tomes  (John,  Esq.).  On  the  Presence  of  Fibrils  of  Soft  Tissue  in  the  Dentinal  Tubes,  515. 

Tyndall  (Professor  John).  Further  Researches  on  the  Polarity  of  the  Diamagnetic  Force, 
237. — Introduction,  237  ; description  of  apparatus,  240;  experiments,  deportment  of  diamag- 
netic bodies,  243 ; deportment  of  magnetic  bodies,  252. 

W. 

Welsh  (John,  Esq.).  Account  of  the  Construction  of  a Standard  Barometer,  and  Description  of 
the  Apparatus  and  Processes  employed  in  the  Verification  of  Barometers  at  the  Kew 
Observatory,  507. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  BY  TAYLOR  AND  FRANCIS,  RED  LION  COURT,  FLEET  STREET. 


■ • . ■ •■/■Sy  -•.  • ''  •,  J*  S”  '»''  ..*' 

» ’ ' ■■  \ w '•  %',  • '■■.•'  V' ■ 


v»"i59’ 


■;  ■ ‘Fif  je 


vdt  \''  '■■Ay.iS  I '■'  < } iifi ‘ . '3 

■'  ■ , • <•  ' ■'<,■■  ‘ ..  '■  '■  ^ 1 ' •.'■i  ;i-'-  I iA?1|  ''.'V,  '.  . .1 

^ :>  ., * - ..  v'''^|'  ^ -!i, 

' .yj-ii,  - •:  A * ina-ti  Iti  .1.  , -'"/  i-Aw,  ^ 


>h 


} • 

•'  I .' 


^*y  'i'  ‘ ^ - "'  , ■ ■ • '/ 


*^v 

¥ 

, »■ . i 


(.. , 


I 


4^. 


Wy--.y- 


■ i;ift>-  < '■  - i\:>  'V I; 

^ ^ '‘'.X  X.-..  X „ .'  ■ ' XXV'^..  XX:.i'..l  . ^X-. 


.V,.  > .T1.  t -I,.:! --.v,.  ^ ^ . ( . :’-^X,^-''‘  X^  ' ’'  ' '■' 

■ y ' ->  -'v^'?  .;X  X ijK  t ' 


' rw : I 


: Ai;; f i.'ii 

.^yy  •>:^y'}m^ 


‘•>.>J^...-..  .v»X’'^;'>-.  • .j:-.  '•  •■••^ 

}{-.'’v..;%A ^ S#'!jii. ' .p  J‘:!Hift:  '■  ' : ■''  X .^54  * J 

IX'v-'  asm""* -XM'jl 


yy^yyyma  ym-- 

' •■■■  '".'X'''..', 'Xa  ' '-M 


••yi . ( 


■•'■■  >■  ' :v  ':  ir.)j;.iX5v>sVV'^  :'>k  . 

>/'■'■•*'  . ‘''a ■ rra,. v:,vot'(t  a.ix^a/i  . .. 

' ' ' ' '"^  "X  ' '' 


.1^ 


'■■  ...’ffvVJIOiiHL 


PRESENTS 

RECEIVED  BY 

THE  ROYAL  SOCIE 

WITH  THE 

NAMES  OF  THE  DONORS. 


From  November  1855  to  June  1856. 

Presents. 

ACADEMIES  and  SOCIETIES. 

Amsterdam  : — 

Verhandelingen  der  Koninklijke  Akademie  van  Wetenschappen.  2*^®  Deel. 
410.  Amsterdam  1855. 

Verslagen  en  Mededeelingen.  2'^®  Deel.  3'^^  Stuk.  S'*®  Deel.  P‘®  2'*®  Stuk. 
8 VO.  Amsterdam  1854—55. 

Organiek  Reglement  der  Akademie,  &c.  4to.  Amsterdam  1855. 

Catalogus  der  Boekerij,  van  de  K.  Akademie.  P*®  All.  8vo.  Amsterdam 
1855. 

Basel : — Verhandlungen  der  Naturforschenden  Gesellschaft.  2®®  Heft.  8vo. 

Basel  1856. 

Batavia ; — 

Verhandelingen  van  het  Bataviaasch  Genootschap  van  Kunsten  en  Weten- 
schappen. Deel  25.  4to.  Batavia  1853. 

Tijdschrift  voor  Indische,  Taal-,  Land-  en  Volkenkunde. 

P*®  en  2“*®  Deel.  8vo.  Batavia  1852-53. 

Berlin : — 

Abhandlungen  der  Kdnigl.  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften.  Aus  dem  Jahre 
1854.  4to.  Berlin  1855. 

Monatsbericht.  May  to  Dec.  1855.  Jan.  to  Apr.  1856.  8vo. 

Die  Fortschritte  der  Physik  im  Jahre  1850-51-52.  8vo.  Berlin  1855. 
Bologna : — 

Memorie  della  Accademia  delle  Scienze.  Tomo  V.  4to.  Bologna  1854. 
Rendiconto  delle  Session!,  1853-54.  8vo.  Bologna  1854. 

Bombay  : — Transactions  of  the  Medical  and  Physical  Society.  No.  2.  New 
Series.  8vo.  Bombay  1855. 

Boston : — 

Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences.  Vol.  II. 
No.  21.  Vol.  III.  No.  14.  8vo. 

Proceedings  of  the  Boston  Society  of  Natural  History.  Vols.  I.  to  IV.,  and 
Vol.  V.  Nos.  1 to  II.  8vo.  Boston  1844-55. 


T Y, 


Donors. 

The  Academy. 


The  Society. 

The  Society. 


The  Academy. 

The  Physical  Society. 
The  Academy. 

The  Society. 

The  Academy. 

The  Society. 


MDCCCLVI. 


a 


[ 2 ] 


Presents. 

ACADEMIES  and  SOCIETIES  {continued) . 

Boston  : — 

Journal  of  the  Boston  Society  of  Natural  History.  Vol.  V.  No.  4.  Vol.  VI. 
Nos.  1,  2,  3.  8vo.  Boston  1847-53. 

Breslau : — 

Novorum  Actorum  Acadeniiae  Cajsarese  Leopoldino-Carolinse  Naturae 
Curiosorum.  Vol.  XXV.  Part  1.  4to.  Vratislavicc  et  Bounce  1855. 
Supplenientum  (Vol.  XXIV.)  sistens  Cestodeorum  evolutio  ex  propriis  suis 
observationibus  exposuit  Dr.  G.  R.  Wagener.  4to.  1854. 

Concours  de  I’Academie... propose  par  le  Prince  Anatole  de  Demidoff.  4to. 
July  1855. 

Zwei  und  dreissigster  Jahres-bericht  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fur  vater- 
liindisclie  Kultur.  4to.  Breslau  1855. 

Brussels : — 

Memoires  de  I’Academie  Royale  des  Sciences.  Tomes  XXVIIL,  XXIX. 
4to.  Bruxelles  1854-55. 

Memoires  couronnes  et  Memoires  des  Savants  etrangers.  Tome  "NT. 

2“'^  Part®.  8vo.  Bruxelles  1855. 

Bibliographie  Academique,  1854.  8vo.  Bruxelles  1855. 

Annuaire  de  I’Academie,  1855.  8vo.  Bruxelles  1855- 
Bulletins:  Tome  XXI.  Part  2.  Tome  XXII.  Part  1.  8vo.  Bruxelles 
1854-55. 

Essai  d’  une  Geographic  Physique  de  la  Belgique,  &c.  Par  J.  C.  Houzeau. 
8 VO.  Bruxelles  1854. 

Calcutta: — 

Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.  Nos.  2 to  7,  1855.  8vo. 

Plates  to  Mr.  E.  C.  Bayley’s  Paper  in  Vol.  XXL 
Cherbourg: — Memoires  de  la  Societe  Imperiale  des  Sciences  Naturelles. 

Tome  II.  8vo.  Cherbourg  1854. 

Christiania : — 

Beretning  om  Kongeriget  Norges  Okonomiske  Tilstand  i Aarene  1846-50. 
4to.  Christiania  1853. 

Midlertidigt  Reglement  for  Gaustad  Sindsyge-Asyl.  8vo.  Christiania 
1855. 

Om  Dodeligheden  i Norge.  At  Eilert  Sundt.  8vo.  Christiania  1855. 

Det  Kongelige  Norske  Frederiks  Universitets  Aarsberetning  for  1853. 
8vo.  Christiania  1855. 

Nyt  Magazin  for  Naturvidenskaberne.  Udgives  af  den  physiographiske 
Forening  i Christiania  ved  Chr.  Langberg.  8'*®  Binds.  3‘'®  I'''®  Heft.  8vo. 
Christiania  1 854-55. 

Kong  Christian  den  Fjerdes  Norske  Lovbog  af  1604.  Af  Fr.  Hallager  og 
Fr.  Brandt.  8vo.  Christiania  1855. 

Das  Christiania-Silurbecken.  Chemischgeognostisch  Untersucht.  Af  T. 
Kjerulf.  4to.  Christiania  1855. 

De  Prisca  Re  Monetaria  Norvegiae,  et  de  Numis  aliquot  et  Ornamentis, 
in  Norvvegiarepertis.  Octavo,  Christianiae,  mdcccliv.  AfC.  A.  Holmboe. 
Copenhagen: — Oversigt  over  det  Kgl.  danske  Videnskabernes  Selskabs...i 
Aaret  1854.  8vo.  Kjdbenhavn. 


Donors. 


The  Society. 


The  Academy. 


The  Society. 


The  Academy. 


The  Society. 


The  Society. 


The  Royal  University. 


The  Academy. 


[ 3 ] 


Presents. 

ACADEMIES  and  SOCIETIES  {continued). 

Dijon : — Memoires  de  I’Academie  Imperiale  des  Sciences,  Arts  et  Belles- 
lettres.  Serie.  Tom.  III.  and  IV.  8vo.  Dijon  1855-56. 

Dublin : — 

Royal  Irish  Academy.  Transactions.  Vol.  XXII.  Part  6.  ■ito.  Dublin 
1855. 

Proceedings.  Vol.  VI.  Part  2.  8vo. 

Royal  Dublin  Society.  Journal.  No.  1.  8vo.  Dublin  1856. 

Geological  Society.  Journal.  Vol.  VII.  Parts  1 and  2.  8vo.  Dublin  1856. 
Edinburgh : — 

Royal  Society.  Transactions.  Vol.  XXL  Part  2.  4to.  Edinburgh  1854-55. 
Proceedings.  Vol.  III.  No.  45.  8vo. 

Transactions  of  the  Royal  Scottish  Society  of  Arts.  Vol.  IV.  Part  3.  8vo. 
Edinburgh  1855. 

Architectural  Institute  of  Scotland.  Transactions.  Vol.  IV.  Part  1.  8vo. 
Edinburgh  1855. 

Frankfurt  a.  M. : — Abhandlungen  herausgegeben  von  der  Senckenbergischen 
Naturforschenden  Gesellschaft.  I"  Bd.  Frankfurt  a.  M.  1854-55. 

Geneva: — Memoires  de  la  Societe  de  Physique  et  d’Histoire  Naturelle. 

Tome  XIV.  P®  Partie.  4to.  Geneve  et  Paris  1855. 

Gottingen  : — Nachrichten  von  der  Kdnigl.  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften, 
vom  Jahre  1855.  8vo.  Gottingen. 

Lausanne : — 

Bulletin  de  la  Society  Vaudoise  des  Sciences  Naturelles.  Tome  IV.  No.  33. 
8vo.  1854. 

Programme  des  Connaissances...rEcole  Speciale.  8vo.  1854. 

Leipzig : — 

Abhandlungen  der  Kdnigl.  Sachsischen  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften. 
Bd.  4.  3 pts.  8vo.  Leipzig  1 855. 

Berichte  — Mathematisch-Physische  Classe,  1854.  Parts  1,  2.  8vo. 
Preisschriften  gekront  und  herausgegeben  von  der  Fiirstlich  Jablonowski- 
schen  Gesellschaft.  FI.  B.  Geinitz.  Darstellung  der  Flora,  u.s.w.  8vo. 
Leipzig  1854. 

Mit  14  Kupfertafeln  in  gross  folio. 

Liege: — Memoires  de  la  Societe  Royale  des  Sciences.  Tom.  X.  8vo.  Liege 
1855. 

Liverpool : — 

Proceedings  of  the  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society.  No.  9.  8vo.  Liver- 
pool 1855. 

The  Historic  Society  of  Lancashire  and  Cheshire.  Proceedings  and  Papers. 

Vols.  I.  to  VII.  8vo.  Liverpool  1849-1855. 

Laws  of  the  Society.  8vo.  Liverpool  1854. 

List  of  Members,  Jan.  1,  1855.  8vo.  Liverpool. 

London : — 

British  Architects.  Papers  read  at  the  Royal  Institute  of  British  Archi- 
tects, Session  1854-55.  4to.  London  1855. 

British  Association.  Report  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Meeting.  Sept.  1854. 
8 VO.  London  1855. 

a 2 


Donors. 
The  Academy. 

The  Academy. 

The  Society. 
The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Institute. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 
The  Society. 
The  Society. 
The  Society. 


The  Society. 

The  Society. 


The  Institute. 
The  Association. 


[ 4 ] 


Presents. 

ACADEMIES  and  SOCIETIES  {continued). 

London : — 

Chemical  Society.  Quarterly  Journal.  Vol.  VIII.  Nos.  2 to  4.  8vo.  1855. 
Vol.  IX.  No.  1,  1856. 

Entomological  Society.  Transactions.  Vol.  III.  Parts  5 to  8.  8vo.  1855- 
1856. 

Etlinological  Society.  Journal.  Vol.  IV.  8vo.  London  1856. 

Geological  Society.  Quarterly  Journal.  Vol.  XI.  Parts  3 and  4.  Vol.  XII, 
Part  1.  8vo.  London  1855-56. 

Geological  Survey,  Memoirs  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Great  Britain, 
dec.  Part  1.  The  Iron  Ores  of  Great  Britain.  8vo.  London  1856. 
Memoirs  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  the  United  Kingdom.  Decade  5.  4to. 
London  1856. 

Linnean  Society.  Transactions.  Vol.  XXI.  Part  IV.  4to.  London  1855. 

Proceedings.  Nos.  59  to  66.  8vo.  Vol.  II. 

Address  of  Thomas  Bell,  Esq.,  The  President,  May  1 855. 

List  of  the  Society,  1855. 

Journal  of  the  Proceedings.  Vol.  1.  Nos,  1,  2.  8vo. 

London  1856. 

Pathological  Society.  Transactions.  Vol.  VI.  8vo.  London  1855. 
Photographic  Society.  Journal.  Nos.  32  to  42. 

Royal  Agricultural  Society.  Journal.  Vol.  XVI.  8vo.  London  1856. 
Royal  Asiatic  Society.  Journal.  Vol.  XV.  Part  2.  8vo.  London  1855. 
Vol.  XVI.  Part  2.  1866,  with  three  Maps,  illustrative  of  the  localities  of 
Nineveh. 

Royal  Astronomical  Society,  Memoirs,  Vol.  XXIV.  4to.  London  1856. 

Monthly  Notices.  Vol.  XV.  and  Vol.  XVI. 

Nos.  1 to  7.  8vo. 

Royal  Institution.  Notices.  Part  5,  Nov.  1854  to  July  1855. 

Royal  Medical  and  Chirurgical  Society.  Medico-Chirurgical  Transactions. 
Vol.  XXXVIII.  8vo.  London  185.5. 

Royal  Society  of  Literature.  Annual  Report,  Address,  and  List  of  Mem- 
bers. 8vo.  1855. 

Society  of  Antiquaries.  Archasologia.  Vol.  XXXVI.  4to.  London  1855. 

Proceedings,  Nos.  41,  42.  Vol.  III.  8vo.  1855. 

List  of  the  Society,  April  23,  1855. 

Society  of  Arts.  Journal.  Nos.  134  to  186.  8vo.  1855-56. 

Catalogue  of  the  Eighth  Exhibition  of  Inventions.  8vo. 

London  1856. 

Statistical  Society.  Journal.  Vol.  XVIII.  Parts  3,  4.  8vo.  1855.  Vol.  XIX. 
Part  1.  London  1856. 

Zoological  Society.  Proceedings.  Nos.  236  to  298.  Parts  19  to  23,  8vo. 
1851-55. 

Reports  of  the  Council  and  Auditors,  1852,  1853, 

1854,  1855.  8 VO. 

Madrid : — 

Memorias  de  la  Real  Academia  de  Ciencias.  Tom.  1.  Part  3,  Tercera  serie. 
Ci.  nut.  4to.  Madrid  1854. 


Donors. 


The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Director-General  of  the 
Ordnance  Survey. 


The  Society. 
The  Society. 


The  Society. 
The  Society. 
The  Society. 
The  Society. 


The  Society. 
The  Society. 

The  Institution. 
The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 


The  Society. 


The  Society. 
The  Society. 
The  Society. 


The  Academy. 


[ 5 ] 


Presents. 

ACADEMIES  and  SOCIETIES  {continued). 

Madrid : — 

Memorias  de  la  Real  Academia  de  Ciencias.  TomoII.  Ciencias  exactas.  4to. 
Madrid  1853. 

Resumen  de  las  Actas,  1851  a 1852:  1852  a 1853.  4to.  Madrid 

1854. 

Manchester: — Memoirs  of  the  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society.  Second 
Series.  Vol.  XII.  8vo.  London  1855. 

Melbourne : — Transactions  of  the  Philosophical  Society  of  Victoria.  Vol.  I. 
8vo.  Melbourne  1855. 

Moscow: — Bulletin  de  la  Societe Imperiale  des  Naturalistes.  Tomes  II.,  III., 
IV.,  VII.,  VIII.,  1830-35,  et  Annees  1839,  Nos.  1,  2,  3.  1843,  No.  4. 
1844,  1845,  1848.  Nos.  1-4.  1853,  Nos.  3-4.  1854,  No.  1.  8vo. 

Munich : — 

Abhandlungen  der  Historischen  Classe  der  Kdnigl.  Bayerischen  Akademie 
der  Wissenschaften.  7™  Bd.  3"^  Abth.  4to.  Munchen  1855. 

Philosoph-Philologischen  Classe.  7™  Bd.  3"  Abth.  4to. 

Munchen  1855. 

Gelehrte  Anzeigen.  Bd.  40,  41.  4to.  Mwichen  1855. 

Verzeichniss  der  Verlagsschriften,  Reden  und  Abhandlungen.  8vo.  Miin- 
chen  1855. 

Dr.  Lorenz  Hiibner’s  Biographische  Charakteristik  von  Joseph  Wissmayr. 
4to.  Munchen  1855. 

Ueber  die  Gliederung  der  Bevdlkerung  des  Kbnigreichs  Bayern,  von 
T.  B.  W.  von  Hermann.  4to.  Munchen  1855. 

Rede  iiberdie  Grenzscheide  der  Wissenschaften  von  F.  von  Thiersch.  4to. 
Munehen  1855. 

Rede  in  der...KbnigL  Akad...zu  ihrer  96“  Stiftungsfeier.  4to.  Munchen 

1855. 

Naples : — Accademia  delle  Scienze.  Elettroscopio  del  Cav.  Macedonio  Melloni. 

4to.  Napoli  1855. 

New  Orleans : — 

Proceedings  of  the  New  Orleans  Academy  of  Sciences.  Vol.  1.  No.  1.  8vo. 
1854. 

Constitution  and  By-laws.  8vo.  New  Orleans  1854. 

New  York : — 

American  Geographical  and  Statistical  Society.  Bulletin.  Vol.  1.  Part  3. 
8 VO.  New  York  1854. 

Documents  relative  to  the  Colonial  History  of  the  State  of  New  York,  pro- 
cured in  Holland,  England,  and  France,  by  J.  R.  Broadhead.  Vols.  HI. 
and  IV.  4to.  Albany  1853-54. 

Annual  Report  of  the  Commissioners  of  Emigration  of  the  State  of  New 
York,  for  the  Year  1854.  8vo.  New  York  1855. 

Annual  Report  of  the  Superintendent  of  the  Banking  Department  of  the 
State  of  New  York.  8vo.  Albany  1855. 

Annual  Reports  of  the  State  Engineer  and  Surveyor,  on  the  Canals  of  the 
State  of  New  York.  Albany  1854-55. 


Donors. 

The  Academy. 

The  Society. 
The  Society. 
The  Society. 

The  Academy. 


The  Academy. 

The  Academy. 


The  Society. 


[ 6 ] 


Presents. 

ACADEMIES  and  SOCIETIES  (continued). 

New  York : — 

Annual  Report  of  the  Canal  Commissioners  of  the  State  of  New  York.  8vo. 
Albany  1855. 

Sixth  Annual  Report  of  the  Governors  of  the  Almshouse  of  New  York,  for 

1854.  8vo.  New  York  1855. 

Annual  Report  of  the  State  Engineer  and  Surveyor  on  the  Railroad  Sta- 
tistics of  the  State  of  New  York.  8vo.  Albany  1853. 

on  the  Railroads  of  the  State  of  New  York.  8vo.  Albany 

1854—55. 

Report  of  the  Committee  appointed  to  examine  and  report  the  Causes  of 
Railroad  Accidents,  &c.  8vo.  Albany  1853. 

Oxford: — Ashmolean  Society.  Proceedings.  No.  33.  8vo.  1855. 

Paris : — 

Memoires  de  ITnstitut  Imperiale  de  France,  Acad,  des  Inscriptions  et  Belles- 
lettres.  Tome  XVIII.  4to.  Paris  1855. 

Memoires  de  I’Academie  des  Sciences  Morales  et  Politiques.  Tom.  IX.  4to. 
Paris  1855. 

Comptes  Rendus  de  I’Academie  des  Sciences.  Tom.  XL.  Liv.  23  to  26. 
Tom.  XLI.  Nos.  1 to  9,  11  to  27.  1855.  Tables.  Tomes  XXXIX.,  XL. 
4to.  1855. 

Annales  des  Mines.  Tom.  VI.  Liv.  4,  5,  6,  1854.  Tom.  VII.  Liv.  1,  2,  3, 

1855.  8vo.  Paris. 

Annuaire  de  la  Societe  Meteorologique  de  France.  Tom.  I",  1853.  8vo. 
Paris  1853. 

Archives  du  Museum  d’Histoire  Naturelle.  Tom.  VII.  Liv.  3,  4.  Tom.  VIII. 
Liv.  1,  2.  4to.  Paris  1855. 

Bulletin  de  la  Societe  de  Geographic.  Tomes  IX.,  X.  4“®  Serie.  8vo. 
Paris  1855. 

Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Geologique  de  France.  2“®  Serie.  Tom.  XII. 

Feuilles  12  to  60.  Tom.  XIII.  Feuilles  1 to  7.  8vo.  Paris  1854-55-56. 
Comptes  Rendus  des  Seances  et  Memoires  de  la  Societe  de  Biologie.  Tomes 
I.  to  V.  l^"^®  Serie,  1850-54.  Tome  I.  2“®  Serie,  1855.  8vo.  Paris. 
Philadelphia : — 

Academy  of  Natural  Sciences.  Proceedings.  Nos.  2 to  7.  8vo. 

American  Philosophical  Society.  Proceedings.  Vol  IV.  No.  29.  Vol.  VI. 
Nos.  51  and  52.  8vo. 

Franklin  Institute.  Journal.  Vol.  XXIX.  No.  6.  Vol.  XXX.  Nos.  1 to  6. 
Vol.  XXXI.  Nos.  1 to  5.  8vo.  Philadelphia.  1855-56. 

Rome  : — Atti  dell’  Accademia  Pontificia  de’  Nuovi  Lincei.  Anno  5.  Sessione 
5,  6.  4to.  Roma  1853-54. 

San  Francisco  : — Proceedings  of  the  California  Acadimy  of  Natural  Sciences, 
Sept.  1854  to  Jan.  1855.  4to. 

Stockholm : — 

Kongl.  Vetenskaps-Akademiens  Handlingar  for  ar  1853.  8vo.  Stockholm 
1855. 

Ofversigt.  — Elfte  argangen  1854.  8vo.  Stockholm  1855. 


Donors. 


The  Society. 


The  Society. 
The  Institute. 


L’Ecole  des  Mines. 
The  Society. 

The  Museum. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Society. 

The  Academy. 

The  Society. 

The  Institute. 

The  Academy. 

The  Academy. 

The  Academy. 


[ 7 ] 


Donors. 


Presents. 

ACADEMIES  and  SOCIETIES  {continued). 

Stockholm : — 

Berattelse  om  Framstegen  i Insekternas,  Myriapodernas  och  Arachnidernas 
Naturalhistoria  for  1851  och  1852.  C.  H.  Boheman.  8vo.  Stockholm 

1854. 

Arsberattelser  om  Botaniska  Arbeten...fdr  aren  1845-1848.  J.  E.Wikstrom. 
Sednare  Delen.  8vo.  Stockholm  1855. 

Tasmania : — 

Papers  and  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Van  Diemen’s  Land.  Vol.  II. 
Part  3.  8vo.  Tasmania  1851. 

Tasmanian  Contributions  to  the  Universal  Exhibition  of  Industry  at  Paris. 

1855.  Fol. 

Toronto  : — The  Canadian  Journal,  May  to  December  1855.  4to.  Nos.  1 and  2. 
New  Series.  8vo.  Toronto  1856. 

Turin : — Memorie  della  Reale  Accademia  delle  Scienze.  Serie  Seconda. 

Tom.  XIV.  Tom.  XV.  1855.  4to.  Torino  1854. 

Utrecht ; — 

Aanteekeningen  ...  van  het  Provinciaal  Utiechtsch  Genootschap  van  Kun- 
sten  en  Wetenschappen,  1845-1855.  8vo.  Utrecht  1846-55. 

Verslag  — van  het  Jaar  1854.  8vo. 

Naamlijst  der  Leden,  1854.  8vo. 

Verhandelingeii  over  de  Verdiensten  van  Gijsbert  Karel  van  Hogendorp, 
als  Staatshuishoudkundige  ten  aanzien  van  Nederland.  Door  O.  Van  Rees. 
8 VO.  Utrecht  1854. 

Uittreksel  uit  de  Meteorologische  Waarnemingen,  &c.  Door  W.  Wencke- 
bach. 8vo.  Utrecht  1844. 

Uitkomsten  der  Meteorologische  Waarnemingen,  1839-1843.  Door  R.  Van 
Rees.  8vo,  Utrecht  1844. 

Uitkomsten  der  Meteorologische  Waarnemingen,  gedaan  te  Breda  van 
1839-1846.  Door  Dr.  C.  H.  D.  Buys  Ballot.  8vo.  Utrecht  1848. 

te  Utrecht,  en 

op  eenige  andere  Plaatsen  in  Nederland,  ih.  1849-50.  4to.  Utrecht\%o\. 
Meteorologische  Waarnemingen  in  Nederland,  1851.  ih.  8vo.  Utrecht  1852. 

en  afwijkingen  der  Teinperatur  en  Barome- 

terhoogte  ook  op  enkele  Plaatsen  Buiten  Nederland,  1852.  ih.  Obi.  4to. 
Utrecht  1852. 

Windwaarnemingen  in  Nederland,  1849-1850.  Door  F.  W.  C.  Krecke. 
Obi.  4to.  Lith. 

Description  de  I’Observatoire  Meteorologique  et  Magnetique  a Utrecht,  ih. 
8 VO.  Utrecht  1850. 

Vienna : — 

Denkschriften  der  Kaiserlichen'  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften.  Phil.- 
Hist.  Classe.  3"  Bd.  Fol.  Wien  1852. 

6"  Band.  4to.  Wien  1855. 

Math.-Natur.  Classe.  8"  and  9"  Bd.  4to.  Wien  1854-55. 

Sitzungsberichte.  Math.-Natur.  Classe.  1”  Bd.  8"  Bd.  Heft  4 and  5.  14"  and 
15"  Bd.  Heft  1-3.  16"  Bd.  Heft  1,  2.  17"  Bd.  Heft  1,  2,  3.  8vo.  Wien 
1848-55. 


The  Academy. 


The  Society. 


The  Canadian  Institute. 
The  Academy. 

The  Society. 


The  Academy. 


[ 8 ] 


Presents. 

ACADEMIES  and  SOCIETIES  {continued). 

Vienna : — 

Sitzungsberichte.  Phil.-Hist.Classe.  8"Bd.  Heft  3-5. 13"  Bd.Heft  3. 1'i"  Bd. 

Heft  1,  2. 15"  Bd.  Heft  1-3.  16",  17"  Bd.  Heft  1,  2.  8vo.  Wien  1852-55. 
Almanach,  1855. 

Jahrbiicher  der  k.  k.  Central-Anstalt  fiir  Meteorologie  und  Erdraagnet- 
ismus.  3"  Bd.  Von  K.  Kreil.  ito.  Wien  1855. 

Resultate  aus  den  Magnetischen  Beobachtungen  zu  Prag,  von  K.  Kreil.  4to. 
Wien  1855. 

Integration  der  Linearen  Differentialgleichungen  von  Jos.  Petzval.  1"  Bd. 
4to.  Wien  1853. 

Die  Vegetationsverhaltnisse  von  Iglau,  von  A.  Pokorny.  8vo.  Wien  1852. 
VersucheinerGeschicbte  der  Pflanzenvvelt,  von  Dr.  F.  Unger.  8vo.  Wien  18.52. 
Systema  Helminthum.  Auctore  C.  M.  Diesing.  Vols.  I.,  H.  8vo.  Vindohonoe 
1850-51. 

Genera  et  Species  PlantarumFossilium.  Auctore  F.Unger.  8vo.  Vindobona. 
1850. 

Recueil  d’ltineraires  dans  la  Turquie  d’Europe.  Par  Ami  Boue.  Tomes  I.,  H. 
8 VO.  Vienne  1854. 

Abhandlungen  der  k.  k.  Geologischen  Reichsanstalt.  Band  2.  5"  Jahrgang. 

Nos.  3 and  4.  4to.  Wien  1855. 

Jahrbuch.  6"  Jahrgang,  Nos.  1,  2.  4to.  Wien  1854-55. 

Coup-d’ceil  geologique  sur  les  Mines  de  la  Monarchie  Autrichienne.  Par 
F.  de  Hauer  et  F.  Foetterle,  avec  une  Introduction  par  Guil.  Haidinger. 
4to.  Viermt  1855. 

Washington : — 

Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge.  Vol.  VII.  4to.  Washington \B55. 
Eighth  and  Ninth  Annual  Reports  of  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the  Smith- 
sonian Institution.  8vo.  Washington  1854-55. 

Wurzburg  : — Verhandlungen  der  Physicalisch-  Medicinischen  Gesellschaft. 
Vols.  I.  and  II.  8vo.  Erlangen  1850-51.  Vols.  III.,  IV.,  V.  and  VI.  Heft 
1 and  3.  8vo.  IVurzburg  1852-55. 

ACL  AND  (H.  W.)  Memoir  on  the  Cholera  at  Oxford  in  the  }'^ear  1854,  with 
considerations  suggested  by  the  Epidemic.  4to.  London  and  Oxford  1856. 
ADELMANN  (P.)  Tractatus  anatomico-chirurgicus  de  Aneurysmate  spurio 
Varicoso.  4to.  Wirceburgi  1821. 

AIDHUSANUS  (J.  S.)  De  Ovorum  Mammalium  Velamentis.  8vo.  Wirceburgi 
1816. 

AIRY  (G.  B.)  Report  to  the  Board  of  Visitors  of  the  Royal  Observatory, 
Greenwich,  June  7,  1856.  4to. 

ANGHERA  (D.)  Quadratura  del  Cerchio,  Trisezione  dell’  Angolo  e Dupli- 
cazione  del  Cubo,  Pi’oblemi  geometricamente  risoluti  e dimostrati.  8vo. 
Malta  1854. 

ANGIUS  (V.)  L’Automa  Aerio  o sviluppo  della  soluzione  del  Problema  sulla 
Direzione  degli  Aerostat!.  8vo.  Torino  1855. 

ANONYMOUS:— 

Almanaque  Nautico  para  el  Ano  1857-  8vo.  Cadiz  1855. 


Donors. 


The  Academy. 


The  I.  R.  Institute  of  Geo- 
logy. 


The  Institution. 


The  Society. 


The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 
The  Author. 

The  Author. 


The  Observatory  of  San 
Fernando. 


[ 9 ] 

Presents. 

ANONYMOUS  {continued'). 

Annals  of  the  Astronomical  Observatory  of  Harvard  College.  Vol.  I.  Part  2. 
Two  Copies.  4to.  Cambridge  1855. 

Astronomische  Beobachtungen  auf  der  Kdniglichen  Universitats  Stern- 
warte  zu  Kdnigsberg.  With  Bessel’s  Portrait.  27*'  Abth.  1“  und  2®'' 
Theil.  Pol.  Konigsberg  ] 856. 

Catalogo  della  preziosa  libraria  gia  appurtenuta...il  Comm'®  Lodovico 
Ciccolini.  12mo.  Roma  1855. 

Catalogue  of  a Collection  of  Works  on,  or  having  reference  to,  the  Exhibition 
of  1851,  in  the  possession  of  C.  W.  Dilke.  Printed  for  private  Circulation, 
8vo.  1855. 

Die  Landtafel  des  Markgrafthumes  Mahren.  Lief.  4-6.  4to.  Briinn  1856. 
Droogten  in  den  Noorder  Atlantischen  Oceaan.  Extract  uit  het  Meteorologisch 
Journaal  van  Kapitein  R.  J.  Scholten.  4to. 

Flora  Batava.  Afl.  177,  178.  4to.  Amsterdam. 

List  of  the  Fellows,  &c.  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons.  July  1855.  8vo. 

L.  Tabulae  Vegetationis  in  Brasilia  physiognomiam  illustrantes,  E.  Martii 
Flora  Brasiliensi  seorsim  expressae.  Fol.  1856. 

Nachricht  von  der  Vollendung  der  Gradmessung  zwischen  der  Donau  und 
dem  Eismeere.  8vo.  St.  Petersburg  1853. 

Ninth  Annual  Report  of  the  Board  of  Agriculture  of  the  State  of  Ohio.  8vo. 
Columbus  1855. 

Observations  Meteorologiques  faites  a Nijn^-Taguilsk.  Annees  1852,  1853, 
1854.  8 VO.  Paris. 

Quarterly  Return  of  Marriages,  Births  and  Deaths.  1855.  Nos.  28  and  29. 
Report. ..  vindicating  the  Rights  of  Charles  T.  Jackson  to  the  Discovery  of 
the  Anaesthetic  effects  of  Ether  Vapour.  8vo. 

Report  to  the  Registrar-General  on  the  International  Statistical  Congress  held 
at  Paris  in  1855.  8vo. 

Report  on  the  Nomenclature  and  Statistical  Classification  of  Diseases  for 
Statistical  Returns.  8vo. 

The  Correspondence  relating  to  the  Lancet  Sanatory  Commission,  &c.  8vo. 
London  1856. 

The  Great  Arctic  Mystery.  8vo.  London  1856. 

The  Great  Powers.  Supplement  to  the  Report  on  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Statistical  Congress  in  Paris.  8vo. 

The  London  University  Calendar,  1856.  8vo.  London  1856. 

The  Royal  Gallery  of  Art.  Parts  9 to  16.  Fol.  London  1855-56. 

Third  Report  of  the  Commissionei’s  for  the  Exhibition  of  1851.  8vo.  London 
1856. 

Uitkomsten  van  Wetenschap  en  Ervaring  aangaande  Winden  en  Zeestroo- 
mirigen  en  sommige  Gedeelten  van  den  Oceaan.  4to.  Utrecht  1855. 
ARNOTT  (N.)  On  the  Smokeless  Fireplace,  Chimney  Valves,  and  other 
Means,  Old  and  New,  of  obtaining  healthful  Warmth  and  Ventilation.  8vo. 
London  1855. 


Donors. 

The  Observatory. 
The  Observatory. 


G.  Rennie,  Esq.,  F.R.S. 
C.  W.  Dilke,  Esq. 


The  Publication  Committee. 

The  Director  der  Afdeeling 
Zeevaart. 

His  Majesty  the  King  of 
the  Netherlands. 

The  College. 

Dr.  C.  F.  P.  von  Martius, 
For.  Mem.  R.S. 

Observatory,  Pulkowa. 

The  Ohio  State  Board. 

The  Prince  Demidofif. 

The  Registrar-General. 

C.  T.  Jackson,  M.D.,  per 
C.  D.  Archibald,  Esq., 
F.R.S. 

The  Registrar-General. 


Unknown. 

The  Author. 

Unknown. 

The  University. 

S.  C.  Hall,  Esq. 

The  Commissioners. 

The  Royal  Netherlands 
Meteorological  Institute. 
The  Author. 


MDCCCLVI. 


h 


[ 10  ] 


Presents. 

ASCHERN  (H.)  Ueber  den  Sitz  der  Placenta  in  den  Muttertrornpeten.  8vo. 
Wurzburg  1841. 

BABBAGE  (C.)  Observations  addressed,  at  the  last  Anniversary,  to  the  Pre- 
sident and  Fellows  of  the  Royal  Society,  after  the  delivery  of  the  Medals. 
8 VO.  London  1856. 

■■  A Word  to  the  Wise.  Observations  on  Peerage  for  Life. 

8vo.  London  1856. 

BACHE  (A.  D.)  Address  to  the  American  Association  for  the  year  1851,  on 
retiring  from  the  Duties  of  President.  8vo. 

DAILY  (Francis,  the  late,  F.R.S.)  Journal  of  a Tour  in  the  Unsettled  Parts 
of  North  America  in  1796  and  1797.  8vo.  London  1856. 

BALEGUER  (F.)  History  of  Asiatic  Cholera  Morbus,  &c.  8vo.  Agra. 

Claims  to  Public  Confidence  ....  in  favour  of  my  Method 

of  treating  some  Tropical  Diseases,  principally  Asiatic  Cholera.  8vo.  Cawn- 
pore  1855. 

Cholera  Asiatique  : Ou  il  prend  sa  Source.  4to.  1855. 

BARKER  (T.  H.)  On  Cystic  Entozoa  in  the  Human  Kidney.  8vo.  London 
1856. 

BARLOW  (P.  W.)  On  some  Peculiar  Features  of  the  Water-bearing  Strata 
of  the  London  Basin.  8vo.  London  1855. 

BARTHELMESS  (R.)  Die  Chronische  Entziindung  der  Eierstdcke  mitihren 
Folgen.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1844. 

BEAMISH  (N.  L.)  On  the  Uses  and  Application  of  Cavalry  in  War,  from 
the  Text  of  Bismark.  London  1855. 

BELL  (Thos.)  Horm  Carcinologicae.  A Monograph  of  the  Leucosidae.  4to. 
London  1855. 

BIANCONI  (J.  J.)  Specimina  Zoologica  Mosambicana.  Fasc.  7-10.  4to.  Ido- 
nonicc  1850. 

Repertorio  Italiano  per  la  Storia  Naturale.  Vol.  H.  8vo. 

BononicR  1854. 

BIGSBY  (R.)  Remarks  on  the  suggested  establishment  of  a National  Order 
of  Merit.  16mo.  London  1855. 

BLAIR  (D.)  Report  on  the  Recent  Yellow  Fever  Epidemic  of  British  Guiana. 
8vo.  London  1856. 

BORGER  (H.)  Bericht  fiber  die  Wichtigsten  Vorfalle  auf  der  geburtshil- 
flichen  Klinik  zu  WMrzburg.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1853. 

BOTFIELD  (B.,  F.R.S.)  Some  Account  of  the  first  English  Bible.  8vo. 

Bibliotheca  Membranacea  Britannica,  or  Notices  of 

Early  English  Books  printed  upon  Vellum.  8vo. 

BRADBURY  (H.)  On  the  Security  and  Manufacture  of  Bank  Notes.  4to. 
London  1856. 

BRAME  (C.)  De  I’Adh&ion  et  de  la  Spongiolie.  8vo.  Tours  1856. 

Rapport  sur  six  Mernoires  de  Mons.  C.  Brame,  ayant  pour 

objet  i’etude  des  phenomenes  qui  accompagnent  la  cristallisation  du 
souf're,  du  phosphore  et  de  plusieurs  autres  corps.  8vo. 

BRAUN  (F.)  Beschreibung  der...zu  Germersheim  herrschenden  Schleim- 
fieberepidemie.  8vo.  Landau  1842. 


Donors. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Author. 


The  Association. 
Miss  Baily. 

The  Author. 


The  Auiiior. 

The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.Wiirzburg. 
The  Author. 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 


The  Author. 

Unknown. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Author. 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 

Mons.  C.  Brame. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


[ H ] 


Presents. 

BRIGHT  (E.  B.)  Vis.  A Treatise  on  the  predominating  Influence  of  the  Sun- 
beam throughout  Creation,  &c.  IGmo.  London  1855. 

BROCA  (P.)  Proprietes  et  Fonctions  de  la  Moelle  Epiniere:  Rapport  sur 
quelques  experienees  de  M.  Brown-Sequard.  8vo.  Paris  1855. 

Notice  sur  les  Travaux  de  M.  E.  Brown-Sequard.  4to.  Paris. 

BROUGHAM  (Henry,  Lord)  and  ROUTH  (E.  J.)  Analytical  View  of  Sir 
Isaac  Newton’s  Principia.  8vo.  London  1855. 

BROWN  (Samuel.)  A few  Thoughts  on  Commission,  Divisions  of  Profit, 
Seleetion  of  Lives,  the  Mortality  in  India,  and  other  subjects  relating  to 
Life  Assurance.  8vo.  London  184'9. 

BROWN-SEQUARD  (E.)  Experimental  Researches  applied  to  Physiology 
and  Pathology.  8vo.  New  York,  London  and  Paris  1853. 

Experimental  and  Clinical  Researches  on  the  Phy- 
siology and  Pathology  of  the  Spinal  Cord,  &c.  8vo.  Richmond  ( U.S?) 
1855. 

Deux  Memoires  sur  la  Physiologie  de  la  Moelle 

epiniere.  8vo.  Paris  1855. 

Recherches  experimentales  sur  la  transmission 

croisee  des  Impressions  sensitives  dans  la  Moelle  epiniere.  8vo.  Paris  1855. 

Resumd  de  plusieurs  Memoires  de  Physiologie 

experimentale.  8vo.  Paris.  1847. 

Sur  les  Resultats  de  la  section  et  de  la  galvanisa- 
tion du  nerf  Grand  Sympathique  au  Cou.  8vo.  Paris  1854. 

BRUNNOW  (F.)  Tafeln  der  Flora,  mit  Beriicksichtigung  der  Stdrungen 
durch  Jupiter  und  Saturn.  4to.  Berlin  1855. 

BURNIER  (F.)  et  PLANTAMOUR  (E.)  Nivellement  du  Grand  Saint- 
Bernard.  8vo. 

CASTELLA  (E.  de.)  Sur  la  Plegmasia  alba  dolens  et  Observation  de  tumeur 
erectile  traitee  par  la  ligature.  8vo.  Wiirtzhourg  1838. 

CAZALET  (Rev.  W.  W.)  On  the  Right  Management  of  the  Voiee  in  Speak- 
ing and  Reading,  &c.  8vo.  London  1 855. 

CHANDON  (C.)  Ueber  eine  falsche  Pulsadergeschwulst.  8vo.  Zweibriicken 
1824. 

COLLIER  (C.)  APISTOTEAHS  OEPI  4^yXHS.  Translated  from  the 
Original  Text.  8vo.  Cambridge  1 855. 

COOKE  (J.  P.)  On  Two  new  Crystalline  Compounds  of  Zine  and  Antimony, 
&c.  4to.  Cambridge  1855. 

CZERMAK  (J.)  Beitrage  zur  mikroskopischen  Anatomie  der  menschlichen 
Zahne.  8vo.  Leipzig  1850. 

DAVY  (J.)  Some  Miscellaneous  Observations  on  the  Salmonidae.  4to.  1854. 

On  the  Effects  of  certain  Agents  on  Insects.  8vo.  London  1851. 

Some  Observations  on  the  Excrement  of  Insects.  8vo.  1854. 

DE  CANDOLLE  (A.)  Geographic  Botanique  raisonnee,  ou  exposition  des 
Faits  Principaux  et  des  Lois  concernant  la  Distribution  Geographique  des 
Plantes  de  I’Epoque  actuelle.  Two  Vols.  8vo.  Paris  et  Geneve  1855. 

DE  LA  RIVE  (A.)  On  the  Cause  of  the  Aurora  Borealis.  8vo.  1854. 

A Treatise  on  Electricity  in  Tlieory  and  Practice.  Vol.  II. 

8vo.  London  1856. 


h 2 


Donors. 

The  Author. 

Mons.  E.  Brown-Sequard. 

The  Authors. 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 


The  Academy,  Berlin. 

The  Authors. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Author. 

Dr.  Textor. 

C.  Collier,  M.D.,  F.R.S. 

Dr.  Daubeny,  F.R.S. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Author. 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 


[ 12  ] 


Presents. 

DE  RYCKHOLT  (Le  Baron  P.)  Melanges  Pal6ontologiques.  Partie.  4to. 

D’ESPINE  (M.)  Notice  Statistique  sur  la  premiere  Invasion  du  Cholera  dans 
le  Canton  de  Geneve.  l2mo. 

DICKSON  (S.)  The  “ Destructive  Art  of  Healing;”  a Sequel  to  the  “Fal- 
lacies of  the  Faculty.”  Fourth  Edition.  8vo.  London  1856. 

DOLLEN  (W.)  Ueber  Dr.  Wichmann’s  Bestimmung  der  parallaxe  des  Arge- 
lander’schen  Sterns.  4to.  St.  Petersburg  1854. 

DOLLY  (F.)  Die  Kiinstlich  eingeleitete  Friihgeburt.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

ELLESMERE  (Earl  of.)  Address  to  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  of 
London;  May  1855.  8vo. 

ENCKE  (J.  F.)  Berliner  Astronomisches  Jahrbuch  fiir  1858.  8vo.  Berlin 
1855. 

ENGELMANN  (G.)  De  Antholysi  prodromus.  8vo.  Francofurti  ad  Mcenum 
1832. 

FAIRBAIRN  (W.)  Useful  Information  for  Engineers,  &c.  %vq.  London 

FEDORENKO  (Ivan.)  Positions  moyennes  pour  I’Epoque  de  1790‘0  des 
Etoiles  circompolaires,  dont  les  Observations  ont  ete  publiees  par  Jerome 
Lalande.  4to.  St.  Peter sbourg  1854. 

FERGUSSON  (Lieut.  E.  F.  T.)  Magnetical  and  Meteorological  Observations 
made  at  the  Hon.  East  India  Company’s  Observatory,  Bombay,  in  the  years 
1852  and  1853.  4to.  Bombay  1855. 

FINN  (J.  H.)  Der  Kaiserschnitt,  u.s.w.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1839. 

FLECHSIG  (R.  F.)  De  Polymastia  seu  de  Fceminis  multimammiis.  8vo. 
SnebergcE  Saxonum  1839. 

FUCHS  (C.  H.)  De  Lepra  Arabum,  &c.  8vo.  Wirceburgi  1831. 

GAUPP  (C.)  Medizinische  Topographic  der  Stadt  Kirchheim  unter  Teck. 
8vo.  Wurzburg  1839. 

GEGENBAUR  (C.)  Zur  Lehre  vom  Generationswechsel  und  der  Fortpflan- 
zung  bei  Medusen  und  Polypen.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

Beitrage  zur  Entwickelungsgeschichte  der  Land-Pulmo- 

naten.  8vo.  Leipzig  1852. 

GILLISS  (Lieut.  J.  M.)  The  United  States  Naval  Astronomical  Expedition 
to  the  Southern  Hemisphere  during  the  years  1849,  50,  51,  52.  Two  Vols. 
4to.  Washington  1855. 

GOEDEN  (R.)  De  Fonticulis,  quos  vocant  ossificates.  4to.  Wirceburgi  1837. 

GOLLIEZ  (H.)  Description  d’une  nouvelle  forme  de  Cellule  dans  I’Encepha- 
loide.  8vo.  Payerne  1849. 

GRAHNER  (H.)  Beschreibung  eines  Fades  von  Transposition  der  Brust-u. 
Unterleibseingeweide.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

GREG  (R.  P.)  An  Essay  on  Meteorites.  8vo.  London  1855. 

HALL  (Dr.  M.)  Abstract  of  an  Investigation  into  Asphyxia;  its  Nature, 
Carbonic  Acid  Blood-poisoning,  and  its  Remedy.  Prone  and  Postural 
Respiration.  8vo.  London  1856. 

HANSTEEN  (C.)  Den  magnetiske  Inclinations  Forandring  i den  nordlige 
tenipererte  Zone.  4to.  Kjobenhavn  1855. 

.4ftryk  af  Oversigt,  &c.  (^Abstract  of  the  above,  and  Re- 
port of  the  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society  at  Copenhagen.)  8vo.  1855. 

HARPUR  (A.)  The  Nature  of  Visible  Magnitude,  &c.  8vo.  Dublin  1856. 


Donors. 

The  Author. 

The  Registrar-General. 

Unknown. 

The  Observatory,  Pulkowa. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Royal  Geographical 
Society. 

The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Author. 

The  Observatory,  Pulkowa. 


The  Directors,  Hon.  East 
India  Company. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


Dr.  Textor. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Author. 


The  Author. 


Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 
The  Author. 


The  Author. 


The  Author. 


[ 13  ] 


Presents. 

HARRIS  (Sir  W.  S.)  Rudimentary  Treatise  on  Galvanism,  and  the  General 
Principles  of  Animal  and  Voltaic  Electricity,  &c.  12mo.  London  1856. 

HAUGHTON  (Rev.  S.)  The  Solar  and  Lunar  Diurnal  Tides  on  the  Coasts 
of  Ireland.  4to.  Dublin  1855. 

HEDD^US  (J.)  Die  Contractionen  der  Gebarmutter,  u.s.\v.  8vo.  Wurzburg 
1851. 

HEGETSCHWEILER  (J.  J.)  De  Insectorum  Genitalibus.  4to.  Turici  1820. 

HEISE  (H.)  Die  Irideremie  oder  den  angeborene  Mangel  der  Iris.  8vo.  Wurz- 
burg 1854. 

HEYDUK  (P.  C.)  Ueber  Vergiftung  durch  Seevogel  und  Seefische  sowie 
durch  Kupferne  Kochgeschirre.  8vo.  Fulda  1840. 

HEYMANN  (A.)  Einiges  iiber  die  Lepra,  wie  sie  auf  Java  und  in  den  Mo- 
lukken  vorkommt.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

HEYMER  (C.)  Beitrage  zum  Puerperalfieber.  Svo.  Wurzburg  1847. 

HEYNEMANN  (M.)  Ueber  die  Coagulationen  im  Herzen  u.s.vv.  8vo.  Furth 
1843. 

HOFFMANN  (A.)  Grundlinien  zu  einer  Geschichte  des  Frankischen  Keuper- 
Gebirges  im  mittleren  Main-Gebiete.  4to.  Wurzburg  1835. 

HOFMANN  (C.  E.  E.)  Ueber  die  Aufnahme  des  Quecksilbers  und  der  Fette 
in  den  Kreislauf.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

HOGG  (J.,  F.R.S.)  On  Two  Events  which  occurred  in  the  Life  of  King 
Canute  the  Dane.  8vo.  London  1855. 

Greek  Inscriptions  from  Syria  and  the  Hauran,  discovered 

by  the  Rev.  J.  L.  Porter.  Edited  with  Notes  by  J.  Hogg,  Esq.  8vo. 
London  1855. 

HOLLMAN  (A.  G.)  Einige  Untersuchungen  fiber  Blut  und  Ham  der 
Schwangeren.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

HOLTZBACHER  (A.)  Ueber  die  Amputation  im  Allgemeinen,  u.s.w.  8vo. 
Wurzburg  1835. 

HOOKER  (J.  D.)  and  THOMSON  (T.)  Flora  Indica : being  a Systematic 
Account  of  the  Plants  of  British  India,  &c.  Vol.  1.  8vo.  London  1855. 

HOPFF  (F.)  Ueber  die  Hmmophilie  oder  die  erbliche  Anlage  zu  tddtlichen 
Blutungen.  8vo.  Wiirzhurg  1828. 

HOPFF  (G.  W.  L.)  Das  Bier  in  geschichtlicher,  chemischer,  medizinischer, 
chirurgischer  und  diatetischer  Beziehung,  u.s.w.  8vo.  Zweibrucken  1856. 

HOPKINS  (W.)  On  the  External  Temperature  of  the  Earth,  and  the  other 
Planets  of  the  Solar  System.  4to.  Cambridge  1856. 

HORNER  (F.)  De  Cyanosi.  4to.  Monachii  1823. 

HORNER  (F.  M.)  Die  Medicinische  Schule  zu  Salerno,  u.s.w.  8vo.  Wurz- 
burg 1840. 

HUBER  (V.  A.)  De  Lingua  et  Osse  hyoideo  Pici  viridis.  4to.  Stuttgardice 
1821. 

HUMMEL  (T.  W.  L.)  Ueber  die  Resection  im  Oberarm-gelenk.  4to.  Wurz- 
burg 1832. 

HUMPHREYS  (E.  R.)  Britain’s  Working  Men;  (and  other  Lectures,  &c.). 

8 VO.  Cheltenham  1855-56. 

HUSEMANN  (G.)  Die  pathologische  Anatomic  der  ausseren  und  inneren 
Unterleibsbriiche.  4to.  Wurzburg  1834. 


Donors. 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 

The  Editor. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 

The  Authors. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 

The  Author. 

Dr.  Textor. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


[ >4  ] 


Presents. 

JASSO Y (E.  T.)  De  Echinorhyncho  Polymorpho  Bremseri.  4to.  Herhipoli 
1820. 

JESSOP  (W.  H.  R.)  A complete  Decimal  System  of  Money  and  Measures. 

8vo.  Cambridge  1855.  and  Part  2.  1856. 

JOACHIM  (K.)  Ueber  die  Naclitblindheit  und  das  Augapfelrollen.  8vo. 
Wurzburg  1842. 

JOHNSON  (M.  J.)  Astronomical  and  Meteorological  Observations  made  at 
the  Radcliffe  Observatory,  Oxford,  in  the  year  1854.  8vo.  Oxford  1856. 
JOURNALS:— 

Astronomische  Nachrichten.  Nos.  969  to  1030. 

Cosmos.  Vol.  VI.  Liv.  26  and  Index ; Vol.  VII.  Liv.  1-25  ; Vol.  VIII.  Liv.  1 
to  23.  8 VO.  Paris  1855-56. 

II  Nuovo  Ciniento  Giornale  di  Fisica,  di  Chimica,  &c.  By  C.  Matteucci  and 
others.  Tomo  I.  Aprile  to  Oct.  Tomo  11.  8vo.  Pisa  1854-55. 

Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago.  Vol.  VIII.  No.  13;  Vol.  IX.  Nos.  4 to  9. 
and  Supplementary  No.  Ethnology  of  the  Indo-Pacific  Islands.  Part  2.  8vo. 
Singapore  1855-56. 

The  American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts.  Vol.  XIX.  No,  57 ; Vol.  XX. 

Nos.  58,  59,  60;  Vol.  XXL  Nos.  61,  62,  63.  8vo.  1855-56. 

The  Assurance  Magazine.  Vols.  I.  to  V.  8vo.  London  1851-55. 

The  Athenaeum.  June  to  December  1855;  January  to  May  1856. 

The  Builder.  Vol.  XIII.  Parts  6 to  12.  Vol.  XIV.  Parts  1 to  5. 

The  Literary  Gazette.  June  to  December  1855;  January  to  May  1856. 

The  Philosophical  Magazine.  July  to  December  1855;  January  to  June  1856. 
The  Practical  Mechanic’s  Journal.  Parts  94,  96,  97.  4to.  London  1856. 
KAMM  (A.)  De  Siphonomate  Vesic®,  &c.  8vo.  Wirceburgi  1848. 

KEIL  (F.)  Beschreibung  eines  Falles  von  Transposition  des  Ursprungs  der 
beiden  grossen  Kdrperarterien.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

KENTISH  (N.  L.)  The  Question  of  Questions  ! Showing  how  to  make  Food 
plentiful  and  cheap,  Am.  8vo.  Melbourne  1855. 

KIESER  (D.  G.)  Elemente  der  Psychiatrik.  8vo.  Breslau  and  Bonn  1855. 

KIRBY  (W.)  and  SPENCE  (W.)  An  Introduction  to  Entomology,  &c.  Se- 
venth Edition.  8vo.  London  1 856. 

KLtiG  (M.)  Ueber  die  Krankheits-Constitution  . , . im  Julius-Hospitale  zu 
Wurzburg.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1835. 

KOLLIKER  (A.)  Mikroskopische  Anatomie  oder  Gewebelehre  des  Menschen. 
Vol.  II.  in  Three  Parts.  8vo.  Leipzig  1850,  1852,  1854. 

Handbuch  der  Gewebelehre  des  Menschen  fvir  Aertzte  und 

Studirende.  Ziveite  Aufiage.  8vo.  Leipzig  1855. 

— Bericht  von  der  Kbniglichen  Zootomisehen  Anstalt  zu 

Wurzburg,  1847-48,  4to.  Leipzig  1849. 

Ueber  die  letzten  Endigungen  des  Nervus  cochle®  und  die 

Function  der  Schnecke.  4to.  Wurzburg  1854. 

Die  Schwimmpolypen  oder  Siphonophoren  von  Messina. 

4to.  Leipzig  1853. 

Physiologische  Studien  iiber  die  Samenfliissigkeit.  8vo. 


Donors. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  W’iirzburg. 
The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Radcliffe  Trustees. 


The  Observatory,  Altona, 
L’Abbe  Moigno. 

The  Editors. 

The  Editor. 


The  Editors. 

S.  Brown,  Esq. 

The  Editor. 

The  Editor. 

The  Editor. 

Messrs.  Taylor  and  Francis. 
The  Editor. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 

The  Kaiserl.  Leopold.  Carol. 
Academy. 

W.  Spence,  Esq.,  F.R.S. 
Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wiirzburg, 
The  Author. 


1855- 


[ 15  ] 


Presents. 

KOOL  (J.  A.)  Aper9u  Historique  au  Sujet  de  la  Societe  pour  secourir  les 
Noyes.  8vo.  Amsterdam  1855. 

KC)RBER  (G.  J.  L.)  Die  Knochen-Beschadigungen  der  Friichte  wiihrend  der 
Schwangerschaft,  u.s.w.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1835. 

KOST  (H.)  Ueber  die  Structur  und  Chemische  Zusammensetzung  einiger 
Muschelschalen.  8vo.  Hildburghausen  1853. 

KOSTER  (T.)  De  Uteri  functionibus.  8vo.  Francofurti  ad  Moenum  1842. 

KRAFT  (B.)  Ueber  die  Resection  der  Knochen.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1843. 

KREIL  (K.)  Magnetische  und  Geographische  Ortsbestimmungen  an  den 
Kristen  des  Adriatischen  Golfes  im  Jahre  1854.  4to.  Wien  1855. 

KREITMAIR  (A.)  Darstellung  des  Ergebuisses seit  1821  angestellten 

Resectionen.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1839. 

KRONIG  (A.)  Neue  Methode  zur  Vermeidung  und  Auffindung  von  Rechen- 
fehlern  vermittelst  der  Neuner-Elfer-Siebenunddreissigster-  und  Hunder- 
tundeinerprobe.  8vo.  Berlin  1855. 

KUPFFER  (A.  T.)  Compte  Rendu  Annuel  de  I’Observatoire  Physique  cen- 
tral. Annee  1854.  4to.  St.  Petersbourg  1855. 

KUTTLER  (C.)  Einiges  riber  fremde  Kdrper  in  den  Lul’twegeii.  8vo.  Wiirz- 
burg  1840. 

KUTTLINGER  (A.)  Ueber  eine  Cystenfdrmige  Entartung  des  Hodens.  8vo. 
Wurzburg  1841. 

LAMONT  (J.)  Annalen  der  Kdniglichen  Sternwarte  bei  Mrinchen.  Bd.  8. 
8vo.  Miinchen  1855. 

LEA  (J.)  Fossil  Footmarks  in  the  Red  Sandstone  of  Pottsville,  Pennsylvania, 
fol.  Philadelphia  1855. 

Rectification  of  Mr.  T.  A.  Conrad’s  “ Synopsis  of  the  Family  of 

Naiades  of  North  America.”  8vo.  Philadelphia  1 854. 

LE  COUTEUR  (J.)  The  Rifle  : its  Effects  on  the  War,  &c.  16mo.  London  1855. 

LEE  (Lieut.  S.  P.)  Report  and  Charts  of  the  Cruise  of  the  U.S.  Brig  ‘ Dol- 
phin.’ 8 VO.  Washingto7i  1854.  With  Map. 

LEISNIG  (A.  F.)  Ueber  Trepanation,  u.s.w.  8yo.  Wurzburg  1844. 

LERCH  (J.)  Einige  chemische  Untersuchungen  fiber  das  Blutserum  in  ver- 
schiedenen  pathologischen  Zustanden.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1845. 

LINDELOEF  (L.  L.)  Ueber  die  Verbesserungen  und  die  Genauigkeit  der 
von  Hevelius  mit  seinem  Grossen  Sextanten  gemessenen  Sternabstande,  &c. 
8vo.  1853. 

De  orbita  Cometae  qui  anno  1664  apparuit.  4to.  Hel- 

singforsicE  1854. 

LOW  (D.)  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  the  Simple  Bodies  of  Chemistry. 
Third  Edition.  8vo.  Edinburgh  1856. 

LOWE  (E.  J.)  A Natural  History  of  Ferns  ; British  and  Exotic.  Parts  1 to  13. 
8vo.  London  1855-56. 

The  Magazine  of  Natural  Philosophy.  8vo.  London  1856. 

LUBBOCK  (Sir  J.  W.,  Bart.)  On  the  Theory  of  Astronomical  Refractions. 
4to.  London  1855. 

LUCAE  (J.  C.  G.)  Schadel  abnormer  Form  in  geometrischen  Abbildungen, 
nebst  Darstellung  einigen  Entvvickelungs-Ziistande  der  Deckknochen.  fol. 
Frankfurt-a.M.  1855. 


Donors. 

The  Society. 

Phys,  Med.  Soc.  Wfirzburg. 


The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Author. 

The  Observatory. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Observatory. 
The  Author. 


The  Author. 

The  Naval  Observatory, 
Washington. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 

Pulkovva  Observatory. 


The  Author. 
The  Author. 


The  Author. 

The  Senckenbergischeii 
Academy. 


[ 16  ] 


Presents. 

LYELL  (Sir  C.)  On  certain  Trains  of  Erratic  Blocks  on  the  Western  borders 
of  Massachusetts,  United  States.  8vo. 

MACGILLIVRAY  (W.)  The  Natural  History  of  Deeside  and  Braemar. 
Edited  by  E.  Lankester,  F.R.S.  Printed  for  private  circulation.  8vo. 
London  1855. 

MACLEOD  (H.  D.)  The  Theory  and  Practice  of  Banking.  Vols.  1 & 2. 

8 VO.  T^ondon  1855-56. 

MAPS,  CHARTS,  ENGRAVINGS,  &c. 

Karte  der  Insel  Thera  oder  Santorin.  1848. 

Two  Drawings  of  the  Observatory  at  Rome. 

Copernico,  cratere  della  Luna.  (Photograph.) 

Engraved  Portrait  of  the  late  Professor  Edward  Forbes,  F.R.S. 

Engraved  Portrait  of  Alexander  von  Humboldt.  (Bears  the  Donor’s  Auto- 
graph.) 

Bronze  and  Silver  Medal  of  Carl  Friedrich  Gauss,  Foreign  Member  of  the 
Royal  Society. 

MARTINS  (C.)  Memoire  sur  la  Temperature  des  Oiseaux  du  Nord  de  I’Eu- 
rope.  4to.  Montpellier  1856. 

Sur  le  Froid  exceptionnel  qui  a regne  a Montpellier  dans  le 

Courant  de  Janvier  1855.  4to. 

MAYR  (A.)  Vollstandige  Theorie  des  Differenzial-Calculs.  8vo.  Regensburg 
1854. 

MENABREA  (L.  F.)  Lois  generales  de  divers  ordres  de  Phenomenes  dont 
I’Analyse  depend  d’Equations  lineaires  aux  differences  partielles  tels  que 
ceux  des  Vibrations  et  de  la  Propagation  de  la  Chaleur.  4to.  Turin  1855. 
MENDOZA  RIOS  (Joseph  de).  A complete  Collection  of  Tables  for  Naviga- 
tion and  Nautical  Astronomy.  (Contains  the  Author’s  Autograph  Initials.) 
4to.  London  1805. 

METZ  (H.)  Ueber  die  Ldsung  des  Oberschenkels  aus  dem  Hiiftgelenke.  8vo. 
Wurzburg  1841. 

MIALHE — . Chimie  appliquee  a la  Physiologic  et  a la  Therapeutique.  8vo. 
Paris  1856. 

MILLER  (W.  A.)  Elements  of  Chemistry  ; Theoretical  and  Practical.  Vols. 
1 & 2.  8vo.  London  1855. 

MINERVINI  (G.)  Monografia  della  Clorosi.  8vo.  Napoli  1853. 
Notizia  di  due  Casi  di  perniciose  Intermittenti.  8vo.  Na- 
poli 1852. 

Poche  Parole  sulle  difformita  delle  Uova.  8vo.  Napoli 

1850. 

Dell’ Epillessia.  8vo.  iVajoo/*  1847. 

Memoire  Fisiologiche  riguardanti  la  Mestruazione.  8vo. 

Napoli  1854. 

MOLESCHOTT  (J.)  Der  Kreislauf  des  Lebens.  Physiologische  Antworten 
auf  Liebig’s  Chemische  Briefe.  2‘®Auflage.  8vo.  Mainz  1855. 

MOORE  (Thomas.)  The  Ferns  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  Edited  by 
.1.  IJridley,  Pli.D.,  F.R.S.  Nature-Printed  by  Henry  Bradbury.  Parts  1 
to  15.  fol.  London  1855-56. 


Donors. 

The  Author. 

H.R.H.  Prince  Albert. 


The  Author. 


C.  Ritter,  For.  Mem.  R.  S. 
The  Rev.  Father  Secchi. 


A.  Claudet,  Esq.,  F.R.S. 
The  Baron  von  Humboldt, 

F.R.S. 

H.M.  the  King  of  Hanover, 
through  the  Royal  Society 
of  Sciences,  Gottingen. 
The  Author. 


The  Author. 

The  Author. 

The  Author’s  daughter, 
A.  F.  Bellew. 

Dr.  Textor. 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 


The  Author. 

Messrs.  Bradbury  and 
Evans. 


[ 17  ] 


Presents. 

MOOSHERR  (H.)  Ueber  das  pathologische  Verhalten  der  kleineren  Hirn- 
gefasse. 

M ULLER  (H.)  Beitrage  zur  Morphologie  des  Chylus  und  Eiters,  8vo.  Wurz- 
burg 184'5. 

Abhandlung  iiber  den  Ban  der  Molen.  8vo.  Wurzburg  184*7. 

Ueber  das  Mannchen  von  Argonauto  Argo  und  die  Hecto- 

cotylen.  8vo. 

MUNCHMEYER  (E.  E.)  Ueber  das  Alter  des  Varioloid.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1835. 

MURDOCK  (W.  D.  C.)  A Demonstration  of  the  Quadrature  of  the  Circle.  8vo. 

NAPOLEON  III.  CEuvres  de  -Napoleon  III.  Tomes  3 & 4.  8vo.  Parisl856. 

NITTINGER  (C.  G.  G.)  Status  puti-idus  cum  Febre.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1835. 

NOETHIG  (J.)  Das  intermittirende  Wundfieber.  8vo.  Jl^urzburg  1837. 

OESTERREICHER  (J.  H.)  Darstellung  der  Beweise  fiir  den  Kreislauf  des 
Blutes.  4to.  Munchen  1825. 

OF'J'ERDINGER  (L.  F.)  Beitrage  zur  Wiederherstellung  der  Schrift  des 
Euklides  iiber  die  Theilung  der  Figuren.  4to.  Ulm  1853. 

OPPENHEIMER  (S.)  Ueber  die  Resection  des  Hiiftgelenkes.  8vo.  Wurz- 
burg 1840. 

OS  ANN  (C.  W.)  Die  Anwendung  des  hydroelektrischen  Stromes  als  .^Etzmit- 
tel.  8 VO.  Wurzburg  1842. 

OS  ANN  (F.)  Ueber  die  Resection  des  Fussgelenkes.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1853. 

OSANN  (G.  W.)  Grundziige  der  Lehre  von  dem  Magnetismus  und  der  Elek- 
tricitat.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1847. 

OTTO  (A.)  Beitrag  zu  den  Analysen  des  gesunden  Blutes.  8vo.  W^w-zburg 
1848. 

OTTO  (K.  A.  F.)  Skeletogenie.  4to.  Wurzburg  1831. 

OWEN  (R.,  F.R.S.)  Principes  d’Osteologie  Comparee,  ou  Recherches  sur 
I’Archetype  et  les  Homologies  du  Squelette  Vertebre.  8vo.  Paris  185,5. 

PALAGI  (A.)  Sur  les  Variations  Electriques  que  subissent  les  Corps  lorsqii’ils 
s’Goignent  ou  se  rapprochent  les  uns  des  autres.  8vo.  1854. 

PANDER  (C.)  Historia  Metamorphoseos,  quam  Ovum  Incubatum  prioribus 
quinque  Diebus  subit.  8vo.  Wirceburgi  1817. 

PARROT  (J.  C.)  Genius  Morborum  epidemicus,  &c.  8vo.  Wirceburgi  1835. 

PAULI  (E.)  Ueber  Blasensteine  und  deren  Behandlung.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

PERRY  (M.  C.)  The  Enlargement  of  Geographical  Science,  a consequence 
to  the  Opening  of  New  Avenues  to  Commercial  Enterprise.  8vo.  New  York 
1856. 

PESTALOZZI  (H.)  Ueber  Aneurysmata  spuria  der  kleinen  Gehirnarterien 
und  ihren  Zusammenhang  mit  Apoplexie.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1849. 

PETERSEN  (W.)  Ueber  die  Kiinstliche  Lippenbildung.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1845. 

PFISTER  (P.  J.)  Die  Verletzungen  des  Auges  durch  fremde  Kdrper.  8vo. 
Wurzburg  1839. 

PFRENGER  (A.)  Ueber  die  Resektion  des  Schulterblattes.  8vo.  Wurzburg 
1846. 

PFRIEM  (C.  J.)  Das  Lithoscop,  u.s.w.  4to.  Wurzburg  1838. 

PHILLIPS  (R.)  On  some  Modifications  of  the  Electricity  of  a Jet  of  Steam. 
On  Atmospheric  Electricity.  On  the  Aurora.  (From  the  Chemist.)  8vo. 
1852-53. 


Donors. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Autlior. 


Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 
The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


Unknown. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 

The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  A merican  Geographical 
and  Statistical  Society. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 


MDCCCLVI. 


C 


[ 18  ] 


Presents. 

PICTET  (F.  J.)  Notices  sur  quelques  Anomalies  de  I’Organisation.  410.  Ge- 
neve  1855. 

PLANTAMOUR  (E.)  Resume  Meteorologique  de  I’annee  1854  pour  Ge- 
neve et  le  Grand  Saint-Bernard.  8vo.  Geneve  1855. 

POEY  (A.)  Des  earacteres  physiques  des Eclairs  enBoules,&c.  8vo.  Paris\S55. 

Memoire  sur  la  frequence  des  chutes  de  Greles  a I’lle  de  Cuba, 

&c.  8 VO.  Paris  1855. 

Tableau  Chronologique  des  Tremblenients  de  Terre  ressentis  a 

rile  de  Cuba  de  1551  a 1855.  8vo.  1855. 

Sur  les  Tempetes  Electriques  et  la  quantite  de  Victimes  que  la 

Foudre  fait  annuellement  aux  Etats-Unis  d’Amerique  et  a ITle  de  Cuba. 
8vo.  Versailles  1855. 

Prqjet  d’Installation  d’unObservatoire Meteorologique  a laHavane. 

8vo.  Versailles  1855. 

Supplement  au  Tableau  Chronologique  des  Tremblements  de 

Terre  ressentis  a I’lle  de  Cuba  de  1551  a 1855.  8vo.  Paris  1855. 

Tableau  Chronologique  coraprenant  364  cas  d’Ouragans  Cyclo- 

niques,  &c.  8vo.  Paris  1855. 

La  Science : Journal  du  Progres,  &c.  Nos.  233,  237,  240. 

1855. 

PRAZMOVSKI  (A.)  Ra]jport...sur  les  Travaux  de  I’Expedition  de  Bessa- 
rabie,  entreprise  en  1852,  pour  terminer  les  Operations  de  la  Mesure  de 
I’Arc  du  Meridien.  8vo.  1853. 

PRICE  (Rev.  B.)  A Treatise  on  Infinitesimal  Calculus,  &c.  Vol.  3.  8vo. 
Oxford  1856. 

QUETELET  (A.)  Observations  des  Phenomenes  Periodiques,  1853.  4to. 

Sur  la  relation  entre  les  Temperatures  et  la  duree  de  la 

Vegetation  des  Plantes.  8vo. 

Annuaire  de  I’Observatoire  Royal  de  Bruxelles.  22ine  an- 

riee  1855.  16nio.  1 ruxelles  1854. 

RADLKOFER  (L.)  Die  Befruchtung  der  Phanerogamen.  4to.  Leipzig  1856. 

RANKINE  (W.  J.  M.,  F.R.S.)  Introductory  Lecture  on  the  Harmony  of 
Theory  and  Practice  in  Mechanics.  8vo.  London  and  Glasgow  1856. 

RAUDNITZ  (J.  M.)  Materia  Medica  Hippocratis.  8vo.  Dresdce  1843. 

RENNIE  (G.  B.)  Suggestions  for  the  Improvement  of  the  River  Danube, 
between  Isatcha  and  the  Sulina  entrance.  8vo.  London  1856. 

REUBOLD  (W.)  Beitriige  zur  Lehre  vom  Soor.  8vo.  Berlin  1854. 

REUSCHE  (E.)  De  Maxillae  inferioris  Resectione.  4to.  Wircehurgi  1844. 

REUSS  (C.  A.)  Ueber  den  Scorbut,  u.s.w.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1843. 

RIIEINER(H.)  Beitriige  zur  Histologic  des  Kehlkopfs.  8vo.  Wurzburg\852. 

RINDSKOPF  (E.)  Ueber  einige  Ziistande  des  Bluts  in  physiologischer  und 
pathologischer  Beziehung.  8vo.  Wiirzburg  1853. 

ROBINSON  (Rev.  T.  R.)  On  the  Luminous  Phaenomena  produced  by  the  dis- 
charge of  Ruhmkorff  ’s  Induction  Apparatus  in  Vacuo.  8vo.  1856. 

ROEDEII  (P.)  Ueber  die  Resectionen  am  Knochengeriiste  der  Hand.  8vo. 
Wurzburg  1847. 

ROENTGEN  (P.  L.)  Bemerkungen  uber  Dodoniius  Lebeu  und  Schriften, 
u.s.w.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1842. 


Donors. 
The  Author. 


The  Author. 


The  Author. 


The  Observatory,  Pulkowa. 


The  Autlior. 
The  Author. 


The  Author. 

The  Author. 

Pliys.  Med.  Soc.  Wiirzburg. 
Tlie  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


[ 19  ] 


Presents. 

ROTH  (J.  J.)  De  Animalium  Invertebratorum  Systemate  Nervoso.  4to.  Wirce- 
burgi  1825. 

SABINE  (Col.  E.)  Terrestrial  Magnetism ; with  Map  of  the  Magnetic  Decli- 
nation and  Inclination.  1856. 

SCANZONI  (F.  W.)  Beitrage  zur  Geburtskunde  und  Gynsekologie.  Bd.  1. 
Heft  1-3.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1853-54. 

SCHAFER  (A.)  De  Canali  Intestinali,  &c.  4to.  Wirceburgi  1825. 

SCHAFFNER  (A.)  Ueber  das  Enchondrom.  4to.  Wurzburg  1845. 

SCHILLING  (E.)  De  Melanosi.  A^io.  Francofurti  ad  Moenum  \bS\. 

SCHLAPFER  (F.)  Ueber  Ankylosis  und  Luxation  der  drei  obersten  Hals- 
wirbel.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

SCHMAHL  (L.)  Ueber  die  Briiche  der  Schaedelbasis.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

SCHMITT  (P.)  Ueber  die  Harnblasenspalte,  u.s.w.  4to.  Wurzburg  1836. 

SCFIROEDER  (K.)  La  Rotation  Souterraine  de  la  Masse  ignee,  ses  Causes 
et  ses  Consequences.  8vo.  Paris  1856. 

SCHWARZENBACH  (V.)  Studien  liber  die  Verrichtungen  des  mittlern 
Ohres.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 

SECCHI  (A.)  Descrizione  dell’ Osservatorio  del  Collegio  Romano.  (Manu- 
script.) With  2 drawings. 

Osservazioni  di  Saturno  e suoi  Anelli.  4to. 

SIBER  (J.  M.)  Grundziige  einer  Geschichte  des  alteren  Medizinalwesens  der 
Stadt  Ritzingen.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1838. 

SIEBOLD  (R.  von.)  (jber  anomalen  Ursprung  und  Verlauf  der  in  chirur- 
gischer  Beziehung  wichtigen  Schlagaderoste.  Wurzburg  1837- 

STMMONDS  (P.  L.)  Observations  on  the  Rainfall  of  various  Countries.  4to. 

SIMSON  (R.)  The  Elements  of  Euclid.  4to.  Glasgow  1756. 

SIXTUS  (F.)  De  DifRssione  Genitalium,  singular!  penis  bifidi  observatione 
illustrata.  4to.  Wuerceburgi  1813. 

SMITH  (A.)  Supplement  to  the  Practical  Rules  for  ascertaining  the  Devia- 
tions of  the  Compass  which  are  caused  by  the  Ship’s  Iron,  &c.  8vo.  Lon- 
don 1855. 

SMITH  (C.  R.)  C.  Roach  Smith’s  Museum  of  London  Antiquities.  8vo.  Lon- 
don 1855. 

SMYTH  (C.  P.)  Description  of  New  or  Improved  Instruments  for  Navigation 
and  Astronomy.  8vo.  Edinburgh  1855. 

SOUTH  (Sir  James.)  A Letter  to  the  Fellows  of  the  Royal  and  the  Royal 
Astronomical  Societies,  in  reply  to  the  Obituary  Notice  of  the  late  Rev.  R. 
Sheepshanks,  &c.  8vo.  London  1856. 

SPENGLER  (L.)  On  the  Effects  of  the  Thermal  Waters  of  Ems.  16mo- 
London  1854. 

SPIX  (B.)  De  Docimasia  Pulmonum.  8vo.  Wirceburgi  1817. 

STACHELROTH  (L.)  Beschreibung  eines  seltenen  Verlaufes  der  grossen 
Gefasse  und  des  Brustganges.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1850. 

STADELMAYR  (L.)  Ansicht  vom  Blutlaufe  nebst  Beobachtungen  iiber  dass 
Riickengefass  der  Insekten.  4to.  Miinchen  1829. 

STAINTON  (H.  T.)  The  Natural  History  of  the  Tineina.  Vol.  I.  8vo.  Lon- 
don 1855. 

TheEntomologist’s Annual  for  1856.  \2mo.  LondonW56. 

c 2 


Donors. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wiirzburg. 
The  Author. 

Phys.  Rled.  Soc.  Wiirzbuig. 


The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wiirzburg^ 
The  Author. 


Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 

Dr.  Sharpey,  Sec.  R.S. 
Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 

The  Admiralty. 


The  Author. 
The  Author. 
The  Author. 


The  Author. 


Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wiirzburg. 


The  Author. 
The  Editor. 


[ 20  ] 


Presents. 

STAUNTON  (Sir  G.  T.,  Bart.)  Memoirs  of  the  Chief  Incidents  of  the  Public 
Life  of  Sir  George  Thomas  Staunton,  Bart.,  &c.  Printed  for  Private  Cir- 
culation. 8vo.  London  1856. 

STOLTENBERG  (F.)  Ueber  die  Ausrottung  der  Thranendruse  beim 
Thranentraiifeln.  8vo.  Wurzburg  184'9. 

STROMER  (R.)  Ueber  den  Bruch  der  Wirbelbeindornfortsatze.  8vo.  Wurz- 
burg 1842. 

STROMEYER  (E.)  Ueber  Atonie  fibrdser  Gewebe  und  deren  Ruckbildung. 
8 VO.  Wurzburg  1840. 

STRUBE  (F.)  Der  normale  Bau  der  Cornea,  u.s.w.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1851. 

STRUVE  (O.)  Beobachtungen  des  Bielaschen  Cometen  im  Jahre  1852.  4to. 
St.  Petersbourg  1854. 

Expeditions  Chronometriques  de  1845  et  1846.  Parts  1 & 2. 

4to.  St.  Petersbourg  1853-54. 

Narratio  de  Parallaxi  Stellse  a Lyrm.  4to.  Petropoli  mdccclii. 

Positions  geographiques...dans  le  pays  des  Cosaques  du  Don. 

4to.  St.  Petersbourg  1855 

Nachrichten  iiber  den  neuen  Kometen  von  Hrn.  Dr.  Schwei- 

zer.  8vo.  1855. 

Resultats  d’Observations  faites  sur  des  Etoiles  doubles  artifi- 

cielles.  8vo.  1854. 

STRUVE  (W.)  Resultats  des  Observations  sur  la  Grande  Nebuleuse  d’Orion, 
&c.  8vo.  1853. 

SWELLENGREBEL  (J.  G.  H.)  Analytisch-geometrische  Untersuchungen 
fiber  allgemeine  Verwandtschafts-Verhaltnisse  von  Coordinaten-Systemen. 
4to.  Bonn  1855. 

TARGIONI-TOZZETTI  (G.)  Notizie  sulla  Storia  delle  Scienze  Fisiche  in 
Toscana.  4to.  Firenze  1852. 

TAYLOR  (T.  G.),  WORSTER  (Capt.  W.  FI.),  and  JACOB  (W.  S.)  Magne- 
tical  Observations  made  at  the  Hon.  East  India  Company’s  Magnetical  Ob- 
servatory at  Madras,  in  the  years  1846-1850.  4to.  Madras  1854. 

TEXTOR  (C.)  Grundziige  zur  Lehre  der  Chirurgischen  Operationen  welche 
mit  bewaffneter  Hand  unternommen  vverden.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1835. 

Ueber  die  Nichtnothwendigkeit  der  Trepanation  bei  Schiidel- 

eindrucken.  4to.  Wurzburg  1847. 

TEXTOR  (Karl.)  Versuch  fiber  das  Vorkommen  der  Harnsteine  in  Ost- 
franken.  4to.  Wurzburg  1843. 

THIEME  (O.)  Der  Cretinisinus,  eine  Monographie.  4to.  Weimar  1842. 

TIEDEMANN  (H.)  Ueber  die  Stellvertretende  Menstruation  (menstruatio 
vicaria).  8vo.  Wurzburg  1842. 

TIMOTEO  (D.),  BARNABITA  (M.  B.),  PALAGI  (A.)  Sulla  distribuzione 
delle  Correnti  elettriche  nei  Conduttori.  8vo.  Bologna  1855. 

TORTOLINI  (B.)  Annali  di  Scienze  Matematiche  e Fisiche.  Tomo  V.  8vo. 
lioma  1854. 

Sopra  gli  Integrali  generali  di  alcune  Equazioni  a deri- 

vate  parziali  a Coefficienti  costanti.  4to.  Modena  1854. 

TVv’lNING  (Elizabeth.)  Illustrations  of  the  Natural  Orders  of  Plants,  &c. 
Parts  39,  40.  fob  London  1855. 


Donors. 
The  Author. 


Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Observatory,  Pulkowa. 


The  Author. 


His  Imp.  & Royal  Highness 
the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany. 
The  Directors,  Hon.  East 
India  Company. 

The  Author. 


The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Authors. 
Signor  B.  Tortolini. 


R.  Twining,  Esq.,  F.R.S. 


[ 21  ] 


Presents. 

TWINING  (H.)  The  Elements  of  Picturesque  Scenery;  or  Studies  of  Nature 
made  in  Travel,  with  a View  to  Improvement  in  Landscape  Painting. 
2 Vols.  8vo.  London  1853,  1856. 

UIBELEISEN  (C.  F.)  Ueber  Vaccination  und  Revaccination.  8vo.  Wurzburg 
1835. 

ULSAMER  (L.)  Ueber  die  Ovariotoiviie.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1851. 
ULLERSPERGER  (Dr.)  Pathologisch-anatomische  Beschreibung  zweyer 
Missgeburten.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1822. 

VARRENTRAPP  (J.  G.)  Observationes  anatomicae  de  Parte  cephalica  nervi 
sympathici  ejusque  conjuiictionibus  cum  nervis  cerebralibus.  4to.  Franco- 
furti  ad  Mcenum  1831. 

VILLE  (G.)  Recherches  Experimentales  sur  la  Vegetation.  8vo.  Paris  1855. 

Recherches  Experimentales  sur  la  Vegetation.  (Rapport  fait 

par  M.  Pelouze  a I’Acad.  des  Sciences.)  8vo.  Paris  1856. 

VOGLER  (H.)  Physikalisch-Chemische  Untersuchungen  der  neuen  Thermal 
Quellen  zu  Bad-Ems.  8vo.  Coblenz  1851. 

VOLCKERS  (C.  P.  J.)  Die  Wahrnehmung  des  Raiimlichen  durch  den  Gesicht- 
sinn.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1835. 

VOLPICELLI  (P.)  Rettificazione  delle  Formule  per  assegnare  il  Numero 
delle  Somme  ognuna  di  due  Quadrati  nelle  quali  un  Interne  pub  spezzarsi. 
4to.  Roma  1853. 

Sopra  una  nuova  Proprieta  elettrostatica.  8vo.  Roma 

1854. 

WALL  (W.  S.)  History  and  Description  of  the  Skeleton  of  a new  Sperm 
Whale,  &c.  8vo.  Sydney  1851. 

WANKMIJELLER  (F.)  De  Ulceribus  Ventriculi  perforantibus.  8vo.  Wiirz- 
burg  1846. 

WEBER  (C.)  Ueber  den  Diabetes  Mellitus.  8vo.  Wurzburg  1854. 
WEBSTER  (J.,  F.R.S.)  Statistics  of  Grave  Yards  in  Scotland.  8vo.  London 

1855. 

WEBSTER  (T.,  F.R.S.)  The  Case  of  Josiah  Marshall  Heath,  the  Inventor 
and  Introducer  of  the  Manufacture  of  Welding  Cast  Steel  from  British  Iron. 
8vo.  London  1856. 

WEISER  (C.  W.)  De  Orificii  uteri  in  partu  rigiditate,  observationibus  illus- 
trata.  8vo.  Necstadii  ad  Orilam  1835. 

WELD  (C.  R.)  A Vacation  in  Brittany.  8vo.  London  1856. 

WHITE  (Walter).  A Londoner’s  Walk  to  the  Land’s  End  ; and  a Trip  to  the 
Scilly  Isles.  8vo.  London  1855. 

WIEDEL  (G.)  Drei  Beobachtungen  iiber  Elephantiasis  scroti  mit  Ergiessung 
lymphatischer  Fliissigkeit.  4to.  Wurzburg  1837. 

WIERRER  (C.  M.)  Itinerarium  der  Indischen  Cholera-Epidemie,  u.s.w. 
8vo.  Wurzburg  1837. 

WILD  (K.)  Einige  Beitrage  zur  Physiologie  der  Placenta.  8vo.  Wurzburg 
1849. 

WILLICH  ((’.  M.)  Annual  Supplement  to  the  Tithe  Commutation  Tables  for 
the  year  1856.  8vo.  London  1856. 

WIRTHS(J.)  Beitrage  zu  der  Frage:  Wie  ensteht  nach  supraorbital-Verlet- 
zungen  Amaurose. 


Donors. 
The  Author. 


Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 

Mons.  G.  Ville. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 


The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 

\ 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 

The  Author. 

The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wiirzburg, 


L 22  ] 


7^ 


Presents. 

WOPINLICH  (W.)  De  Helice  Pomatia.  410  Wirceburgi  1813. 

WOLF  (R.)  Zusammenstellung  der  gewdhnlichsten  Kehlkopfkrankeiten, 
u.s.w.  8 VO.  Wurzburg  1854. 

WORTH  (O.  R.  A.)  Ueber  Zwerchfells-Brucli.  4to.  Wurzburg  1847. 

YATES  (J.,  F.R.S.)  Narrative  of  the  Origin  and  Formation  of  the  International 
Association  for  obtaining  a Uniform  Decimal  System  of  Measures,  Weights 
and  Coins.  Q\o.  London  1856. 

ZANTEDESCHI  (F.)  Della  Interferenza  luminosa,  che  presenta  il  Filo  Me- 
tallico  commune  a due  Circuit!  chiusi.  8vo. 

Memoria  sul  simultaneo  passaggio  delle  Correnti  elet- 

triche  opposte.  8vo.  Venezia  1855. 

Memoria  sugli  Argomenti  comprovanti  il  simultaneo 

Passaggio  delle  opposte  Correnti.  8vo.  Venezia  1855. 

ZIEGLER  (R.  O.)  Ueber  die  solitaren  und  Peyerschen  Follikel.  8vo.  Wiirz- 
burg  1850. 

ZSCHOKKE  (F.  E.)  Ueber  eine  merkwiirdige,  bisher  unbekannte,  Krank- 
hafte  Veranderung  an  Menschenknochen  aus  Peru.  8vo.  Aarau  1845. 


Donors. 

Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


The  Author. 


The  Author. 


Phys.  Med.  Soc.  Wurzburg. 


