
Agricultural Research Institute 

PUSA 





PKOCEEDINGS 


or THIC 


ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON. 


From Feb. 23, 1854 to Deo. 20, 1055 Moluoive 


(being a continuation op the series entitled 

••ABSTRACTS OF THE PAPERS COMMUNICATED TO 
THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON”). 


VOL. Vtl. 


LONDON 

PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND FRANCIS, 

HKD LION COURT, rLKKT 8TKKKT. 

MOCCTLVl. 




CONTENTS. 


VOL. VII. 


(iJontinuation of a P^er on Square Numbers, &c., read Dec. 22, )853. 

By Sir Frederick Pollock, M.A., F.H.S page 1 

On a Class of Differential Equations, including those which occur 
in Dynamical Problems. By W. F. Donkin, M,A., F.R.S 4 

On the Growth of Land Shells. By E. JT. Lowe, Esq., F.G.S., F.R.A.S, 8 

Note on the Decomposition of Solphuric Acid by Pentachloride of 
Phosphorus. By Alexander Williamson, Ph.D., F.C.S 11 

On a new and more correct method of determining the Angle of 
Aperture of Microscopic Object-Glosscui. By W. §. Gillett, M.A4 16 

On some new Compounds of Phenyl. By Alexander Williamson, 
Ph.D., F.C.S 18 

Note on an indication of depth of Primicval Seas, afforded by the re- 
mains of colour in Fossil Testacea. By Edward Forbes, F.R.S., 
Pres.G.S.&c 21 

Note on the Melting-point and Transformations of Sulphur. By B. 

C. Brodie, Esq., F.K.S...., 24 

On the Structure and Affinities of THgonocarpon (a fossil fruit of the 
Coal-measures). By Joseph D. Hooker, M.D., F.R.S 28 

Ou a peculiar Arrangement of the Sanguiferous System in Terebratula 
and, ceitain other Brachiopoda. By W, B. Carpenter, M .D., F .R.S. 32 

On a new Series of Sulphuretted Acids. By Dr, August KekuW ... 37 

On the Changes produced in the Blood by the Administration of Cod- 
liver Oil and Cocoa-nut Oil. By Tlieophilus Thompson, M.D*, 
F.R.S 41 

On a property of Numbers, By the Rev. James Booth, LL.D., F.R.S. 42 
On Messers Gyroscope. By CX Wheatstone, Esq., F.R.S 43 

Account of Researches in Th^armo-Elcctneity. By Frofhssor W, 
Thomson of Glssgow,F.E.a 49 

An Intvoductory l^em<w upcm Qmmtics. By Arthur Cayley, Esq,* 
F.R*B..*«. 38 

■ ■ ' ■ b . '■" ■ 



IV 


On the relation of the Angular Aperture of the Object-Glasses of 
Compound Microscoiies to their penetrating power and to Oblique 
Light, By J. W. Griffith, M,D., FX.S.... pag^i 60 

On some conclusions derived from the Observations of the Magnetic 
Declination at the Observatory of St. Helena. By Colonel Kdward 
Sabine, R.A., V.P.K.S 67 

Election of Fellows ...» 82 


The Bakerian Lecture. — On Osmotic Force. By Professor Graham, 
V.P.R.S 83 

Examination of the Cerebro-spinal Fluid. By .William 1'urner, Esq. 89 

On the Oxidation of Ammonia in the Humau Body. By II. Bence 
Jones, M.D., F.R.S V4 

On the Disintegration of Urinary Calculi by the Lateral Disniptive 
Force of the Electrical Discharge. By George Robinson, M.l). ... 9.9 

The Attraction of Ellipsoids considered generally. By Matthew Col- 
lins, Esq., B.A. 103 

Researches on the Impregnation oftlie Ovum in the Amphibia, (lliird 
Scries.) From the MS. papers of the late George Newport, Esq,, 
F.R.S 104 


Contributions to the Anatomy of the Brachiopoda. By Thomas H. 
Huxley, Esq., F.R.S 106 


On the production of Pictures on the Retina of the Human Eye. — 

Part 11. Bythe Rev William Scoreshy,D.D.,F.R.S 117 

On the frequent occurrence of Indigo in Human Urine, and on its 
Chemical, Physiological and Pathological Relations. By Arthur 
Hill Hassall, M.D. 122 


On the Effect of the Pressure of the Atmosphere on the Mean Level 
of the Ocean. By Captain Sir James Clark Ross, R.N., F.R.S. ... 123 

On the Thermal Effects of Fluids in Motion. — No. II. By J. P. 
Joule, Esq., F.R.S., and Professor W. Thomson, F.R.S 127 

Note on Nitro-glycerine. By A. W. Williamson, Ph.I)., F.C.S. ... 130 
On a New Phosphite of Ethyl, By A. W. Williamson, Ph.D., P.C.S. 131 

On some new derivatives of Chloroform. By A. W. Williamson, 
Ph.D.,F.C,S 136 


On the Structure of certain Microscopic Test-objects, and their Action 
on the Transmitted Rays of Light. By Chas. Brooke, M.A., F.R.S. 139 

On the Constitution of Coal-tar Creosote. By Professor William- 
son, Ph.D., F.C.S....... 143 


On the Formation of Powers from Arithmetical Progressions. By 
C.Wheatstone, Esq., F.R.S 146 

On the Btnietnre and Functions of the Rostellum in lAsUra ovata. 

By J. D. Hooker, M.D., F.R.S 152 

On the Immolate Principles of the Excrements of Man and Animals 
in the Hehithy Condition. By William Maroet, M.l). 163 


On the Vine-Uhsoase in the Port-wine Districts of the Alto-Douro, in 
April 1964. With a Supplemental Note on the proposed Reme- 
dies Ibr its Eradication. By Jos. James Forrester, Esq., F.R.G.S. 156 



V 


Letter from Lieut> Maury to Admiral Smyth, For. Sec, R.S. ,,, paye 165 

Letter from W, Graratt, p4sq., F.R.S., to Colonel Sabine, IVees. R.S. 166 

ObservatiouBi on the Respiratory Movements of Insects. By the late 
William Frederick Barlow, E«q., F.R.C.S 167 

On the Imprejynation of the Ovum in the Stickleback- By W, II. 
Ransom, M..1) 168 

On the applicability of Oelatiiie Paper as a Medium for Colouring 
Light. By Horace Dobell, Esq 17- 

On the Theory ofTiefinitc Integrals. By W II. L. Russell, B.A. ... 174 

Anniversary Meeting 175 

On the Attract ion of the Himalaya Mountains, and of the elevated 
region beyond them, upon the Pluinh-line in India. By the 
Venerable John Henry Pratt, M. A., Archdeacon of Calcutta 176 

On the Value of Steam in the Decomposition of Neutral Fatty Bodies. 

By George Wilson, Esq. 182 

The Physical Theory of Musenlar Contraction. By Charles Bland 
Radelide, M.D. 183 

On the Structure of some Limestone Nodules encriosed in Seai^s of 
Bittiminous Coal, with n Description of some Trigonocarijons con* 
tained in them. By J. D. Hooker. M.D., F.R.S., and E. Binney, 

Esq 188 

Remarks on the Anatomy of the Macffillwrai/ia pela^ira and Chele- 
tropis Huxleyi (Forbes) ; suggesting the cstablisliment of a new 
genus of Gasteropoda. By John D. Macdonald, K.N 191 

On the Development of Muscular Fibre in Mammalia. By William 
S. Savory, M.D., F.U.C.S 194 

On the General Integrals of the Ec^uations of the Internal Equili- 
brium of an Elastic Solid. By William John Maeipiorn Rankinc, 
Esq,, Civil Engineer, F.R.S, L. & E 196 

Note to a paper read before the Royal Soiiiety on the 1 1th of May, 
1854. By J. W. Griffith. M.D., F.L.S 203 

Researches on the Theory of Invariants. By William Spottiswoode, 
M,A., F.K.S 204 

Ocular Speetres and Structures as Mutual Ex]>oucut8, By James 
Jago, A.B. Cantab., M B. Oxon,,,.,. 208 

The Bakerian Lecture. — On th(i Nature of the Force by which Bo- 
dies are repelled from the Poles of a Magnet; preceded by an 
Account of some Kxpenments on Molecular Influences. By John 
Tyndall, Ph.D., F.R.H 214 

On Differential Transformation and the Reversion of Serieses. By 
J. J. Sylvester, Esq., F.R.S 21.9 

Ocular Spectres and Structures as Mutual Exixments. By James 
Jago, A.B. Cantab., M.B. Oxon. (concluded) 225 

Micm-chemical researches on tlio Digestion of Starch apd Amyla* 
ceous Foods. By Philip Burnard Ayres, M.D. 225 


An Account of some recent Researches near Cairo, undertaken with 
the view of throwing light upon the Geological History of the 
Alluvial Land of Egypt.— Part First. By Leonard Homer, Esq., 
F.R.SS. L&E*,F.G.8 


23li 



VI 


All Account of Bume recent Researches near Cairo. See, By Leonard 
Horner, Esq.— Part First {concluded) pag0 233 

On the Computation of the Effect of the Attraction of Mountain- 
masses, ns disturbing the apparent astronomical latitude of stations 
in Geodetic Surveys. By George B. Airy, Esq., F.R.8,, Astro- 
nomer Royal 240 

Note to a paper entitled “ Contributions to the Anatomy of the Bra- 
chiopoda,” read June 1 5, 1854. By Thomas H. Huxley, Esq., F.R.8. 241 

On the Temperature and Density of the Seas between Southampton 
and Bombay vid the Mediterranean and Red Seas. By MM* 


Adolphe, Uermaim, and Robert Scblagintweit 242 

On the Structure, Functions, and Homology of the Manducatory 
Organs in the Class Rotifera. By P. II. Gosse, Esq 24«5 

Address of the President 248 

Obituary Notices of Deceased Fellows: — 

Professor Edward Forbes 2f)3 

Rear Admiral Sir John Franklin 270 

Captain F. R. M. Crozier, R.N 275 

Professor Jameson * 275 

George Newport, Esq. 278 

Nathaniel Wallich, M.D 285 

On the Structure. Functions, and Homology of the Manducatory 
Organs in the Class Rotifera. By P. 11. Qosae, Esq. (concluded) 292 

On the Perihelia and Nodes of the Planets* By Edward J. Cooper, 
Esq., F.R.S 295 

On Circumstances mollifying the Action of Chemical Affinity. Bv 
J. H. Gladstone, Ph.D.; F.E.S 298 

Researches on Organo-metallic Bodies. By E. Frauklaud, Ph.D., 
F.R.S. Second memoir 303 

Note on the Magnetic Medium. By Prof. A. W. Williamson 305 

Further Observations on the Anatomy of MacgiUivraya, Cheletropis, 
and allied genera of pelagic Gastero{K>da. By John Denis Mac- 
donald, Esq., R.N 309 


On the Anatomy of Nautilua umbilicatus, compared with that of 

PowipiZittS. By John DenU Macdonald, Esq., R.N 311 

On a Class of Differential Equations, including those which occur in 
Dynamical Problems. — Part II. By W. F. Donkin, M.A., F.R.S., 
F.R.A.S 314 

Extract of a Letter, dated January 6, 1855, from J. Mitchell, Esq., 
Quartermaster of Artillery, Bangalore, “ On the Influence of Local 
Altitude on the Burning of the Fuses of Shells ” 315 

On the existence of an element of Strength in beams subjected to 
Transverse Strain, arising from the Lateral Action of the fibres or 
particles on each other, and named by the author the * Resistance 
to Flexure.' By William Heuiy Barlow, Esq., F.R.S 319 

On the Metallic and some other Oxides, in relation to Catalytic Phe- 
nomena. By the Rev J. Eyre Ashby 322 

Ocular Spectres and Structures as -Mutual Exponents. By James 
Jago, A*B. Cantab*, M.B. Oxou 326 



Vll 


An Account of »oine Experiments made with the Submarine Cable of 
the Mediterranean tllectric Telegraph. By Charles Wheatstone* 
Esq., F.R.S page .328 

On the Descent of Glaciers. By the llev. Henry Moseley, M.A., F.U.S. 15.33 

Reply of the President and Council of the Royal Society to an appli- 
cation from the Lords of the Ctiinmittee of Privy Council for 
Trade, on the subject of Marine Meteorological Observations. By 


Colonel E. Sabine 342 

A Letter from Edwin Canton, Eaq 3Gl 


Some Observations on the Ova of the Salmon, in relation to the dis- 
tribution of Species ; in a letter addressed to Charles Darwin, M.A., 
V.P.R.S, &c. By John Davy, M.D., K H.SS. Lond. & Edinb 3G2 

Observations on the Anatomy and Atfinities of the Phyllirrhoe 6ttrc- 
pkala (Peron). By John Denis Macdonald, Esq., li.N 3()3 

Brief sketch of the Anatomy of a new genus of inslagic Gasteropoda, 
named Jaaonilla, By John Denis Macdonald, Esq., R.N 3(>8 

Note on the position of Aluminum in the Voltaic series. By Charles 


Wheatstone, Esq., F.R.S. 3GJ4 

An Experimental Inquiry into the nature of the metamorphosis of 
Saccharine Matter, as a normal process of the animal economy. 

By Frederick W, Pavy, M.D 3/0 

An Experimental Inquiry into the nature of the metamorphosis of 
Saccharine Matter, as a normal process of the animal economy. 

By Frederick W. Pavy, M.D. {cmiclM) 371 

Researches on the Partition of Numbers, By Arthur Cayley, Esq., 
F.R.S 37G 

Further Researches on the Partition of Numbers. By Arthur Cayley, 
Eaq., F.R.S. With Postscript 377 

An Experimental Inquiry undertaken with the view of ascertaining 
whether any force is evolved during Muscular Contraction analo- 
gous to the /orce evolved in the Fish Gymuotus, and Torpedo. By 
Henry Foster Baxter, Esq 378 

On a simple Geometrical Construction, giving a very approximate 
Quadrature of the Circle. By C. M. Witlich, Esq 379 

A Second Memoir upon Quantics. By Arthur Cayley, Esq., F.U.S 380 

On a Decimal Compass Card. By James M. Share, Esq., Master R.N. 381 

On the Theory of the Electric Telegraph. By Professor William 
Thomson, F.R.S 382 

Observations on the Human Voice. By Manuel Garcia, Esq, .399 

Annual General Meeting for the Electiop of Fellows 411 

Remarks on the Rev. II. Moselev’s ^flieory of the Descent of Glaciers. 

By James D. Forbes, D.C.L.; F.R.S 412 

Researches on the Foraminifera. — Part I. General Introduction, and 
Monograph of the Genus Orbitolites. By William B. Carpenter, 
M.D., F.E.S 417 

On a suppo^d Aerolite or Meteorite found in the Trunk of an old 
Willow Tree in the Battersea Fields. By Sir Roderick Impey 
Murchison, F.R,S 421 



vm 


On the MagnetiHm of Iron Ships, and its accordance with Thco^, 
as determined exten\aUy, in recent Experiments. By the Rev. W. 
Sooresby, D.IX, RR.S page 431 

Extract of a Letter from Professor Lan^i^berf^ of Christiania to Co- 
lonel Sabine, dated June 10, 1865 434 

Anatomical Notices. By Professor Andrew Ret*iiis, of Stockholm ... 437 

On the Eifoct of Local Attraction upon the Plumb-line at stations on 
the English Arc of the Meridian, between .Dinniosc and Biu-leigh 
Moor; and a Method of competing its Amount. By the Vene- 


rable Archdeacon Pratt 440 

Contributions to the history of Aniline, Axobenzole and Benzidine. 

By A. W. Hofmann, Pli.I)., F.R.S 444 

On the Formation and some of the Pro|K*rtie» of Cymidinc, the Organic 
Base of the Cymol Series. By the Rev. John Barlow, F.R.S 44<> 

Letter from Dr. Herapath to Professor Stokes, On the Compounds 
of Iodine and Strychnine 447 

On the Existence of a Magnetic Medium. By T. A. Hirst, Esq 448 

On the ultimate Arrangement of the Biliaiw Ducts, and on some other 
points in the Anatomy of the Liver of Vertebrate Animals. By 
Lionel 8. Beale, M.B 454 

Experimental Researches on the Movement of Atmospheric Air in 
Tubes. By W. D. Cbowne, M.D 455 

On the Constitution and Propevtiea of Ozone. By Thomas Andrews, 
M.D., F.R.S 475 

On Rubian aiid its Products of Decomposition. — Part 111. By Ed- 
ward Sohuiick, Esq.. F.R.S 477 


On the Enumeration of «?-edra having an (a?— l)-gonal Face, and all 
their Summits Triedral. By the R.ev. Thomas P. Kirkman, A.M. 482 

Notes on British Foraminifera. By J. Gwyn Jeffreys, Esq., F.R.S. 486 

Preliminary Research on the Magnetism developed in Iron Bars by 
Electric Currents. By J. P. Joule, Esq., F.R.S. 488 

Discussion of the observed Deviations of the Compass in several 
Ships, Wood-built and Iron-built ; with General Tables for facili- 
tating the examination of Compass-deviations. By G. B. Airy, 


Esq., F.R.S., Astronomer Royal 491 

On Axes of Elastici^ and Crystalline Forms. By W. J. Macquom 

Rankine, Esq., C.E., F.R.SS. L. & E. &c 495 

Report of a Committee appointed by the Council to examine the 
Calculating Maehino of M. Scheutz 499 

Report made to the President and Council of the Royal Society, of 
Experiments on the Friction of Discs revolving in Water. By James 
Thomson, Esq., C.E., Belfast ..,..,,7. 609 


Account of the appropriation of the sum of j£?500(), placed by Her 
Majesty’s Government, in five annual sums of j^lOOO each, in the 
years I860 to 1854 inclusive, at the disposal of the Royal Society, 
to be Employed in aiding the promotion of Science in the United 

Kingdom - 612 

Experimental Researches in Electricity. Thirtieth Series. By Mi- 
cWl Faraday, D.C.L., F.R.S. &c. 623 



IX 


Experimental Researches in Electricity. Thirtieth Series. By Mi- 
chael Faraday, D.C.L., F.R.S., &c. {concluded) page 524 

Discussion of the observed Deviations of the Compass in several 
ships. Wood- built and Iron-built ; with General Tables for facili- 
tating the examination of Compass-deviations. By G. B. Airy, 

Esq., F.H.S., Astronomer Uoyal 627 

Anniversary 527 

On the Determination of the Dew-point by means of the Dry^- and 
Wot*Bulb Thermometers. By Lieut. Nobh?, R.N., Toronto 628 

On Chemical Affinity, and the Solubility of the Sulphate of Baryta in 
Acid Liquors. By F. Grace Calvert, Esq 682 

Results of the Examination of certain Vegetable Products from India. 

— Part I. By John Steiibouse, LL.D., F.R.S. 68(J 

On the Representation of Polyhedra. By the Rev. Thomas P. Kirk- 
man, A.M. 648 


On the Action of Sulphuric Acid on the Nitriles and on the Amides. 

By G. B. Buckton, Esq., and A, W. Hofmann, Ph.D., F.R.S 644 

On the Structure and Development of the Cysticercus ('cllulosro, as 

Jf a T4' T».. _ £.40 


found in the Pig. By George Rainey, Esq 648 

Further Researches on the Polarity of the Diamagnetic Force. By 
John Tyndall, Ph.D., F R.S 666 

Address of the President 660 


Obituary Notices of Deceased Fellows : — 

Martin Bar^, M.D. 677 

Sir Henry Tliomas De la Beche, C.B. &c 682 

Bryan Donkin, Esq 686 

Charles Frederic Gauss 689 

George Simon Ohm 698 

Rear-Admiral Sir William Edward Parry 60.8 

Richard Sheepshanks, Esq 612 




February 28, 1854, 


The Rev. BADEN POWELL, V.P., in the Chair. 


The following comrauTiicationfl were read : — 

I. A paper entitled, ‘^Continuation of the subject of a paper 
read Dec. 22, 1853, the supplement to which was read 
Jan. 12, 1854, by Sir Freberick Pollock, &c. ; with a 
proof of FermaPs first and second Theorems of the Polygonal 
Numbers, viss. that every odd number is composed of four 
square numbers or less, and of three triangular numbers or 
less.^^ By Sir Frederick Pollock, M.A,, F.R.S, &c. 
Received Febmaiy 23, 1854. 

The object of this paper is in the first instance to prove the 
truth of a theorem stated in the supplement to a former paper, via. 

that every odd number can be divided into foursquares (zero being 
considered on even square) the algebraic sum of whose roots (in 
some form or other) will equal 1, 3, 5, 7, &c. up to the greatest 
possible sum of the roots.*' The paper also contains a proof, that if 
every odd number *2h -f 1 con be divided into four square numbers, 
the algebraic sum of whose roots is equal to i, then aiiy number h 
is composed of not exceeding three triangular numbers. 

The general statement of the method of proof may be made thus : 
two theorems are introduced which connect every odd number with 
the gradation series, 1, 3, 7, 13, Ac., of which the general term is 
1 or 1 (that is, the double of a triangular number 

l)f each term of which series can be resolved into four squares, the 
a%ebraic sum of the roots of wbidb,/>,j?,p,jp4“l* or 
may man^stly bo ^l. By these theorems it is shown that every 
odd number to dildsiUo into femr squai'es, having roots capable of 
VOL. VU, B 



2 


forming a« the sum of the roots 3> 5, 7, 8ic. up to the greatest 
possible sum of the roots. 

As the four square numbers which compose an odd number must 
obviously be three of them even and one odd, or three odd and one 
even, the diflferonces of the roots among themselves must be the first 
odd and the third even, or vice versd ; and therefore these roots must 
have the sum of the first and third differences an odd number ; the 
middle difference may be either odd or even. 

llxe first of the theorems referred to, called by the author '' Theo- 
rem P,” is in substance this : — 

Let r, s, /. V be the roots the squares of which compose any odd 
number N, such that r + s -f f-hv=l. and let each of these roots be 
increased by m; then r+m, y-fm, / -fm, v + m will be the roots of 
the odd number and w— r, a, w— #, m—v the 

roots of the odd number N -f-2m(2m— 1) ; the sum of the roots in 
the first case being 4m + 1. and in the second 4m— 1. So that 
giving to m successively the values 0, 1, 2, 3, in the general form 
N-f 2m(2m jh l)t a series will be formed in which the suras of the 
roots will be 1,8, 6, 7, 9, &c., and the sums of their squares N, 
N4-2.1.1, N + 2.1.3, N + 2.2.3. N + 2 . 2 . 5, N-f 2 . 3 . 5, 
N-f-2.3.7. N-f 2.4.7, &c.; orN, N + 1.2, N-f2.3, N + 3.4, 
N+4.5, N + 5.6, N-f6.7. N + 7.8, &c. So that if p be the 
distance of any odd number in this series from N, the number will be 
N-fp(p-f-l), and the sum of its roots will be 2p*f 1. 

The conclusions to be drawn from this theorem are then stated:— 

1, The greatest sum of the roots of the squares into which any 
odd number can be divided may be obtained ; for let 2n 4- 1 be any 
odd number, and 2p<f 1 the odd number to which the algebraic sum 
of its roots is required to be equal ; then if p is such that p(p-f 1) 
is less than 2a -f I, the number 2a -fl can be resolved into squeures 
the sum of whose roots is 2^4-1 ; otherwise it cannot. 

2. The form of the roots of 2»4'1 may be found of which the 
algebraic sum is any possible odd number 2p-f 1 except 1, provided 
all the odd numbers less than 2a -fl possess the property of having 
the algebraic sum of their roots =1. For if from 2«-hl,p(p+l) 
be taken, there will remain an odd number (N in Theorem P) such 
that, according to the condition ‘stated, the algebraic sum of ite^ 
roots =r 1 ; and in the series of roots and odd numbers formed from 



3 


these roots according to theorem P, p terms from N will be found 
the number 2n + 1 composed of squares the algebraic sum of whose 
roots is 2^) + 1* 

It thus appears that any odd number 2«+l can be divided into 
squares the sum of whose roots will equal 3, 5, 7, &c. (any possible 
odd number except 1) if the odd numbers below it can be divided 
into squares the sum of whose roots = 1 ; and if it can be shown 
that its roots in some form will equal 1, then the theorem M will be 
true for that number and for every number below it. 

This is illustrated by an example, and then another theorem, 
called Theorem Q," is stated. In this a series of roots and odd 
numbers is formed by making the 1st and 3rd diflerences of the 
roots constant, but reversed every alternate term, and increasing or 
diminishing the middle difference by I each term ; — or the middle 
difference is made constant and the Ist and 3rd vary. The sums of 
the roots thus oecome constant in every term of the series, but the 
sums of the squares of the roots increase, as in theorem P, by the 
even numbers 2, 4, 6‘, 8, &c., so that the increase at any number of 
terms p is p{p-^ 1). or the double of a triangular number. 

By the application of these theorems to a variety of examples, it 
is shown how any odd number may be composed of four squares, 
such that the algebraic sum of their roots may equal 1 . 

The theorems P and Q, it is considered, connect every odd num- 
ber with every other odd number, so as to make it impossible if one 
odd number be composed of four squares, but that every other odd 
number should likewise be so. It is pointed out in what manner 
every possible combination of numbers which can furnish the differ- 
ences of the roots of any squares, not exceeding four, which can 
make an odd number, and the sum of which roots = 1, can be derived 
from the gradation series, that is from 4/i^±2ji?-i- 1. The combined 
effect of the theorems P and Q is therefore to prove that every 
odd number must be composed of not exceeding four square num- 
bers. 

The author goes on to show that every number is composed of 
not exceeding three triangular numbers, by proving that if every 
odd number 2ia+ 1 can be divided into four square numbers the sum 
of whose roots 1, then n will be composed of not exceeding three 
triangular numbers. This is done by taking the differences of the 

B i 



4 


root* of 2n4- the algebraic sum of which roots ia one, and ditai* 
niahiag the middle difference by theorem Q until it reaches a number 
nearest to half the sum of the first and third differences. The 
difference between 2«-fl and the number thus obtained will be the 
double of a triangular number =:2T. By the next step, the extreme 
differences are reduced until they are of the form m, m-f 1 ; and the 
difference between 2»4-l — 2T and the number thus obtained will 
again be the double of a triangular number =:2T‘. The differences 
last obtained give the double of a triangular number +1 ”2T'^4- 1. 
So that we find 2n + 1 ^ 2T + 2T^-)- 2T^' -f 1 . Consequently «s=: the 
sum of three triangular numbers, if all the three operations be 
necessary ; if not, to two or one triangulox number only. 


II, The first part of a paper On a Class of Differential Equa- 
tions, including those which occur in Dynamical Problems," 
By W. F. Donkin, M.A., F.R.S., F.ll.A.S., Savilian Pro^ 
fessor of Astronomy in the University of Oxford. 


This paper is intended to contain a discussion of some properties 
of a class of simultaneous differential equations of the first order, 
including as a particular case the form (which again includes the 
dynamical equations), 


dyl 




dxl 




where ... yi ••• y,, are two sets of n variables each, and accents 
denote total differentiation with respect to the independent variable t ; 
Z being any function of *r, &c., &c., which may also contain t ex- 

plicitly. The port now laid before the Society is limited to the 
consideration of the above form. 

After deducing ffom known properties of functional determinants 
a general theorem to be used afterwards, the author establishes the 
following propositions. 

If ... jr„ be « variables connected with n other variables y, ,..y„ 


by n equations of the form y*» — (X being a given function of 
then the equations obtained by solving these algebraic 



5 


cally, 90 os to express terms of y.* will also be of the 

JV" 

form Xisa where Y is a function of yi ... which may be de- 
dj/i 

fined by the equation 

y = -(X)-f(ari)y,+ ... -f (a?«)yN. 

in which the brackets indicate that the terms within them are to be 
expressed as functions of y, ...y*. Moreover, if p be any other 
quantity contained explicitly in X (besides the variables ... 
the following relation will subsist ; namely, 


^ ^ =0 
dp (ip 

the differentiation in each case being performed only so far as p 
appears explicitly in the function. 

It is then shown that if X contain explicitly, besides ... the 
n constants Oj, a,. ... 0^, and the variable f, and if the 2n variables 
••• yj ... y*. be determined as functions of i by the system of 
equations, 


dx^ 


=yi, 



(II.) 


where ... are n other constants, the elimination of the 2» con- 
stants from these equations and their differentials with respect to t, 
leads to the system of differential equations (L), if for Z be put the 

JV 

result of substituting in — — the values of the 2« constants in 

terms of the variables. The equations expressing the 2n constants 
in terms of the variables may be considered as the 2n integrals of 
the system (I.). 

The author employs the symbol [p, q] in a sense similar to that 
in which Poisson and others have employed (p, y)» namely, as an 

abbreviation for X,/ ^ * and he shows that if p, q 

^dy^ dxi dXi dy/ ^ 

represent any two of the 2« constants &c., &c., then [p, y] is 

either =1 or =0, according asp, q are a pair not. 

Next it is shown that if a,, represent any functions of 2»» 

variables ... iTn* yi ... y», satisfying identically the con- 

ic 

ditions [«*, 0^=0, then if by means of the n given equations ex- 



6 


pressing &c. in terms of the variables, the set y,, yj ... y, be 
expressed as functions of ... the relations 

will be identically satisfied ; in other words, the expres- 

ax^ dxi 

sion for yi y„ will be the partial diflPerential coefficients of a func- 
tion of OTj ... ar*. 

Hence it easily follows, that if any n integrals .,.fl»ofthe 
system (I.) be given, which satisfy the conditions [fl„ a 

" Principal Function ” X can always be found, from which the re- 
maining integrals of the system may be deduced by means of the 
second set of equations (11.). 

The relation in which these investigations stand to the discovery 
of Sir W. R. Hamilton (as improved and completed by Jacobi) is 
pointed out. And it is shown that the system of n differential equa- 
tions of the second order 

^ dXi 

(to which Lagrange had reduced the dynamical equations, and which 
Sir W. Hamilton had transformed into the system (I.) by a process 
depending upon the circumstance that, in dynamical problems, W 
contains x\, j?',, ... jt', only in the form of a homogeneous function) 
may, by means of the theorems established at the beginning of the 
paper, be reduced to the form (I.) without assuming anything as to 
the form of W, which may be any function whatever of ar, 

... and t. 

The 2« integrals of the system (L), obtained in the way above 
explmned, being shown to satisfy the conditions 

[ffj. ^] = 1 , [«<, oj = [a,, b;] 5= [bu y = 0, 

it is proposed to coll them ** normal integrals,*’ and the constants 
flj &c., die. normal elements,” any pair a,, bi being called co»- 
Jugate. 

In the second section, the author gives a simplified demonstration 
of Poisson’s theorem (extended to the general system (I.)), that if 
/■, g be any two integrals, [/» p] is constant. The preceding prin- 
ciples are then exemplified by application to the problems of the 
motion of a material point under the action of a centrid force, and 
the rotation of a solid body about a fixed point. 



7 


In each case three integrals, are taken, satisfying the 

three conditions [e,, CjjsrO, [c,, Ci]=0, [c,, c,]=0; the first being 
the integral of vis viva, and the other two being derived from the 
integrals expressing the conservation of areas. In the former pro- 
blem the " principal function " is then found with great ease, and the 
remaining integrals deduced. The set of “ normal elements " thus 
obtained coincide with those given by Jacobi (in a memoir in Crelle*8 
J oumal, vol . xvii . ) . In the problem of rotation , the algebraical solution 
of the three assumed integrals for y,, y^ depends upon that of an 
equation of the fourth degree. It is therefore impracticable to 
exhibit the principal function in an explicit form. In this respect 
the result arrived at resembles that obtained by Mr. Cayley in a 
totally different way ; Mr. Cayley having shown that the solution of 
the problem is reducible to quadratures, assuming the algebraical 
solution of a certain system of equations of the same form as those 
to which the author of the present investigation is conducted. (Camb. 
and Dub. Math. Journ. vol. i. p, 172.) 

Methods are then indicated by which, when one system of "normal 
elements '' is given, other systems may be found. 

The practical value of “ normal solutions ** of the system (I.) de- 
pends chiefly upon the simplicity of the corresponding formulee for 
the variation of elements, the theory of which is intended to form 
part of the subject of the following sections. 



8 


March 2, 1854. 


Professor GRAHAM, V.P., in the Chair. 

In accordance with the Statutes, the Secretary read the following 
list of Candidates for election into the Society. 


James Allman, M,D. 

Henry Foster Baxter, Esq. 
Edward William Bray ley, Esq. 
Alexander Bryson, M.D. 

James Caird, Eeq. 

J, Lockhart Clarke, Esq. 
William Coulson, Esq. 

Thomas Russell Crampton. Esq. 
Joseph Dickinson, M.D. 
Solomon Moses Drach, Esq. 
Major Duckett. 

John Eric Erichsen, Esq. 

Sir Charles Fox. 

Ronald Campbell Gunn, Esq. 
William Bird Herapath, M.D. 


Robert Hunt Esq. 

John Bennet Lawes, Esq. 
Edward Joseph Lowe, Esq, 
Robert Mallet, Esq. 

Charles May, Esq. 

Captain Moore, H.N. 

Henry Perigal, Esq. 

Captain Strachey. 

R. D. Thomson, Esq. 

Charles Vincent Walker, Esq. 
Samuel Charles Whitbread, Esq. 
Robert Wight, M.D. 

Thomas Williams, M.D. 

W. C. Williamson. Esq. 

George Fergusson Wilson, Esq. 


The following Papers were read : — 

L the Growth of Land Shells.^^ By E. J. Low£, Esq., 
F.G.S., F.R.A.S. &c. Communicated by Henry Lawson, 
Esq., P.R.S. Received February 18, 1854. 

Perhaps the following observations on the growth of land shells 
may contain sufOicient information to prove interesting to tlie Royal 
Society. Before describing them, however, a few introductory re- 
marks will be necessary. Every individual experimented upon has 
been kept in coniineinent since the day it was hatched. Bach 



9 


speoiee has been placed in a separate box (filled with soil to the 
depth of three inches), and care has been taken to feed the Mollusca 
every other day, the food chiefly consisting of the leaves of the 
lettuce and cabbage . In very dry weather the soil has been moistened 
with rain-water about once a week ; in that box containing Helix 
pomatia small lumps of chalk have been mixed with the soil. 


The species experimented upon were : — 


Helix aspersa 

— caperata 

— hispida 

— nemoralis 

— pomatia 

— rotundatR 

— virgata 


Zonites cellartus 

— lucidus 

— nitidulus 

— radiatulus 
Bulimus obscurus 
Clausilia nigricans 
Pupa umbillcata 


The facts arrived at are, — 

let. The shells of lielicidse increase but little for a considerable 
period, never arriving at maturity before the animal has once become 
dormant. 

2nd. Shells do not grow whilst the animal itself remains dor- 
mant. 

3rd. The growth of shells is very rapid when it does take place. 

4th, Most species bury themselves in the ground to increase the 
dimensions of their shells. 


First Experiment with Helix pomatia. 

A specimen of this species having deposited thirteen eggs which 
were hatched during the first week of August 1852, six of the 
young ones were deposited in a box (having a lace cover) placed 
in the shade, Tlie young Helices were regularly fed every other 
day until the beginning of December, when they buried themselves 
in the soil for winter ; up to this period they had gradually increased 
in diraensions to the size of Helix hispida. From December until 
April the soil was kept dry, the box being placed in the cellar. On 
the 1st of April they were replaced in the garden, the soil having 
preriously been copiously watered. On the 3rd of April the young 
ones appeared on the surface, being no letr^ in size than they were 
in December, and although regularly fed up to the 20th of June 



10 

tbc 7 scarcely incrmed. not being perceptibly larger in size ^on 
they were in December. However, on the 20th of June five of 
them disappeared, having buried themselves (with the mouth of tlte 
shell downmrds) in the soil; on the 30th of June they reappeared, 
having in ten days grown so rapidly as at this time to become equal 
in size to Helh pisana. They again buried themselves on the 15 th 
of July and reappeared on the 1st of August, having again in- 
creased in size. From this date they did not apparently become any 
larger, and on the 2nd of November food was withheld for the 
winter, ond at the present time (February 14th) they are In a dor- 
mant state. Probably they will arrive at maturity by July or August 
next. The sixth specimen did not bury itself until the 15th of 
August. 

Second Experiment with Helix aspersa. 

A pair of fleltx aspersa having been procured in the act of copu- 
lation on the 19th of May 1852, they were placed in confinement. 
Each individual deposited about 70 eggs, which began to hatch on 
the 20th of June; these young ones grew but little during the 
summer, lliey buried themselves in the soil on the 10th of October, 
coming again to the surface on the 5th of April, not having grown 
during the In May they buried themselves (with their heads 

downwards as with Helix pomatia, in winter they and other species 
buried themselves with the head upwards), appearing again in a 
week double the size ; this process was carried on at about fortnightly 
intervals until July the 18th, when they were almost fully grown. 
It is worthy of remark that this species, as well as Helix pomatia 
and Helix nemoralis, and probably other of the Helica, form an oper- 
culum at the aperture, after which they retire considerably within 
the shell, and form a second (much thinner), behind which they 
rest during the winter. 

It would be swelling this paper too much to describe all the obser** 
vations in full ; it will perhaps therefore be considered sufficient to 
remark that the process of growth within the ground takes place 
with Helix nmoralis, Helix virgatu. Helix caperata, and Helix hispida. 
Helix rotundata burrows into decayed wood to increase the size 
of its shell. Zonites radiatulus appears to remain on deca3dng blades 
of grass ; whilst Pupa umhilicata, Clausilia nigricans and Bulinms 
obscurus bury their heads only to increase their shells, With respect 



,v: ■ 

to ionites etllatinM, Zmitei keiin^, mA Zoi^€M it ww 

not iatiftfnctorily atcertmned whether their heads were buried du- 
ring the process of growth. 

E. J, Lows. 

Observatory, Beeston, 

1854, February 14th. 


JL Note on the Decomposition of Sulphuric Acid by Penta- 
chloride of Phosphorus/^ By AtKXAXOKR Williamson, 
Ph.D., F.C.S., Professor of Practical Chemistry in Univer- 
sity College. Communicated by Dr. Sharpey, Sec. B.S. 
Received February 23, 1854. 


Chemists have long been aware of the fact that some acids unite 
with bases in one proportion only, others in two or more proportions, 
'^rhus a given quantity of nitric acid forms with what is termed its 
equivalent of potash, a definite nitrate of potash ; if less than this 
equivalent quantity of potash were added to the nitric acid, the 
product would be a mechanical mixture of the same nitrate of potash 
with uncombined nitric acid ; if more tlmn the equivalent of potash 
were added, the excess of alkali would remain uncombined. Sul- 
phuric acid, on the other hand, is capable of forming two compounds 
with potash, and it depends upon the proportions in which the two 
substances are brought together whether the neutral or acid sulphate 
is formed. 

The number of compounds which an acid forma with one base is 
now considered as indicating its atomic weight. The weights of 
sulphuric and nitric acids which are respectively susceptible of neu- 
tralizing the same quantity of potash are termed equimlentt but 
these are by no means the same as their atomit weights, Sixty- 
three parts of nitric acid (nitrate of water) contains the same quantity 
of hydrogen as forty-five parts of sulphuric acid, and when they are 
neutralized by potash the whole of this hydrogen is removed and 
replaced by potassium ; and if neither of the acids could combine in 
any other proportion with potash, their atomic weights would be the 
same as their equivalent weights. But sulphuric acid also forms a 
potash compound in which half of its hydrogen is replaced by potas- 



12 


siuin» the other half remaining in the compound, whereas the smallest 
particles of nitric acid either exchange the whole or none of their 
hydrogen for potassium. 

This fact is expressed in the simplest possible manner by the 
statement that the smallest indivisible particles of sulphuric acid 
contain two atoms of hydrogen, whilst those of nitric acid only 
contain one. Thus it is, that whereas the equivalent weights of the 
two acids are the quantities which contain the same amount of basic 
hydrogen, their atomic weights must be in the proportion of two 
equivalents of sulphuric to one of nitric acid. The simplest expres- 
sion for an atom of nitric acid being empirically NO^ H, we shall 
accordingly represent an atom of sulphuric acid by the formula 
BO4HS. In like manner, an atom of common phosphoric acid, 
being tribasic, is expressed empirically by the formula PO4 The 
labours of Messrs. Laurent and Gcrhardt greatly contributed to the 
establishment of these results, which are uncontroverted. 

We have hitherto been accustomed to resort very freely to ima- 
ginary distinctions of form end arrangement of matter to explain the 
difFerences of properties ; but of late years an opposite tendency has 
arisen, and chemists have felt the necessity of reducing their language 
end ideas to simpler and more consistent forms. This necessity was 
first felt in the most complex, t. e. the so-called organic part of che- 
mistry. But the simplifications thus introduced have proved to be 
equally applicable to the inorganic part of the science ; and their 
introduction is calculated to disengage, for the consideration of sub- 
stantial differences of composition, the attention which has hitherto 
liecn absorbed by imaginary distinctions of form. Being unable to 
express the constitution of compounds without some formal artifice, 
we shall be able to see and compare their substantial differences 
most easily when all unnecessary variations of those formal artifices 
are eliminated. The success of this operation of course depends on 
our finding one form sufficiently general to replace the special and 
limited forms now employed. 

In some papers published in the Journal of the Chemical Society 
two or three years ago, I endeavoured to show that the constitution 
of salts may be reduced to the type of water ; that acids and bases 
being, truly, acid salts and basic salts, are perfectly conformable to 
the same principle ; and that, amongst other things, the differeime 



13 


between monobasic and bibasic acids, admits of a simple and easy 
explanation by it. The leading propositions in those papers have been 
adopted by several eminent chemists in this country and in France ; 
and M. Gerhnrdt speedily enriched science with a series of brilliant 
and striking illustrations of their truth. As regards the constitution 
of bihasic acids, M. Gerhard t's results were, however, at variance 
with that theory ; and he was led to represent them by formulae 
equally inconsistent with his own previous views on the subject. 1 
believe that this discrepancy is satisfactorily removed by the facts I 
have the honour of submitting to the consideration of the Society. 
An atom of nitric acid, being eminently monobasic, is. as we have 

H 

already shown, represented in the monobasic type by the 

formula in which peroxide of nitrogen (NO^) replaces one 

( H \ 

is ob- 
tained by replacing one atom of hydrogen in the type by its equiva- 


lent of potassium ; and nitrate of 


potash by a simultane- 


ous substitution of one atom of hydrogen by peroxide of nitrogen, 
the other by potassium. Sulphuric acid is formed from two atoms of 


water 


H 

H 

H 


O 


; one of hydrogen from each is removed, and the two 


replaced by the indivisible radical SO^. The series 


Sulphuric acid. 
SOj , 


Acid sulphate of potash. 


so, 

K 


* 0 ' 


Neutral sulphate of potash. 

Ko 


explains itself. 

Chemists have long known how to remove the basylous consti- 
tuents H, K, &c. of these salts, and to replace them by others. But 
it is only recently that they have learnt to remove the chlorous 
radicals SOa, NO,, fitc. in a similar manner. To obtain the chloride 
of potassiiun from its sulphate, it is sufficient to bring the latter into 
liquid contact with chloride of barium ; but the same reagent would 
be powerlcas for the preparation of the chlorides of the radicals SO^ 
or NO#, ‘ 



14 


M. Cahours fthown us a reagent (the pentachloride of phos- 
phorus) which is capable of forming from a great number of mono- 
basic acids the chlorides of the acid radicals* Whilst extending our 
knowledge of the action of the body on monobasic and organic acids, 
and preparing numerous compounds of their radicals with one atom 
of chlorine, M. Gerhard t examined also the nature of its action upon 
bibasic acids and their compounds; and states that it consists of two 
successive phases, first, the liberation of the anhydrous acid, secondly, 
the substitution of two atoms of chlorine for one of oxygen in that 
anhydrous acid. These facts, if correct, would be unfavourable to 
the above view of the constitution of sulphuric and the other bilmsic 
acids; and M. Gerhardt adopted accordingly the old formulae, repre- 
senting in their composition an atom of water ready-formed, SOgHjO. 

Confining my remarks for the present to the case of sulphuric 
acid, whose decomposition is doubtless typical of that of other bibasic 
acids, 1 may state os the result of numerous experiments with the 
most varied proportions of pentachloride and acid, performed on a 
acale of considerable magnitude, that the first action of the penta- 
chloride consists in removing one atom of hydrogen and one of 
oxygen (empirically peroxide of hydrogen) from the acid, putting in 


H 

an atom of chlorine in their place and forming the compound SO 3 


Cl' 


which is strictly intermediate between the hydrated acid and the 
final product SO, Cl, formed by a repetition of the same process of 
substitution of chlorine for peroxide of hydrogen. The existence 
and formation of this body, which we may call chloro-hydrated sul- 
phuric acid, furnishes the moat direct evidence of the truth of the 
notion, that the bibasic character of sulphunc acid is owing to the 
fisot of one atom of its radical SO, replacing or (to use the customarj 
expression) being equivalent to two atoms of hydrogen. Had this 
radical been divisible like an equivalent quantity of a monobasic 
acid, we should have obtained a mixture, not a compound of the 
chloride with the hydrate, — or, at least, the products of decomposi- 
tion of that mixture, 

Chloro-hydrated sulphuric acid boils at 145^ Cent., distilling 
without decompositiou. The intensity of its action upon water 
varies according to the manner in wliich the two bodies are brought 



15 


together. When poured rapidly into a large quantity of cold water, 
a portion of it einke to the bottom, and only gradually dieaolves as 
a mixture of hydrochloric and sulphuric acids. When a small 
quantity of water is added to the compound, the same decomposition 
takes place with explosive violence. The acid dissolves chloride of 
sodium on the application of a gentle heat with evolution of hydro- 

O 

chloric acid, giving rise to a compound of the formula SO^ . When 

Cl, 

poured upon pieces of melted nitre at the atmospheric temperature, 
on effervescence takes place with evolution of a colourless vapour 
which possesses in a striking degree the odour of aqua regia. This 
vapour may be dissolved in various liquids, and when decomposed 
by water, yields nitric and hydrochloric acids. It is doubtless 
chloro-nitric acid, NO^Cl. In like manner the chlorides of other 
inorganic acid radicals may be obtained, as from chlorates, perchlo- 
rates, sulphites, &c., but of these and other reactions I beg leave to 
defer any further account until the experiments now in hand are 
more advanced. 

From the general resemblance of properties and identity of boiling- 
point of the chloro- hydrate with a compound discovered by Rose, 
and described by that eminent chemist as possessing empirically the 
composition S 3 Cl^, 1 was led to suspect that the two might in 
reality be identical, which of course would require the addition of 
the elements of water to Rose’s formula, and several experiments I 
have performed afford strong confirmation of that identity. The 
same compound is obtained by the action of dry hydrochloric acid 
on anhydrous sulphuric acid; and finally, I may mention that 
Mr. Railton obtained a small quantity of the same substance some 
weeks ago in my laboratory by the action of platinum-black at a 
high temperature on an imperfectly dried mixture of chlorine and 
sulphurous acid. 

As regards the successive transformations effected in the penta* 
chloride, I have observed the formation of Wurtz’s oxychloride (the 
tribasic cbloro-phosphorio acid (PO Clg)), and also of a compound 
boUing above 145^ probably PO, Cl. Hydrated phosphoric acid is 
always found unless the amount of pentachloride added is very 
great. 



March 9, 1854. 


THOMAS BELL, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 

The following paper was read : — 

Ou a new and more correct method of determining the Angle 
of Aperture of Microscopic Object-Glasses/^ By William 
S. Gillett, Esq., M.A. Communicated by Charles 
Brooke, E«q., M,A., F.li.S. Reauved March 9, 1854 

Tlie very large apertures assigned to the more recent microscopic 
object-glasses drew the author's attention some time since to the im- 
portance of testing the accuracy of the method employed to deter- 
mine their amount. 

With this object in view he began with the consideration that 
the central pencil was alone to be regarded, and that the marginal 
rays of this were the true limits of the angle of aperture, and that 
consequently the rays of all oblique pencils were to be excluded, as 
these might cross at a point not coincident with the principal focus, 
arid being measured separately might form an angle (apparently of 
aperture) not coinciding of course with the true one, although per- 
haps not didering from it in amount. A short description of the 
usual method of measuring these angles will suffice to show what 
claim it has to confidence in these respects. 

The microscope, with the object-glass to be examined and an or- 
dinary eye-piece, is used as a telescope, and a light placed at some 
distance is commonly made an object to define the limit of the field 
of view, the image of which is formed near the back surface of the 
posterior combination, and the difiPused light of this image, as seen 
through the eye-piece, is the indication that a pencil of light is ad-- 
mitted, whether central or oblique. Sometimes by an additional 
glass the eye-piece is made an erecting one capable of bringing the 
image into focus. This adds much to the convenience, but not to 



17 


the oorrectneBB of the method. Thus the condiUona of the micro- 
Bcopic object^glasB are revereed, the principal focus bein^ transferred 
from the front to the back, and the rays csUmated are those of the ex- 
treme oblique pencils, which may or may not pass through the point 
of the principal focus of the glass when used for the microscope. 

The importance of this in the illumination of objects immediately 
suggested itself ; and the author obtained a further proof by another 
experiment bearing directly upon this point. A blackened wire was 
placed under a microscope at the focal point, with an object-glass 
of considerable power and aperture, the wire covering the field with 
the eye- piece used. The field was then illuminated with an achro- 
matic condenser, the field of illumination exceeding, as it usually 
does, that of the microscope. As was expected, the oblique rays 
which passed on both sides of the wire prevented its blackness from 
being seen (this becoming of a milky- grey), until the field of illumi- 
nation was reduced to the extent of that of the microscope, when it 
immediately assumed to the eye its natural blackness. This re- 
minded the author of a beautiful illustration given by Professor Fara- 
day some years 'since at the Royal Institution, of the effect of glare 
produced by placing white muslin blackened in parts before a white 
paper printed iir large letters ; with the white muslin in front, the 
letters were scarcely visible, while through the blackened parts they 
resumed their natural appearance. These experiments suggested 
the new method adopted, which may be briefly stated as follows : — 

The microscope of which the object-glass is to be examined is 
placed horixontally and centred by an object placed in the focus. 
Next, there is substituted in place of the eye-piece, a hollow cone 
with an aperture at its summit. Light passing through this aper- 
ture is made to form an image of it in the principal focus of the ob- 
ject-glass, in the place of the original object. On this image a 
horizontally placed examining microscope is then directed, which 
traverses as the radius of a graduated circle, having its centre corre- 
sponding with the place of the originnl object, and therefore with 
the image to be viewed ; and the angle of aperture is measured by 
the arc passed through between two extreme positions, in the usual 
manner. The method is further explained in the paper by a figure 
and^ description of the apparatus, which was itself exhibited in the 
library after the meeting. 

VOL, vir. c 



18 


March 16, 1854. 

CHARLES WHEATSTONE, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 

The following paper was read : — 

some new Compounds of Pheuyl.^^ By A. Williamson, 
Ph.D., F.C.S., Professor of Practical Chemistry in Univer- 
sity College. Communicated by Dr. Shaupey, Sec. R.S. 
Received March 15, 1854. 

This communication contains a notice of some of the results ob- 
tained in an investigation of Carbolic Acid or Hydrated Oxide of 
Phenyl, conducted, under the author’s superintendence, by Mr. 
Scrugham in the Analytical Laboratory of University College. 

Referring to the substitution products obtained by Laurent from 
hydrate of phenyl by the action of chlorine and bromine, as well as 
to its combination with acids prepared by that chemist in conjunc- 
tion with Gerhard t, the author states that the substance which they 
conceived to be chloride of phenyl has been found by Mr. Scrugham 
to be a mixture of two compounds. 

As regards the preparation of hydrate of phenyl from the creosote 
of coal-tar, it is observed that the numerous fractional distillations 
by which it is usually isolated may be abridged by crystallization ; 
for if creosote, having the boiling-point between 186® and 188® Cent., 
be left for some time in contact with a few crystals of the pure hy- 
drate, it deposits a considerable quantity of beautiful colourless 
needles, which, when separated from the mother- liquid, distil at 
184® Cent., and condense in the neck of the retort into a solid mass 
of pure hydrate of phenyl. 

When pentachloride of phosphorus is added to hydrate of phenyl, 
the action is at first very energetic, hydrochloric acid being evolved, 
and the mixture becoming hot; but after a time the addition of fresh 
portions of pentachloride produces no perceptible action, unless the 
mixture be heated. Oxychloride of phosphorus is formed, as well as 



19 


a neutral oil}rbody’« which la insoluble in aqueoua potash at the 
common temperature, but soluble with decomposition in boiling pot« 
ash. This oily compound would, from its mode of formation, be 
naturally supposed to be the chloride of phenyl, and it has been so 
considered by some distinguished chemists. It may, however, be sepa* 
rated by distillation into two perfectly definite and distinct bodies, one 
of which boils at 136° Cent,, the other at a temperature above the 
range of mercurial thermometers. The former of these is a colour- 
less mobile liquid, possessing a fragrant smell, not unlike that of 
bitter almonds. The latter is a more consistent inodorous liquid, 
which solidifies at a low temperature into a mass of colourless cry- 
stals, The liquid having the boiling-point of 136° is nothing else 
than the chloride of phenyl. The crystalline body is the phossphate of 
phenylt one of the most beautiful products in organic chemistry. In 
the liquid state it is slightly yellow by transmitted light, and it re- 
flects the more refrangible rays with a fine opalescent appearance, 
due no doubt to the so-called epipolic refraction. The epipolic rays 
visible by ordinary daylight on and at some depth below its sur- 
face, are of a fine violet tint, differing decidedly from the blue colour 
exhibited by disulphatc of quinine in like circumstances. The flame 
of sulphur does not bring out this effect more strongly than the 
diffused light of the sun. 

Phosphate of phenyl dissolves in strong nitric acid with evolution 
of considerable heat, and the solution gives out nitrous fumes on 
ebullition. A heavy yellow oil is precipitated by water from this 
solution, and collects in drops which ultimately solidify, and their 
solidification is, singularly enough, accelerated by hot water, by 
reason of its more quickly dissolving out the nitric acid which at first 
holds the solid body iu solution. Nitrophosphate of phenyl is an acid, 
and forms with potash a beautiful crystalline salt. 

An alcoholic solution of phosphate of phenyl decomposes acetate 
of potash on ebullition. After the alcohol is distilled off, the tempe- 
rature of the mixture rises rapidly on the aj)plication of further heat, 
and a limpid oleaginous substance, having a very peculiar odour, 
distils over, which possesses the composition of acetate of phenyl* 
This compound boils at 190® Cent, j it is heavier tlian water, and 
very slightly soluble in that liquid. It dissolves with decomposition 
in boiling potash. 



20 


Cymidfi of phmyl is obtained by the action of the phosphate oh 
cyanide of potassium. It is decomposed by boiling potash with 
evolution of ammonia. 

Tcrchloride of i)ho8phorus, when distilled with hydrate of phenyl, 
seems to act at first similarly to the pentachloride, but the phosphite 
of phenyl formed is decomposed by heat ; and among the products of 
distillation is found a body boiling at 80^ Cent,, and possessing all 
the properties of i. e. kydruret of phenyl. 

The formation of the iodide of phenyl is necessarily attended with 
some diflSculty, owing to the circumstance of phosphorus not com- 
bining with more than three equivalents of iodine. Its boiling- 
point is 1 90*^ Cent. 

Mr. Scrugham has had reason to confirm the statements of Lau- 
rent and Gerhardt respecting the benzoate of phenyl^ and has pre- 
pared that compound in considerable quantities by the action of 
chloride of benzoyle on phenylate of potash. Chloride and phos- 
phate of phenyl could not be made to react on benzoate of potash. 

Chloride of cuminyl reacts with violence on phenylate of potash, 
with formation of cuminate of phenyl, a compound analogous to the 
benzoate. 

Chloride of phenyl was heated with phenylate of sodium, with a 
view to the formation of oxide of phenyl, and there is no doubt that 
this compound was formed by the reaction, as the correlative pro- 
duct, chloride of sodium, was detected. But a further account of 
this and other reactions is deferred until the experimental investiga- 
tion is more advanced. 

Specimens of most of the compounds mentioned were exhibited. 



21 


March 23, 1854. 


Colonel SABINE, R.A., Treas. and V.P., in the Chair. 

The following paper was read : — 

Note on an indication of depth of Prira«eval Seas, afforded by 
the remains of colour in Fossil Testacea.^^ By Edwarb 
Foebes, F.Il.S., Pres. G.S. &c. Received March 22, 1854. 

When engaged in the investigation of the bathymetrical distribu- 
tion of existing mollueks» the author found that not only did the 
colour of their shells cease to be strongly marked at considerable 
depths, but also that well-defined patterns were, with very few and 
slight exceptions, presented only by testacea inhabiting the littoral, 
circumlittoral and median zones. In the Mediterranean only one in 
eighteen of the shells taken from below 100 fathoms exhibited any 
markings of colour, and even the few that did so, were questionable 
inhabitants of those depths. Between 35 and 55 fathoms, the pro- 
portion of marked to plain shells was rather less than one in three, 
and between tide sea-margin and 2 fathoms the striped or mottled 
species exceeded one-half of the total number. 

In our own seas the author observes that testacea taken from below 
100 fethoms, even when they were individuals of species vividly 
striped or banded in shallower zones, ore quite white or colourless. 
Between 60 and 80 fathoms, striping and banding ore rarely 
presented by our shells, especially in the northern provinces ; 
and ^m 50 fathoms shaHow-^wards, colours and patterns are well 
marked. 

The relation of these arrangements of colour to the degrees of 
light penetrating the different zones of depth, is a subject well worthy 
of minhte inquiry, and has not yet been investigated by natural phi- 
losophers. 

VOL, vn, B 



22 


The purpose in this brief notice is not, however, to pursue this 
kind of research, but to put on record an application of our know- 
ledge of the fact that vivid patterns are not presented by testacea 
living below certain depths, to the indication of the depth, within 
certain limits, of paleeozoic seas, through an examination of the 
traces of colour afforded by fossil remains of testacea. 

Although their original colour is very rarely exhibited by fossil 
shells, occasionally we meet with specimens in which, owing proba- 
bly to organic differences in the minute structure of the coloured 
and colourless portions of the shell, the pattern of the original paint- 
ing is clearly distinguished from the ground tint. Not a few exam- 
ples are found in Mesozoic as well as in Tertiary strata, but in all 
the instances on record, the association of species, mostly closely allied 
to existing types, and the habits of the animals of the genera to 
which they belong, eire such as to prevent our having much difficulty 
about ascertaining the probable bathymetrical zone of the sea in 
which they lived. 

But in palaeozoic strata the general assemblage of articulate, mol* 
luscan and radiate forme is so different from any now existing with 
which we can compare it, and so few species of generic types 
still remaining are presented fSr our guidance, that in many in- 
stances we can scarcely venture to infer with safety the original 
bathymetrical zone of a deposit from its fossil contents. Con- 
sequently any fact that will help us in elucidating this point be- 
comes of considerable importance. 

Traces of colouring are rarely presented by palaeozoic fossils, and 
the author knows of few examples in which they have been noticed. 
Professor Phillips, in his ' Geology of Yorkshire,' represents the car- 
boniferous species, Pfeuro/omana ftammigera (I. e. eanita^a) and co~ 
nica, as marked with colCur, and Sowerby has figured such mark- 
ings in P. carinata and P. rotundata. In the exceUent monograph 
of the carboniferous fossils of Belgium, by Professor De Koniiick of 
li^ge, indications of pattern-colouring are faintly shown in the 
figures of Solarium pentangulatum, and distinctly in those of Plm> 
rotatmria carinata and Patella aolaris. 

In the cabinets of the Geological Survey of Great Britain are 
some finely-preserved fossils from the carboniferous limesteme of 
Parkhill, near Longnor in Derbyshire. Among these are several 



that present unmistakeable pattern- markings, evidently derived from 
the onginal colouring* They are — 

Pleurotomaria carinata and conica, showing wavy blotches, resem- 
bling the colouring of many recent Trockidm. 

An undescribed Trochus, showing a spiral band of colour. 

Metoptoma pileust and 

Patella } retrorsay both with radiating stripes, such as are pre- 
sented by numerous existing Patellida, 

Natica plicistria, with broad mottled bands. 

Aviculo-pecten^ a large unnamed species, with spotty markings on 
the ribs in the manner of many existing Pectines, 

Aviculo-pecten sublobatus, Ph. ? Beautifully marked with radiating, 
well-defined stripes, varying in each individual, and resembling the 
patterns presented by those recent Aviculte that inhabit shallows 
and moderate depths. 

Aviculo-pecten intercoatatus and elongatus also exhibit markings. 

Spirifer decorus and Orthia resupinata^ show fine radiating white 
lines. 

Terebratula haatata, with radiating stripes. 

The analogy of any existing forms that can be compared with 
those enumerated, would lead to ^ conclusion that the markings 
in these instances are characteristic of mollusks living in a less 
depth of water than 50 fathoms. In the case of the Terebratula, 
which belongs to a genus the majority of whose living representa- 
tives inhabit deep water, it may be noticed that all the living spe- 
cies exhibiting striped shells are exceptions to the rule, and come 
from shallow water. 

There are many circumstances which warrant us to suspect that 
the carboniferous mountain limestone of most regions was a deposit 
in shallow water. The facts now adduced materially strengthen 
this inference. 

In the British Museum there is a beautifully spotted example of a 
Devonian Terebratula, brought by Sir John Richardson from Boreal 
America* 

Specim^s of the Turbo rupeetria, from the Lower Silurian lime- 
stone of the Chair of Kildare near Dublin, exhibit appearances that 
seem to indicate spiral bands of colour. 



March 30, 1864 


THOMAS BELL, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 

The following papers were read : — 

L "Note on the Melting-point and Transformations of Sul- 
phur By B. C. Brodie, Esq., F.R.S. Received March 
30, 1854. 


In the treatises of chemistry where the results of different ob- 
servers ore collected, various statements will be found as to the 
melting-point of sulphur. The numbers given in Gmelin's Che- 
mistry vary from 104®‘5 C. to 112°‘2 C., but of five chemists cited, no 
two agree as to this apparently simple fact. There is evidently 
some peculiarity about this melting-point which is the cause of these 
anomalous results. In some experiments on allotropic substances, 
in which I have been engaged, 1 had occasion to submit this ques- 
tion to a more searching inquiry than it had hitherto received, in 
which 1 have discovered the cause of these discrepancies. In the 
present note I will briefly give the results at which I have arrived, 
reserving the details for a further and more full communication. 

The melting-point of sulphur varies according to its allotropic 
condition. This condition is readily altered by heat, and invariably, 
without pec^dia^ precautions, by melting. Hence the temperature 
at which sulphur melts is^iff^r^nt from that at which it will solidify, 
or at which, having been melted, it will melt again. 

The melting-point of the octohediral sulphur, as crystallized from 
the bisulphide of carbon, is 114°'5 C, But from the facility with 
which this sulphur, when heated even below its melting-point, 
passes into the sulphur of the oblique system, this fact may readily 
be overlooked. When this sulphur, in the state of fine powder, is 
heated even for the shortest time between 100° and 114°'6, this 
change cannot be avoided. For the transformation of large crystals 



25 


a longer time is required. At a certain point the crystal becomes 
opakc, and is often broken in pieces at the moment of the change. 
When in such a crystal this change has either entirely or par- 
tially taken place, the melting-point will be above 11 4*^' 5. The 
minute crystals of sulphur from alcohol, which are so extremely thin 
that their angles cannot be measured, have this melting-point of 
114°* 5, w*hich fixes the system to which tlie crystals belong. The 
crystals of sulphur from benzole (rectified coal naphtha) melt also at 
n4°‘5. The crystals from alcohol are very minute, consequently 
so readily transformed, that they presented anomalies which led me 
to doubt whether sulphur of both forms did not exist among them* 
1 answered this question by dividing a certain number of carefully 
selected crystals, and taking the melting-point of the two halves of 
the same crystal. 1 found that these melting-points in many cases 
did not correspond, which would have been the case if the anomalies 
had arisen from the different nature of the crystals. Sulphur which 
has been melted at 114°‘5, and of which the temperature has not 
been raised above 1 15°, remains, on solidification, perfectly transpa- 
rent for any length of time. Heated beyond this point, it becomes, 
on cooling, more or less opake. 

When sulphur has been converted by heating for a sufficient 
length of time, in the manner above mentioned, between 100° and 
1 14°*5, it acquires a fixed melting-point of 120° C. This is the melt- 
ing-point of the oblique prismatic sulphur. If sulphur thus converted 
be carefully melted so os to raise the temperature as little as possible 
above the melting-point, no sensible difference will be observed be- 
tween the point of melting and of solidification. To obtain this fixed 
melting-point of 120°, care must be taken that the transformation of 
the sulphur has been thoroughly effected. If this be not done, it may 
melt at any point between 1 14°*5 and 1 20°. If. however, the tempera- 
ture of the melted sulphur be raised above its melting-point of 120°, 
the point of solidification will be altered, and may lie even below the 
first melting-point of 114°’5’*‘. The point of solidification is in this 
case^not fixed, but depends upon the temperature to which the sul- 

* This hsft been obsenrod by Person, who states that if sulphur be heated above 

IpO** its melting-point is lowered to 9 bont 1 12® or 1 1 O'*. He says, that when heated 
with care, the thermometer will lem^n constant during crystalUastion, at 115®. 
1 have not found this fiorrect.-— Ann. de Chemie, vol. xxu p. 323. 



26 


phur Is raised and upon the mode in which it is cooled. It has varied 
in my experiments from 118® to as low as 111®. When the melting- 
point of the sulphur^ thus solidified^ is taken, it will begin to melt 
at about the temperature of solidification. The cause of this ano- 
maly is evident. When the temperature of sulphur is raised above 
120®, a transformation into the viscid form instantly commences, so 
that the sulphur is a mixture of the two varieties, and the melting- 
point varies according to the proportion in which these two varieties 
are mixed. It varies inversely with the temperature to which the 
sulphur is raised, so that the presence of the viscid sulphur lowers 
the point of solidification. There is, however, a limit beyond which 
the melting-point is not affected by this admixture. 1 made the 
experiment of pouring sulphur, heated to its boiling-point, into 
water of different temperatures, and of taking the melting-point of 
the sulphur when it hod become hard. Five different preparations, 
which, when extracted with bisulphide of carbon, gave each a differ- 
ent quantity of insoluble sulphur, coincided in the melting-point of 
about 1 12®. Tins sulphur, before melting, becomes transparent, and 
passes again into the viscid or elastic condition. 

The sulphur which is insoluble in bisulphide of carbon, and which 
is prepared by extracting the hlS^dened viscid sulphur with that re- 
agent, has a melting-point considerably above 120®, but which I 
have not been able to determine with precision. 

I had placed in a water-bath, at 100®, tubes containing fragments 
of the three definite varieties of sulphur. After a short time, on 
examining the tubes, I found the insoluble sulphur, which 1 have 
stated to have such a high melting-point, distinctly melted. The 
octohedral sulphur had become opake and rounded at the edges, the 
other was unaltered in appearance. Further inquiry convinced me 
that the cause of the melting of the insoluble sulphur was, that it 
had passed into another modification, and that this conversion was 
attended with evolution of heat sufficient to melt the sulphur. The 
insoluble sulphur thus converted remains transparent, and is per- 
fectly soluble in bisulphide of carbon. 

It is stated in chemical treatises that the opacity which on solidi- 
fication comes over the melted sulphur, is due to the transformation 
of the oblique prismatic into the octohedml sulphur, and the con- 
sequent disruption of the crystal. To this cause also is attributed the 



27 


evolution of heat which has been obderved in solid sulphur imrne^ 
diately after cooling. There are, however, no saiHcient grounds for 
this view, and some of the observations which I have given are de- 
cidedly adverse to it. I . The change readily takes place, even at tem- 
peratures at wliich sulphur becomes opake, in the opposite direction, 
namely, from the octohedron to the oblique prism. 2. The melting- 
point of the opake sulphur coincides too nearly with its point of soli- 
dification for it to be supposed that this change in it has taken place. 
On extracting melted sulphur wliich had become opake, with bisul- 
phide of carbon, I have constantly found present traces of insoluble 
matter, even where the greatest precaution had been taken to avoid 
elevation of temperature ; and this opacity appears to roe to be due 
to the hardening of the viscid sulphur, and the consequent deposition 
of opake matter in the pores of the crystals, which is quite sufficient 
to account for it. It remains to ascertain the cause of the evolution 
of the heat. On this point also 1 will offer a suggestion. It is well 
known that the appearance of opacity is delayed by pouring the sul- 
phur into cold water, and that the sulphur thus formed is at first 
viscid and transparent, and only after a time becomes solid and opake. 
The received view, I believe, is that the hard sulphur thus formed 
is the solid form of the viscid sulphur, in the same sense as ice is the 
solid form of water. It appears to me more probable that these two 
sulphurs stand in a different relation, and that the change which 
takes place on solidification is an allotropic transformation of the 
viscid sulphur into the insoluble sulphur and one of the other modi- 
fications. In the case of sulphur gradually cooled this change takes 
place with rapidity, and, like other similar transformations, is attended 
with a sensible evolution of heat. Where the sulphur is tempered 
the change takes place very slowly, and the heat evolved is not per- 
ceived. This view is confirmed by a fact which I have discovered, 
namely, that the viscid sulphur possesses another solid form. I 
have found that when sulphur, melted at a high temperature, is sud- 
denly exposed to intense cold — ^the cold of solid carbonic acid and 
ether — the sulphur formed is not viscid, but solid, hard, and perfectly 
transparent. When the temperature is allowed to rise to that of the 
air, the sulphur becomes soft and elastic. It is probable that this is 
the true solid form of the viscid sulphur. 



28 


II, “ On the Structun? and Affinities of Trigonocarpon (a fossil 
fruit of the Coal-measures),” By Joseph D, Hooker, 
M.D., F.ll.S. Received March 23, 1854, 

Having been for some time engaged in examining the structure 
and affinities of some fossil fruits of the coal formation, included 
under the name Trigonocarpon^ and the progress which 1 am enabled 
to make being extremely slow (owing to tlie difficulty of procuring 
good specimens), I am induced to lay before the Royal Society such 
results as I have arrived at, for publication in their Proceedings (if 
thought worthy of that honour). The details and illustrations of 
the subject will, when complete, be offered to the Geological Society 
of London < 

My attention has for many years been directed to the genus TVi- 
gonocarpon ; as, from the period of my earliest acquaintance with 
the flora of the carboniferous epoch, I have felt assured, that bota- ' 
nically, this was the most interesting and important fossil which it 
contained in any great abundance, and that until the affinities of this 
were determined, the real nature of the flora in question could never 
be regarded as even approximately ascertained. 

In the first place, Trigonocarpon is so abundant throughout the 
coal-measures, that in certain localities some species may be pro- 
cured by the bushel ; nor is there any part of the formation in which 
they do not occur, except the underclays and limestone. The sand- 
stone, ironstones, shales and coal itself, all contain them. 

Secondly. The symmetry in form and size which many of them 
display, the regularity of the sculpturing on their surfiices, and 
various other poiots, suggested their belonging to a class of highly 
organized vegetables. 

Thirdly, The fact of our being wholly unacquainted with the 
organs of fructification belonging to the exogenous vegetation, which 
also abounds in the coal formation, coupled with the assumed highly 
organized nature of Trigonocarpon, favoured the assumption that 
these might throw light upon one another, and seemed to afford a 
legitimate basis upon which to proceed, should 1 ever procure speci- 
mens of TW^ofioco^on displaying structure, which 1 hod long hoped 
to do. 



29 


It is, however, only eince my return from India that I have been «o 
fortunate aa to obtain good specimens, and for these I am indebted 
to my friend Mr. Binney of Manchester, who has himself thrown 
much light upon the vegetation of the coal epoch, and whose exer- 
tions indeed have alone enabled me to prosecute the subject ; since 
he has not only placed his whole collection of Trigonocarpons at ray 
disposal, but has shared with me the trouble and expense of their 
preparation for study. All the specimens were found imbedded in 
a very tough and hard black-band or clay ironstone, full of frag- 
ments of vegetable matter, and which appears originally to have 
been a fine tenacious clay. 

The individual Trigonocarpons are exposed by breaking this rock, 
and are invariably so intimately adherent to the matrix as to be 
fractured with it. A great many of these lumps of ironstone, con- 
taining partially exposed Trigonocarpons, have been sliced by a lapi- 
dary in the usual manner, and excessively thin sections taken on 
slips of gloss. The sections were made necessarily very much at 
random, but as nearly as possible parallel, or at right angles to the 
long diameter of the fruit. Five of the specimens thus operated 
upon have proved instructive, presenting the same appearances, and 
all being intelligible, and referable to one highly developed type of 
plants. As, however, the term highly developed may appear ambi- 
guous, especially with reference to a higher or lower degree in the 
scale of vegetable life, I may mention that by this term 1 mean to 
imply that there are in the fruit of Trigonocarpon extensive modifi- 
cations of elementary organs, for the purpose of their adaptation to 
special functions, and that these modifications are as great, and the 
adaptation as special, as any to be found amongst analogous fruits 
in the existing vegetable world. 

Thus, 1 find that the integuments of the fruit of Trigonocarpon are 
each of them a special highly organized structure ; tliey are modifica- 
tions of the several coats of one ovule, and indeed of the same num- 
ber of integuments as now prevail in the ovules of living plants. 

The number, structure and superposition of these, are strongly 
indicative of the Trigonocarpons having belonged to that large sec- 
of existing coniferous plants, which bear fleshy, solitary fruits, 
and not cones ; and they so strongly resemble the various parts of the 
fruit of the Chinese genus Sulisfmriu, that, in the present state of our 



80 


knowledge, it appears legitimate to assume their relationship to it. 
In all the live specimens alluded to, there are more or less perfect evi- 
dences of four distinct integuments, and of a large cavity, which is 
in all filled with carbonate of lime and magnesia ; these minerals, I 
presume, having replaced the albumen and embryo of the seed. 

The general form of the perfect fruit is an elongated ovoid (rather 
larger than a hazel nut), of which the broader or lower end presents 
the point of attachment, while the upper or smaller end is produced 
into a straight, conical, truncated rostrum or beak, which is per- 
forated by a straight longitudinal canal, llie exterior integument 
is very thick and cellular, and was no doubt once fleshy ; it alone is 
produced beyond the seed and forms the beak ; its apex I assume to 
have been that of the primine of the ovule, and its cavity the exo- 
stome. The second coat appears to have been much thinner, but 
hard and woody or bony; it is impervious at the apex; is also ovoid, 
and sessile by its broad base within the outer integument, with 
which it is perhaps adherent everywhere except at the apex. This 
is marked by three angles or ridges, and being that alone which 
(owing to its hard nature) commonly remains in the fossil state, has 
suggested the name of Trigonocurpon^ Within this are the third 
and fourth coats, both of which kre very delicate membranes ; one 
appears to have been in close apposition with the inner wall of the 
second integument, and the other to have surrounded the albumen. 
These are now separated both from one another, and from the inner 
wall of the cavity, by the shrinking of the contents of the latter, and 
the subsequent infiltration of water charged with mineral matter. 1 
may remark, however, that these two membranes may be due to the 
separation of one into two plates, in which case the original one was 
formed of several layers of cells. Hitherto I have not been able to 
trace any organized structure within the cavity of the firuit, and its 
real nature therefore remains doubtful. It is only from the strong 
resemblance, in structure, appearance and superposition, which these 
integuments present to those of Taxoid coniferm, that I assume their 
probable relationship* Salkhuria, especially, has the same ovoid 
fruit, sessile by its broader end, and its outer coat is perfectly ana- 
logous, being thick, fleshy, and perforated at its apex by a longitu- 
dinal canal (the exostome of the ovule) ; within this is a perfectly 
similar, woody, two or three angled, impervious integument, form- 



81 


ing the nut, Thie again ia lined with one very delicate membrane, 
and contains a mass of albumen covered with a second similar mem- 
brane. A marked analogy is presented to the European botanist by 
the fruit of the Yew, which has the same integuments though some- 
what modified ; the outer, fieshy coat in the Yew is however a cup- 
shaped receptacle, and not drawn up over the nut so as to leave 
only a small canal at the top, as in Salisburia and TVigonocarpon. 
'llio nut also does not adhere to the fleshy cup except below its 
middle. The internal structure is the same in all three. 

Such are the main facts which 1 have been able satisfactorily to 
establish. There are many others yet to be worked out, es]>ecially 
thosK connected with the individual tissues of which those bodies are 
composed ; and it is particularly to be borne in mind that the disco- 
very of some structure indicative of albumen or embryo, is abso- 
lutely essential to the complete establishment of the affinity I have 
suggested. 

It must not be overlooked, that the characters tlirough which I have 
attempted to establish an affinity between Trtgonocarpon and Coniferae 
are equally common to the fruits of Cycadeae; and in connexion with 
this subject I may remark, that M. Brongniart* has referred the 
genua Noggerathia, which is also found in the coal-measures, to 
that natural order, together with some associated organs which arc 
probably Trigonocarpons in a mutilated state. The leaves of Nog^ 
gerathia are, however, alone known, and Dr. Lindley, when figuring 
those of one species (Lindley and Hutton, Fossil Flora, 28, 29), 
pointed out their great resemblance to those of Salisburia, thus 
affording collateral evidence of the view I have been led to adopt 
from an examination of the fruit alone. 


* Annales de« Solenoes NsturcUes, Series, vol. v. p. 52, 



32 


April 6, 1854. 

THOMAS GRAHAM, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 

Notice was given that at the next Meeting of the Society, Lord 
Ashburton would be proposed for immediate ballot, to which, as a 
Peer of the Realm, his Lordship is entitled. 

The following communications were read : — 

I. ‘*On a peculiar Arrangement of the Sanguiferous System in 
Terebratula and certain other Bkachiopoda..^^ By W, B, 
Cakpentkii, M.D., F.R.S. Received March 30, 1854, 

In a memoir ** On the Minute Structure of Shell/' read before the 
Royal Society January 17, 1843, (and subsequently embodied in a 
** Report '* on the same subject, prepared at the request of the 
British Association for the Advancement of Science, and published 
in its Transactions for 1844,) 1 hrst announced the fact, that the 
' punctatione * which had been previously noticed on the exterior 
of many Brachiopodous shells, both recent and fossil, are really the 
orifices of tubular perforations, which pass directly through each 
valve, from one of its surfaces to the other (fig. I). 

Having subsequently obtained specimens of Terebratula in which 
the soft parts of the animals had been preserved, in connection with 
their shells, 1 ascertained that these passages are occupied in the 
living state by membranous caeca, dosed externally, but opening on 
the isUernal surface of the shell, and filled with minute cells of a 
brownish hue. Recollecting that Professor Owen, in his account of 
dissections of some species of Terebratula and Orhimla (Transac- 
tions of the Zoological Society, vol. i.), had spoken of an unusual 
adhesion of the mantle to the shell in these Bivalves, it occurred to 
me that this adhesion might be due to a continuity between the 



88 


mantle and these cncal tubuli ; and 1 carefully sought for evidence 
of such a structure. In thU, however, I was entirely unsuccess- 
ful ; for the mantle, when stripped from the shell, presented no ap- 
pearance whatever of having transmitted any such prolongations 
into its substance ; on the contrary, it was evidently continued over 
the mouths of the cseca with which it was in apposition ; and I fre- 
quently found its external surface (that in contact with the shell) 
covered in patches with cells exactly resembling in size and aspect 
those contained within the cteoa* I was equally unsuccessful in the 
attempt to trace any other connection between these cseca and the 
soft parts of the animal ; so that, although their importance in its 
oeconomy scarcely admitted of doubt, the nature of their function re- 
mained entirely unknown. The idea that they had any connection 
with the formation of the shell itself, seemed to be completely nega- 
tived by the fact, that in a large proportion of the group of Bbachio- 
poi)A, no such perforations exist; notwithstanding that their shells, 
in every other feature of minute structure, are exactly accordant 
with that of Terehraiula, — The foregoing results were communicated 
to the British Scientific Association in 1847, and were embodied in 
the Second Part of my ** Report published in its Transactions for 
that year. 

The physiological importance of the characters of * perforation ’ 
or * non-perforation ' has become continually more obvious, as the 
principles on which the subdivision of the group of Brachiopoda 
should be founded, have been gradually settled by those who have 
concerned themselves with its systematic arrangement ; and in par- 
ticular, the universal presence of the perforations in the shells of the 
family Terehratulida^ contrasted with their equally universal absence 
in those of the family RhynchoneUida, unequivocally marked its rela- 
tion to the general conformation of the animals of these subdivisions. 

Having been requested by Mr. Davidson to undertake a more de- 
tailed investigation than I had yet made, into the minute structure 
of the shells of Brachiopoda, for the soke of throwing still further 
light upon the classification of the group, I applied myself afresh 
to the solution of the problem, and believing that I have succeeded 
in ascertaining the import of this curious feature in the organization 
of Terebratula and its allies, I beg to offer an account of my re- 
sults to the Royal Society, 



34 


The membrane which is commonly spoken of as * the mantle/ and 
which may be stripped from the shell by the use of su6&cient force 
to overcome its adhesions, must, 1 maintain, be considered as really 
its inner iayer only; for I find that an outer layer exists, so intimately 
incorporated with the shell as not to be separable from it without the 
removal of its calcareous component by maceration in dilute acid. 
WJien thus detached, this outer layer is found to be continuous with 
the membrane lining the perforations in the shell (fig. 1 ^) ; so that 
their tubular caeca are, in fact, prolongations of the rea/ external 
surface of the mantle, llie adhesion of the inner to the outer 


Fig. 1. 



Diagram of the iatra-palieal sinus-syttem of Terebratula, with its caecal prolonga- 
tions into the shell ; — A, B, section of valve ; a, inner layer of mantle, outer 
layer in contact with the shell, and giving off caeca ; e, continuity of the two 
at maigin of valve. 

layer (which Professor Owen, not being aware of the existence of an 
outer layer, interpreted as an adhesion of the mantle to the shell) 
does not extend to the whole of the conttguous surfaces, but is 
limited to certain bands or spots, — the two layers of membrane, in 
the intervals between these, being separated by a set of irregular 
spaces, freely communicating with one another, and with the cavities 
of the emea, so as to form a rude network. 'Phis arrangement is 
peculiarly well marked in Terehratula caput-serpentis, as shown in the 
figure (fig. 2) ; and to those who are familiar with the condition of the 
drculating apparatus in the inferior Mollusca, it is scarcely possible 
not to reoognbe in it a * sinus-system/ corresponding to that which 
is formed in the Tunicata by the partial adhesion of the second and 
third tunics to each other. i 



35 


Considered under this point of view, the caecal structure (as was 
first suggested to me by my Mend Mr. T. H. Huxley) bears a close 
resemblance to the vascular prolongations^ which, in many Ascl- 
dians, pass from the sinus-system into the substance of the ' test 
the chief difference lying in this, — that whilst each of the vascular 
prolongations into the ‘ test * of the Ascidians contains both an a^e- 
renf and an efferent canal, — no such distinction ordinarily manifests 
itself in these prolongations of the intra-palleal sinus-system of TVre- 
bratula, although I have met with indications of it in Crania. Their 
csecal character, however, is by no means opposed to the views I 
am now giving of their physiological nature ; for it has been shown 
by M. de Quatrefages, that the prolongations of the * general cavity 
of the body,' which pass into the branchiae and other appendages of 
Annelida, transmitting to them its nutritive fluid for aeration, ore 
always caecal, notwithstanding that they are sometimes distributed 
os minutely os blood-vessels^. 


Fig. 2. 



Sinus-system of Tere&ratuia eapui^eerpmiis (as shown by the grinding away of 
the shelli without detaching the mantle), being a network of canals formed by 
the adhesion of the two layers of the mantle at certain spots, leaving passages 
around them. 

On this interpretation, the cells which are found within the caeca, 
and in the spaces between the contiguous surfaces of the two layers 
of the mantle, are to be regarded as blood- corfmBcles, and they cor- 
respond in size and appearance (so fer as can be determined by spe- 
cimens preserved in spirits) with the blood-corpuscles of Ascidian 
and LameUibranohiate MoUusks. 

* Ann. des Sd. Nat., 3* s^r., Zool., tom* itviii. p. 307. 



36 


The ednus* system from which this collection of cseca proceeds, 
appears to be altogether distinct from the vascular apparatus of the 
(so-called) ‘ mantle/ (that is, agcording to my interpretation, of the 
inner layer of the mantle) which has been described by Professor 
Owen ; but it probably communicates with the ' common sinus * at 
the back part of the visceral chamber, which is stated by Professor 
Owen to receive the blood, not only from the palleal sinuses of the 
dorsal and ventral valves, but also from ** other sinuses that there 
fill, line, and seem to form, the visceral or peritoneal cavity*.” 

It cannot be deemed improbable, then, that the apparatus in ques- 
tion is branchial in its nature ; and that it is designed to provide for 
certain tribes a more special means of aerating the blood, than is 
afiforded by that distribution of blood to the general surface of the 
mantle, which is common to the entire group. This view of its re- 
spiratory office is confirmed by an observation communicated to me 
by Professor Quekett; viz. that the discoidal opercula which cover 
the external orifices of the cjeca, and which, though adherent to the 
periostracum, are not structurally continuous with it, present ap- 
pearances in young shells, which seem indicative of the existence of 
a fringe of cilia round each, designed to produce currents of water 
over the extremities, of the cmca. 

The resemblance which these csecal prolongations of the sinus- 
system into the shell of the Terehratula bear to the vascular pro- 
longations of the sinus-system into the test of certain Ascidiana, is 
not without its parallel in another group, which (as pointed out by 
Mr. Hancock, Ann. of Nat. Hist. vol. v. p. 1 98) is intimately re- 
lated to tliat of Brochiopoda, — ^namely, the Bryozoa. The stony 
walls of the ‘ cells ' which invest the soft bodies of many species of 
Eachara, Lepralia, &c., are marked, like the shells of Terebralulae, 
with punctations, which are really the orifices of short passages ex- 
tending into Ihem from their internal cavity, as sections of these 
structures demonstrate. These passages I have found to be occupied 
by prolongations of the visceral sac, which is the only representative 
of a circulating system among these animals ; and they thus convey 
the nutrient fluid which this contains, into the substance of the 
framework formed by the calcified tunics of these animals. 

• See Mr. Davidson's Monograph on the British rossU Braohiopoda,^ 
published by the Palseontographical Society, vol i p. IS. 



87 


I need not here enlarge upon the additional value which these 
structural and physiological considerations afford, to the character of 
** perforation " or non-perforation ** in the shells of Brachiopoda. 
I’he importance of this character in systematic arrangement will 
plainly appear, I think, from the details which I have published 
in the Introduction to Mr. Davidson’s Monograph already refer* 
red to. 


11. On a new Series of Sulphuretted Acids/^ By Dr. Air- 
ousT Kekule. Communicated by Dr. Shaepey, Sec. R.S. 
Received April 5, 1854. 


Adopting the idea that the series of organic compounds of which 
sulphuretted hydrogen is the type, corresponds in every respect with 
the seiies of which water is the type, I concluded that not only 
mercaptans and neutral sulphides which correspond to the alcohols 
and etliers, but also compounds corresponding to the acids, anhy- 
drous acids and ethers of acids might be produced* I therefore 
endeavoured to obtain reactions which would enable me to replace 
oxygen in the compounds of the latter series by sulphur* 

Such reactions are produced by the compounds of sulphur with 
phosphorus — the tersulphide {P, Sg) and the pentasulphide (Pg S*) — 
wliich are easily obtained by fusing together amorphous phosphorus 
and sulphur in an atmosphere of carbonic acid ; no explosion takes 
place, although the combination is attended with a very violent 
action. 

Experiment has proved that these combinations df sulphur and 
phosphorus act on the members of the series of water in the same 
manner (although less violently) as the corresponding compounds 
of chlorine and phosphorus ; — however, with this difference, that by 
using the chlorine compounds the product is resolved into two groups 
of atoms, while by using the sulphur compounds there is obtained 
only one group ; a peculiarity, wlrioh, according to the bibasic nature 
of etdphnr, must have been expected. By acting on these com- 
potm^ of sulphur and phospl)orus with water one atom of sulphu* 
von. vn. B 



88 


retted hydrogen is obtained, while the chlorides give two atoms of 
hydrochloric acid, 

eJJ } o +p, s asajj } S+2PO, H, 

6^ I 0 + 2P Cla= 6H Cl + 2PO, H,. 

Similar reactions are observed with organic compounds belonging 
to the series of water with the formation of phosphorous and phos- 
phoric acids respectively, or a copulated acid. By acting in this 
way, the following series of sulphuretted organic compounds is ob- 
tained, by the side of which are placed for comparison the products 
formed by the action of the chlorides of phosphorus on the same 
substances. 

Hydrochloric Acid. 

m Cl. 


Chloride of Ethyl-f Hydrochloric Acid. 
C, H, Cl+HCl. 


. Chloride of Ethyl. 

2C,H,CL 

Chloride of Othyl-f Hydrochloric Acid. 
C^H, O.Cl+HCl. 

Chloride of Othyl. 

2C, H,G, Cl. 


Chloride oi Othyl-f Chloride of Ethyl. 
C^HsO.Cl+C.HiCl. 

Mercaptan is obtained by the action of tersulphide or pentasulphide 
of phosphorus on alcohol with extreme facility. Sulphide of ethyl 
may also be prepared by acting on eBaer in a simitar manner. 

TiWaeeftc Acetic Acid , — has been obtained by 

me by ac!^g on monohydrated acetic acid with tersulphide of 
phosphorus. It is a colourless liquid, boiling at about 93° C., and 
has a peculiar odour resembBiig sulphuretted hydrogen and acetic 


Sulphuretted Hydrogen. 

S}b. 


Mercaptan. 

S‘}b. 


C, H 


Sulphide of Ethyl. 

Othyl-Hydrosalphuric Acid. 

Othyl-Sttlphidc of Othyl. 
C,H.01s 
c,H3or- 

OthyUSulphide of Ethyl. 



89 


acid. It dissolves potassium in the cold and aino on heating with 
the evolution of hydrogen, and gives with lead a salt less soluble 
than the ordinary acetate, so that it gives a precipitate with acetate 
of lead. By rccrystallization from water or alcohol, the lead salt is 
obtained in fine silky needles, which, though quite colourless at first, 
are rapidly decomposed (whether in solution or in the solid form) 
with the formation of sulphide of lead. 

By analysis 1 found the lead salt contained--* 

Lead 68*8 per cent. Theory requires 58*0 per cent. 

The acid contained — 

Sulphur 41*3 per cent. Theory requires 42*1 per cent. 

Thiacetic acid is also formed in small quantity and by secondary 
action, by distilling pentasulphide of phosphorus with fused acetate 
of soda. Pentachloride of phosphorus gives a violent reaction with 
thiacetic acid, yielding sulphochloride of phosphorus, chloride of 
othyl, and hydrochloric acid, 

° ® ° ^ • 

Thiaxietate of OthyL — Sulphide of OthyL — Anhydrous Sulphuretted 
Acetic Acid. — Pentasulphide of phosphorus acts but very feebly upon 
anhydrous acetic acid in the cold, but on beating a violent reaction 
takes place. By distilling the product, the anhydrous acid is obtained 
in form of a colourless liquid, boiling at about 121® C., and having 
an odour greatly resembling sulphuretted acetic acid. On mixing 
with water it falls to the bottom, without, at first, suffering any 
change; on standing, however, it is slowly dissolved and decom- 
posed into sulphuretted acetic acid and ordinary acetio aoid. This 
change takes place much more rapidly on heating. 




It appears that anhydrous sulphuretted acetic acid is also pro- 
duced by acting on the othyl-sulphide of lead with chloride of othyh 
at aU events chloride of lead is formed. Chloride of benzoyle gives 
with the lead salt a similar reactbn, and it is probable that an inter- 
mediate sulphuretted acid is formed, having the formula 


C,H,0 

C,H,0 




40 


Thiacetate of Bthyh^Sulphuretted Acetic -This compound 

may be prepared by the action of pentasulpbide of phosphorus on 
acetic ether. It is a liquid lighter than water, and possesses an 
odour resembling acetic ether and sulphuretted hydrogen. It boils 
at about C, 

It will be seen that the action of tersulphide and pentasulpbide of 
phosphorus above described produces sulphuretted organic com- 
pounds by substituting sulphur for oxygen. The compounds ob- 
tained in this way may also be formed by replacing one or two 
atoms of hydrogen in sulphuretted hydrogen (H^ S), or one or two 
atoms of metal in sulphide of potassium (K^ S), or in sulphide of 
hydrogen and potassium (KHS), by organic radicals. Mercaptan 
and the sulphides of alcohol radicals have, in fact, been long ob- 
tained in this manner. 

The formation of a sulphuretted compound containing an acid 
radical has been observed by Gerhardt by acting on sulphide of 
lead with chloride of othyl. I have not made many experiments of 
tlus kind, but I have observed that chloride of benzoyle is not de- 
composed by sulphuretted hydrogen, while it (as well as chloride of 
othyl) gives a reaction with sulphide of hydrogen and potassium 
yielding chloride of potassium. 

I am continuing these researches, and believe the above reactions 
will furnish many new compounds, and will tend to complete our 
knowledge of some of those organic and inorganic compounds now 
known. 

The Society then adjourned to the 27th of April. 



41 


Aprii 27, 1854. 

The EABL of R08SE, President, in the Chair. 

Edward Joseph Cooper, Esq., was admitted into the Society. 

In accordance with the notice given at the last Meeting of the 
Society, the Right Hon. Lord Ashburton was proposed for election 
and immediate ballot, to which, as a Peer of the Realm, his Lord- 
ship is entitled. The ballot having been taken. Lord Ashburton was 
declared duly elected. 

The following papers were read : — 

1. the Changes produced in the Blood by the administra- 
tion of Cod-liver Oil and Cocoa-nut By Theophilus 

Thompson, M.I)., F.R,S. Received March 30, 1854. 

The author has found that during the administration of cod- liver 
oil to phthisical patients their blood grew richer in red corpuscles, 
and he refers to a previous observation of Dr. Franz Simon to the 
same effect. The usp of almond-oil and of olive- oil was not fol- 
lowed by any remedial effect, but from cocoa-nut oil results were 
obtained almost as decided as from the oil of the liver of the Cod, 
and the author believes it may turn out to be a useful substitute. The 
oil employed was a pure cocoa oleine, obtained by pressure from 
crude cocoa-nut oil, as expressed in Ceylon and the Malabar coast 
from the Cojffperai^ or dried cocoa-nut kernel, and refined by being 
treated with an alkali and then repeatedly washed with distilled 
water. It bums with a faint b|ue fiame, lAowing a comparatively 
small proporrion of carbon, and is undrying. 

The analysis of the blood was conducted by Mr. Dugald Camp- 
bell. The whole quantity abstracted having been weighed, the 
coagnium Was drained on bibulous paper for four or five hours, 
weighed and divided Into two portions. One portion was weighed 
voi:.. VII. r 



and then dried in a water- oven, to determine the water. The other 
was macerated in cold water until it became colourless, tlieii mode- 
rately dried and digested with ether and alcohol to remove fat> and 
finally dried completely and weighed as fibrin. From the respective 
weights of the fibrin and the dry clot that of the corpuscles was cal- 
culated. The following were the results observed in seven dilFerent 
individuals affected with phthisis in different stages of advance- 
ment 


First stage, before the use 
of coddiver oil 

Red 
f Female 
[Male 

corpnacles. 

129*26 

116*53 

Fibrin. 

4*52 

13*67 

First stage, after the use 1 
of cod-liver oil 

f Female 
[Male 

136*47 

141*53 

5*00 

4*70 

Third stage, after the use ] 
of cod-liver oil 

^ Male 

138*74 

2*23 

Third stage, after the use i 
of cocoa-nut oil 1 

r Male 
[Male 

139*95 

144*94 

2*31 

461 


I 


IL On a property of Numbers,” By the Rev. James Bdotu^ 
LL.D.; F.B.8, &c. Received April 6, 1854. 

I know not whether the following property of numbers has been 
made public. 

A number of sue places, consisting of a repetition of a period of 
any three figures, is divisible by the prime numbers 7, 11 and 13. 
Thus 376376, 459459, 301301 are so divisible. 

A number N of six places may be thus written 

N= 100.000 a + 10.000 b + 1000 c+ 100 <f+ 10 e+/, 

which, when divided by 7, will give a quotient g and a remainder 
6fl + 45 + 6c -j- 2d + 3e +/. 

Now if rfsBo, easj./ssc, this remainder may be written 7(a+5+c), 
which is divisible by 7, whatever be the values of o, b, e. 

In like manner if a number of six places be divided by 13, the 
remainder will be 

4o+36+12c+9rf+10e+-/j and, as befwe, if dss«, tath./a^e, 



43 


the remainder maybe written 18(a4-ft4-e), which ie divisible by 13, 
whatever be the value of a, b and <?. 

In the same way it may be shown that a number of this kind is 
divisible by 1 1 , 

When the first figure of the period is 0, and the second any what- 
ever i and 7 , the number is OyOy =y0i/ ; or any number of five places, 
the first two and the last two being the same, while the middle place 
is 0, is divisible by 7, 1 1 and 13. Thus 34034, 14014 are so 
divisible. 

When the first two places are 0, the number may be written 
00«00a=t00i, or any number of four jdaces, the first and last figures 
being the same, while the two middle places are 0, is divisible by 
7. 11 and 13. Thus 5005, 8008 are so divisible. 

Like properties may be found for 17, 19, 23, but the periods are 
longer. The prime divisor being 2»-f 1, it is manifest the number 
of places in the period cannot exceed, however it may fall short of n. 

Thus when the divisor is 1 7, the number of places in the period is 
eight. 


III. On FesseP^s Gyroscope/^ By C. WhbatstonBj Esq., 
F.R.S. lleceived April 6, 1854. 

Since the announcement of M. Foucault's beautiful experiment 
which has afforded us a new mechanical proof of the rotation of the 
earth on its axis, the phenomena of rotary motion have received re- 
newed attention, and many ingenious instruments have been con- 
trived to exhibit and to explain them. One of the most instructive 
of these is the Gyroscope invented by M. Fessel of Cologne, de- 
scribed in its earlier form in PoggendorfF's Annalen for September 
1853, and which, with some improvements by Prof. Pliicker and 
some further modifications suggested by myaeH, I take the present 
opportunity of bringing before the Royal Society. 

It is thus constructed : a beam is capable of moving hreely round 
a hotixontol axis which is itself moveable round a vertical axis, so 
that beam may move in any direction round a fixed point ; at 
fifloe end of the beam is fixed a horixontal ring which carries a heavy 

f2 



dUc, the axis of rotation of which is in a line with the beam ; at the 
opposite extremity is a shifting weight by means of which the equi- 
librium of the beam may be established or disturbed at pleasure. 



If the beam be brought into equilibrium, and the disc be rapidly 
rotated, by means of a thread unrolled from its axis, it will be seen 
that the beam has no tendency to displace itself in any direction. 
Not so, however, if the equilibrium be in any way disturbed ; on 
moving the weight towards the centre of the beam, thus causing 
the disc to preponderate, it will be observed that if the disc ro- 
tates from right to left the beam will move round the vertioal 
axis also from right to left; and if the motion of the disc be 
reversed the rotation of the beam will be reversed also. On 
causing the equipoise to preponderate contrary effects will take 
place. Tlie velocity of the rotation of the beam round the ver- 
tical axis increases in proportion to the disturbance of the equili- 
brium. It will also be observed that, notwithstanding the increased 
or diminished action of gravity on the disc, its axis of rotation 
always preserves the same inclination to the vertical axis at which 
it has been originally placed. The effect produced is a seeming 
paradox. When the equilibrium is disturbed while the disc is at 
rest, the beam being placed in any other position than the vertical, 
gravity acts so as to turn it round a horizontal axis ; but when the 


45 


disc is in motion the usual effect of gravity disappears « and there is 
substituted for it a continued rotation round a vertical axis, that is, 
round an axis perpendicular to the plane which contains the axes of 
the two original rotations. 

A similar composition of forces takes place when the disc is caused 
to rotate while the equilibrium of the beam is maintained, by im- 
pressing on the beam a rotation round the vertical axis. When the 
disc rotates from right to left, the slightest pressure tending to pro* 
duce rotation round the vertical axis in the same direction, causes 
the end of the beam carrying the disc to ascend, and a pressure in 
the opposite direction causes it to descend, that is, the beam is con- 
strained to move round a horizontal axis perpendicular to the vertical 
plane which contains the two axes of impressed rotation, a case exactly 
analogous to the preceding. The beam ascends and descends in like 
manner, after rotation has spontaneously taken place round the ver- 
tical axis in cbnsequence of the equilibrium being disturbed, when- 
ever this rotation is any how accelerated or retarded ; the disc ro- 
tating from right to left and its weight predominating, the rotation 
round the vertical axis is from left to right ; accelerating the latter 
motion will cause the disc to descend, and retarding it will occa- 
sion it to ascend. 

As the centre of gravity of the beam is below its point of suspen- 
sion, even when equij>oised it is in perfect equilibrium only when it 
is horizontal, consequently, if it be elevated above or depressed be- 
low this position it will endeavour to resume it, tending to produce 
in the two cases rotations in opposite directions round a horizontal 
axis; the rotation of the disc combined with this tendency gives 
rise, as in the other cases 1 have mentioned, to a continued rotation 
round the vertical axis. If the disc rotate from right to left, and 
the end of the beam carrying it be elevated above the horizontal 
position, the rotation round the vertical axis will be from right to 
left; if, on the contrary, the same end of the beam be depressed 
below the horizontal position, that rotation will be from left to right. 

In ail the experiments above mentioned the axis of the ro- 
uting disc has remained in the prolongation of the beam, but, by 
means of an internal ring moveable round a line perpendicular 
thereto, this axis may be placed at any inclination and at any azi- 
muth with respect to it. Very obvious considerations show that the 



46 


incJination of this axis should produce no difference in the character 
of the effects but merely in their intensity, since in any inclined po- 
aition of the disc it« rotation is resolvable into two others, one per- 
pendicular to the beam, and the other, which is if?caf>able of pro- 
ducing any effect, in a plane containing it. When the axis of the 
rotating disc is vertical and at right angles to the beam, no rotation 
on the vertical axis ought to take place in any case ; but, contrary to 
this expectation, although the beam be horizontal and in perfect 
equilibrium, a motion round the vertical axis results, which is in 
opposite directions according as one or the other end of the axis of 
the disc is uppermost. It is, however, easy to see that this rotation 
is not owing to the same cause which gives rise to the phenomena 
hitherto considered, for whether it be accelerated or retarded no 
change is produced in the horizontal position of the beam ; it is, in 
fact, occasioned by the friction of the pivots of rotation dragging 
the beam into a corresponding motion. Attention to this extraneous 
cause of rotation will explain numerous ttuomalics which present 
themselves in many of the inatriments contrived to exemplify the 
phenomena of combined rotary motions. It is one of the advantages 
of Fessers apparatus that the phenomena may be exhibited in their 
more im])ortant phases without being affected by this source of error. 
We may form a clearer conception of these phenomena by first 
considering some simpler facts which do not appear to me to have 
been hitherto sufficiently attended to. For this purpose let the 
system of rings carrying the disc be removed from the rest of the 
apparatus, and by unfastening the tightening screw let the inner 
ring be allowed to more freely within the outer. Having set the disc 
in rapid rotation, hold the outer ring at the extremities of the dia- 
meter which is in the plane in which the axis of motion of the disc 
is free to move, then giving to the outer ring a tendency to rotation 
round that diameter, it will be observed that, in whatever position 
the axis is, it will fly to place itself in the fixed axis thus determined, 
and rotation will take place round it in the same direction. Ckmsi- 
derablc resistance is felt so long as the moveable axis is changing 
its position, but when once it coincides with the fixed axis the 
rotation of the external ring round its diameter is effected with 
facility. A slight alternate motion of the outer ring, tending to 
give to it rotations in opposite directions, will occasion a continued 



47 


rotation of the moveable axis. The aame result takes place when 
an endeavour is made to rotate the outer ring round an axis per« 
j>endicular to its plane* In all cases when the axis of the rotating 
disc is free to move in a plane» and the outer ring is constrained to 
rotate round a line in this plane* the moveable axis will place itself 
so as to coincide with that line* and so that the disc shall rotate 
in the same direction as the ring ; if the £xed axis bo in a different 
plane the moveable axis will assume permanently that position in its 
plane which approaches nearest to the former* The moveable axis 
is thus apparently attracted towards the fixed axis if the rotations 
are in the same direction, and repelled from it if the rotations are 
in opposite directions* 

In the experiments just described the free and constrained axes of 
rotation intersect* but in Fessers apparatus they are distant from each 
other. In the latter case the rule must be thus modified* that the 
free axis of rotation tends to place itself parallel to the constrained 
axis of rotation* or to as near a position thereto os possible. By this 
principle all the results manifested are easily explained. The beam 
being in equilibrium, a motion impressed on it round the vertical axis 
causes it to ascend or descend* because the axis of the rotating disc 
tends to place itself parallel to the vertical axis of rotation and so that 
the disc rotates in the impressed direction. When the equilibrium of 
the beam is destroyed^ gravity tends to make it rotate round a horizon- 
tal axis ; the axis of the disc endeavours to place itself parallel with 
that axis* but both being unchangeably at right angles to each otlier* 
the tendency to place itself there gives rise to a continued rotation. 
Other results with this apparatus* to which I have not yet adverted, 
are similarly explained. Fix the outer ring horizontally and loosen 
the inner ring* keeping them both however in the same plane ; then, 
on moving the beam round the vertical axis* the axis of the renting 
disc will immediately fly to place itself parallel tliereto, with rotation 
of the disc in the impressed direction. The rings being placed in the 
vertical plane* the same result will take place if the beam be moved 
in a vertical plane* i. e. round a horizontal axis. 

The following additional experiments may be made with the rings 
detached from the apparatus. The results are necessary conse- 
quences of what has been previously explained : — 

1 . Suspend, by means of a string* the outer ring at the extremity 



48 


of a diameter perpendicular to the axi« of the inner ring; and, 
having loosened the latter, place it at right angles to the former. 
On causing the disc to rotate, its axis will retain its original posi- 
tion ; but if the slightest effort be made to turn the outer ring round 
the vertical line, the axis of the rotating disc will instantly fly into 
this position, and the disc will move in the same direction as that of 
the impressed rotation. 

2. The horizontaiity of the loose inner ring being restored, if a 
weight be suspended from either end of the axis of the disc, that axis 
will, while it preserves its hoiizontal or any inclined position, re- 
volve round the vertical line; the direction of the motion will change 
if either the weight be applied to the opposite end of the axis or the 
disc rotate in the opposite direction. If this rotation be arrested, 
gravity will immediately cause the weighted end of the axis to 
descend. 

3. Clamp the rings together either in the same plane or at right 
angles to each other, and fasten a string, in the first case, at the ex- 
tremity of a diameter coinciding ^ith the axis of the inner ring, and 
in the latter case at the extremity of a diameter perpendicular thereto. 
Having set the disc spinning, if a rotation round the vertical line be 
given to the system the axis of the disc will ascend, carrying with it 
the disc and rings notwithstanding their weight, and, even when the 
impressed rotation has ceased to act, will continue to rotate in the 
same direction until the motion of the disc ceases. 

In this note I have purposely avoided entering into the mathema- 
tical theory of the phenomena, my intention having been solely to 
describe the apparatus exhibited and to give an intelligible account of 
its effects. Those who wish to investigate the subject more pro- 
foundly, will find the best guide in the Astronomer Hoyal^s essay 
on Precession and Nutation published in his Mathematical Tracts. 



49 


May 4, 1854, 


Colonel SABINE, E,A„ Treas. and V.P., in the Chair. 

In accordance with the Statutes, the Chairman read the following 


list of Candidates recommended 
election : — 

George James Allman, M.D. 
Edward William Brayley. Esq. 
Alexander Bryson, M.D. 

J. Lockhart Clarke, Esq. 

Joseph Dickinson, M.D. 

Ronald Campbell Gunn, Esq. 
Robert Hunt, Esq. 

John Bennet Lawes, Esq. 


by the Council to the Society for 

Robert Mallet, Esq. 

^ Charles May, Esq. 

I Capt. Thomas £. L. Moore, H.N. 
I Captain Richard Strachey. 

I Robert Dundas Thomson, M.D. 

I Samuel Charles Whitbread, Esq. 
j William Crawford Williamson, 
j Eaq. 


The following papers were read : — 

1, ** Account of Researches in Thermo-electricity.^^ By Professor 
W. Thomson of Glasgow, P.R.S. Received April 20, 1854. 

51. On the Thermal Effects of Electric Currents in Unequally 
Heated Conductors, 

Theoretical considerations (communicated in December IS 51 to 
the Royal Society of Edinburgh), founded on observations which 
had been made regarding the law of thermo-electric force in an un- 
equally heated circuit of two metals, led me to the conclusion that 
an electric current must exercise a convective effect on heat in a 
homogeneous metallic conductor of which different parts are kept at 
different temperatures. A special application of the reasoning to 
the case of a compound circuit of copper and iron was made, and it 
is repeated here because of the illustration it affords of the mecha- 
nical principles on which the general reasoning is founded. 



60 


Bccquerel discovered that if one junction of copper and iron, in a 
circuit of the two metals, be kept at an ordinary atmospheric tem- 
perature, while the other is raised gradually to a red or white heat, 
a current first sets from copper to iron through the hot junction, in- 
creasing in strength only as long as the temperature is below about 
300*^ Cent.; and becoming feebler with farther elevations of tempera- 
ture until it ceases, and a current actually sets in the contrary direc- 
tion when a high red heat is attained. Many experimenters have 
professed themselves unable to verify this extraordinary discovery, 
but the description which M. Becquerel gives of his experiments 
leaves no room for the doubts which some have thrown upon his 
conclusion, and establishes the thermo-electric inversion between 
iron and copper, not as a singular case (extraordinary and unex- 
pected it appeared), but as a phenomenon to be looked for be- 
tween any two metals, when tried through a suflicient range of tem- 
perature, especially any two which lie near one another in the 
thermo-electric series for ordinary temperatures. M, Regnault has 
verified M. Becquerers conclusion so far, in finding that the strength 
of the current in a circuit of copper and iron wire did not increase 
sensibly for elevations of temperature above 240° Cent., and began to 
dimiuiah when the temperature considerably exceeded this limit; 
but the actual inversion observed by M. Becquerel is required to 
show that the diminution of strength in the current is due to a real 
falling off in the electromotive force, and not to the increased resist- 
ance known to be produced by an elevation of temperature. 

From Becquerers discovery it follows that, for temperatures be- 
low a certain limit, which, for particular specimens of copper and 
iron wire, I have ascertained, by a mode of experimenting described 
below, to be 280® Cent., copper is on the negative side of iron in the 
thermo-electric series, and on the positive side for higher tempera- 
tures ; and at the limiting temperature copper and irdn are thermo- 
electrically neutral to one another. It follows, according to the 
general mechanical theory of thermo-electric currents referred to 
above, that electricity passing from copper to iron causes the absorp^ 
tion or the evolution of heat according as tiie temperature of the 
metals is below or above the neutral point ; but neither evdution 
nor absorption of heat, if the temperature be precisely that of neu- 
trality (a conclusion which 1 have already partially verified by 



51 


ex]>eriment). Hence, if in a circuit of copper and iron, one junctian 
be kept about 280^, that ie, at the neutral temperature, and the other 
ttt any lower temperature, a thermo-electric current will aet from 
copper to iron through the hot. and from iron to copper through 
the cold junction ; causing the evolution of heat at the latter, and 
the raising of weights too if it be employed to work an electro*mag- 
netic engine, but not causing the absorption of any heat at the hot 
junction. Hence there must be an absorption of heat at some part 
or parts of the circuit consisting solely of one metsd or of the other, 
to au amount equivalent to the heat evolved at the cold junction, to- 
gether with the thermal value of any mechanical effects produced in 
other parts of the circuit. The locality of this absorption can only 
be where the temperatures of the single metals are non-uniform, 
since the thermal effect of a current in any homogeneous uniformly 
heated conductor is always an evolution of heat. Hence there must 
be on the whole on absorption of heat, caused by the current 
in passing from cold to hot in copper, and from hot to cold in iron. 
When a current is forced through the circuit against the thermo* 
electric force, the same reasoning establishes an evolution of heat to 
an amount equivalent to the sum of the heat that would be then 
taken in at the cold junction, and the value in heat of the energy 
spent by the agency (chemical or of any other kind) by which the 
electromotive force is applied. The aggregate reversible thermal 
effect, thus demonstrated to exist in the unequally heated portions 
of the two metals, might be produced in one of the metals alone, or 
(as appears more natural to suppose) it may be the sum or difference 
of effects experienced by the two. Adopting as a matter of form the 
latter supposition, without excluding the former possibility, we may 
assert that either there is absorption of heat by the current passing 
from hot to cold in the copper, and evolution, to a leas extent, in the 
iron of the same circuit; or there is absorption of heat produced by the 
current from hot to cold in tlie iron, and evolution of heat to a 
less amount in the copper ; or there must be absorption of heat in 
each metal, with the reverse effect in each case when the current Is 
reversed. The reversible effect in a single metal of non-uniform 
temperatare may be called a convection of heat ; and to avoid cir- 
cumlocution, t shall express it, that the vitreous electricity carries heat 
with it, dr that the spedfic heat of vitreous electricity is positive, 



62 


when thU convection is in the nominal direction of the current," 
and 1 shall apply the same expressions to ** resinous electricity " 
when the convection is against the nominal direction of the current. 
It is established then that one or other of the following three hypo- 
theses must be true : — 

Vitreous electricity carries heat with it in an unequally heated 
conductor whether of copper or iron ; but more in copper than in 
iron. 

Or Resinous electricity carries heat with it in an unequally heated 
conductor whether of copper or iron; but more in iron than in 
copper* 

Or Vitreous electricity carries heat with it in an unequally heated 
conductor of copper, and Resinous electricity carries heat with it in 
an unequally heated conductor of iron. 

Immediately after communicating this theory to tlie Royal Society 
of Edinburgh, I commenced trying to ascertain by experiment which 
of the three hypotheses is the truth, as Theory with only thermo- 
electric data could not decide between them. I had a slight bias in 
favour of the first rather than the second, in consequence of the 
positiveness which, after Franklin, we habitually attribute to the 
vitreous electricity, and a very strong feeling of the improbability of 
the third. With the able and persevering exertions of my assistant, 
Mr. M^Farlane, applied to the construction of various forms of ap- 
paratus and to assist me in conducting experiments, the research 
has been carried on, with little intermission, for more than two 
years. Mr. Robert Davidson, Mr. Charles A* Smith, and other 
friends have also given much valuable assistance during the greater 
port of this time, in the different experimental investigations of 
which results are now laid before the Royal Society, Only nu- 
gatory results were obtained until recently from multiplied and 
varied experiments both on copper and iron conductors ; but the 
theoretical anticipation was of such a nature that no wont of expe- 
rimental evidence could influence my conviction of its truth. About 
four months ago, by means of a new form of apparatus, I ascertained 
that eUctficity carries Aec^ with it in an unegually heated iron 

conductor, A similar equally sfensitive arrangement showed no re- 
sult for copper. The second hypothesis might then have been ex- 
pected to hold; but to ascertain tlic truth with certainty I have 



53 


continued ever since, getting an experiment on copper nearly every 
week with more and more sensitive arrangements, and at last, in 
two experiments, I have made out with certainty, that vitr 0 ous elec- 
^rtcf^y carries heat unih it in an unequally heated copper conductor. 

The third hypothesis is thus established : a most unexpected con- 
clusion I am willing to confess. 

I intend to continue the research, and 1 hope not only to ascer- 
tain the nature of the thermal effects in other metals, but to deter- 
mine its amount in absolute measure in the most important cases, 
and to find how it varies, if at all, with the temperature ; that is, to 
determine the character (positive or negative) and the value of the 
specific heat, varying or not with the temperature, of the unit of 
current electricity in various metals. 

§ IL On the Law of Thermo-electric Force in an unequally heated 
circuit of two Metals. 

A general relation l>etween the specific heats of electricity in two 
different metals, and the law of thermo-electric force, in a circuit 
composed of them according to the temperatures of their junctions, 
was established in the communication to the Royal Society of Edin- 
burgh referred to above, and was expressed by an equation* which 
may now be simplified by the thermometric assumption 



(jtt denoting Carnot’s function, J Joule’s equivalent, and t the tempe- 
rature measured from an absolute zero, about 273^^ Cent, below the 
freezing-point,) since this assumption defines a system of thermometry 
in absolute measure, which the experimental researches recently made 
by Mr. Joule and myself establish as not differing sensibly from the 
scale of the air-thermometer between ordinary limits. The equa- 
tion, when SO’ modified, takes the following form : — 

where ^ denotes the excess of the specific heat of electricity in the 
metal through which the current goes from cold to hot above the 
specific heat of the same electricity in the other metal, at the tem- 


* See Proceedings R.S.E. Dec. 1051, or Philosophical Magazine 1852. 



54 


perature / ; F the thermo-electric force in the circuit when the two 
junctions are kept at t)ie temperatures S and T respectively, of which 
the former is the higher ; and 0g the amount of heat absorbed per 
unit of electricity crossing the hot junction. The following relation 
(sixailarly simpliEed in farm) was also established ; — 

^ e do 

^=TS- 

These relations show how important it is towards the special ob- 
ject of determining the 8i>ecific heats of electricity in metals, to in- 
vestigate the law of electromotive force in various cases, and to de- 
termine the thermal effect of electricity in passing from one metal to 
another at various temperatures. Both of these objects of research 
are therefore included in the general investigation of the subject. 

The only progress I have as yet made in the last- mentioned 
branch of the inquiry, has been to demonstrate experimentally that 
there is a cooling or heating effect produced by a current between 
copper and iron at an ordinary atmospheric temperature according 
as it passes from copper to iron or from iron to copper, in verifica- 
tion of a theoretical conclusion mentioned above : but I intend 
shortly to extend the verification of theory to a demonstration that 
reverse cflPects take place between those metals at a temperature 
above their neutral point of about 280^^ Cent. ; and I hope also to 
be able to make determinations in absolute measure of the amount 
of the Peltier effect for a given strength of current between various 
pairs of metals. 

With reference to laws of electromotive force in various cases, I 
have commenced by determining the order of several specimens of 
metals in the thermo-electric series, and have ascertained some very 
curious facts regarding varieties in this series which exist at different 
temperatures. In this I have only followed Becquerel’s remarkable 
discovery, from which I had been led to the reasoning and experimental 
investigation regarding copper and iron described above. My way 
of experimenting has been to raise the temperature first of one 
junction as far as the circumstances admit, keeping the other cold, 
and then to raise the temperature of the other gradually, and watch 
the indications of a galvanometer during the whole process. When 
an mremoa of current is noticed, the changing tempmture is 



55 


brought back till the galvanometer shows no current ; and then (by 
a procem quite analogous to that followed by Mr. Joule and Dr. 
Lyon Rayfair in ascertaining the temperature at which water is of 
maximum density) the temperatures of the two junctions are ap- 
proximated, the galvanometer always being kept as near zero ns 
possible. When the difference between any two temperatures on 
each side of the neutral point which give no current is not very great, 
their arithmetical mean will be the neutral temj>erature. A regular 
deviation of the mean temperature from the true neutral tempera- 
ture is to be looked for with wide ranges, and a determination of it 
would show the law according to which the difference of the spe- 
cific heat of electricity in the two metals varies with the tempera- 
tures ; but I have not even as yet ascertained with certainty the ex- 
istence of such a deviation in any particular case. The following is 
a summary of the principal results 1 have already obtained in this 
department of the subject. 

The metals tried being, — three platinum wires (Pj the thickest, 
Pj the thinnest, and Pg one of intermediate thickness), brass wires 
(B), a lead wire (L^i slips of sheet lead (L), copper wires (C), and 
iron wire (I), I find that the specimens experimented on stand 
thermo-electrically at different temperatures in the order shown 
in the following Table, and explained in the heading by reference to 
bismuth and antimony, or to the terms “ negative ** and ** positive “ 
as often used : — 




56 


It mufit be added) by way of explanation, that the bracket cD'- 
closing: the symbols of any two of the metallic specimens indicates 
that they are neutral to one another at the corresponding temperature, 
and the arrow-head below one of them shows the direction in which 
it is changing its place with reference to the other, in the series, as 
the temperature is raised. When there is any doubt as to a posi- 
tion as shown in the Table, the symbol of the metal is a small letter 
instead of a capital. 

The rapidity with which copper changes its place among some of 
the other metals (the platinums and iron) is very remarkable. Brass 
also changes its place in the same direction possibly no lees rapidly 
than copper ; and lead changes its place also in the same direction 
but certainly less rapidly than brass, which after passing the thick 
platinum wire (Pj) at 130° Cent, passes the lead at 140°, the lead 
itself having probably passed the thick platinum at some tempera- 
ture a little below 130°’*'. 

The conclusion as regards ^specific heats of electricity in the dif- 
ferent metals, from the equation expressing thermo-electric force 
given above, is that the specific heat of vitreous electricity is greater 
in each metal passing another from left to right in the series as the 
temperature rises than in the metal it passes : thus in particular, — 

TAe specific heat of vitreous electricity is greater in copper than in 
platinum or in iron ; greater m brass than in platinum or in lead ; and 
greater in lead than in platinum. 

It is probable enough from the results regarding iron and copper 
mentioned above, that the specific heat of vitreous electricity is 
positive in briiss ; very small positive, or else negative, in platinum, 
perhaps of about the same value as in iron. It will not be difficult to 
test these speculations either by direct experiment on the convective 
effiects of electric currents in the diflferent metals, or by comparative 
measurements of thermo-electric forces for various temperatures in 
circuits of the metals, and I trust to be able to do so before long, 

$ III. On Thermo-electricity tn crystalline metals, and in metah in a 
state of mechanical strain. 

Having recently been occupied with an extension of the mechani- 

* 1 have since feutid that it does pass the thick platinum, at the temperature 
U3®. [Mayl6,l8M0 



i7 


cal theory to the phenomena of thermo-electricity in crystaliine 
metala, I have been led to experimental investigation on this branch 
of tlie subject. The difficulty of obtaining actual metallic crystals 
of considerable dimensions made it desirable to imitate crystalline 
structure in various ways. The analogies of the crystalliae optical 
properties which have been observed in transparent solids, in a state 
of strain, and of the crystalline structure as regards magnetic induc- 
tion which Dr. Tyndall's remarkable experiments show to be pro- 
duced not only in bismuth but in wax, thick paste of dour, and ** the 
pith of fresh rolls,*' by pressure, made it almost certain that pres- 
sure or tension on a mass of metal would give it the thermo-electric 
properties of a crystal. The only case which I have as yet had time 
to try, verifies this anticipation. I have found that copper wire 
stretched by a weight bears to similar copper wire unstretched, ex- 
actly the thermo-electric relation wjiich Svanberg discovered in a 
bar cut equatorially from a crystal of bismuth or antimony compared 
with a bar cut axially from a crystal of the same metal. Thus 1 
found that : — 

If part of a circuit of copper wire be stretched by a considerable 
force and the remainder left in its natural condition, or stretched by 
a less force, and if either extremity of the stretched part be heated, 
a current sete /rom the stretched to the unstretched part through the 
hot junction : and if the wire be stretched and unstretohed on the 
two sides of the heated part alternately, the current is reversed (as 
far as I have been able yet to test, instantaneously) with each change 

the tension. 

I intend to make similar experiments on other metallic wires ; also 
to try the efiFect of transverse as well os of longitudinal tension on 
slips of sheet metal with thw ends at different temperatures^ when 
placed longitudinally in an electric circuit ; and the effects of oblique 
tension on slips of metal similarly placed in a circuit, but kept with 
their ends at the same temperature and their lateral edges unequalfy 
heated. I have no doubt of being able so to verify every thermo- 
electric characteristic of crystalline structure, in metals in a state of 
strain, 

Glasgow College, Msrch 30, 1854, 

P,8. April 19, 1854, — I have today found by experiment that iron 

vot. vtl. 


Q 



56 


wire when stretched by a considerable force bears a thermo-electric 
relation to unstretched iron wire, the opposite of that which 1 had 
previously discovered in the case of copper wire ; and 1 have ascer- 
tained that when the wire is alternately stretched and unstretched 
on the two sides of a heated part the current is reversed along with 
the change of tension, always passing from the unstretched to the 
stretched part, through the hot locality. 

I liope before the end of the present Session to have a complete 
account of all the experiments of which the results are stated above, 
ready to communicate to the Royal Society. 


II. An Introductory Memoir upon Quantics.” By Arthuh 
Cayley^ Esq., F.R.S. Received April 20, 1854. 

The subject of Quantics is dehned as the entire subject df rational 
and integral functions, and of the equations and loci to which these 
give rise, but the memoir relat€)|i principally to the functions called 
quantics ; a quantic being in fact a rational and integral function, 
homogeneous in regard to a set of laden ts (jr, y. .), or more gene- 
rally homogeneous in regard to each of several such sets separately. 
A quantic of the degrees m, in the sets (jp, y ;.) (x^y^.) &c. is 
represented by a notation such as 

(#)(^.y..r(y,y'..r'..), 

where the mark is considered as indicative of the absolute gene- 
rality of the quantic. The coefficients of the different terms of the 
quantic may be either mere numerical multiples of single letters or 
eletnents, such as a, 5, c. or else functions (in general rational and 
integral functions) of such elements ; this explains the meaning of 
the expression the elements of a quantic. The theory leads to the 
discussion of the derivatives called covariants. Of these covariants 
a very general definition is given as follows, viz, considering the 
quantic y, .)"* (a?', y'. .), and selecting any two facients of the 
same set, e. y. the fadents j?, y, it is remarked that there is always 
an operation upon the elements tantamount as regards the quantic 
to the operation jrd^, viz. if we differentiate with respect to each 
element, multiply by proper functions of the elements and add, the 



59 


recruit will be that obtained by differentiating with and multi- 
plying by X. And if the operation upon the elements tantamount 
to xd^ is represented by {xd^}^ then writing down the series of ope- 
rations 

"I xdp J xdyf • * dy/f • < dcCif 

where x, y are considered as being successively replaced by every 
permutation of two different facients of the set (a7,y..), x\y^ by 
every permutation of two different facients of the set (x', y..)dcc., 
then it is clear that the quantlc is reduced to zero by each of the ope- 
rations of the entire system, but this property is not by any means 
confined to the quantic ; and any function having the property in 
question, i. e. every function which is reduced to zero by each ope- 
ration of the entire system, is said to be a covariant of the quantic. 
The definition is afterwards still further generalized, and its connec- 
tion explained with the methods given, in the memoir * On Linear 
Transform^ktions/ Camb. and Dub. Math. Journal, Old Scries, t. iv., 
and New Series, t. i., and the ‘ M^moire sur les Hyperd^terminants,' 
Crelle, t. xxx., and some other theorems given in relation to the 
subject. The latter part of the memoir relates to the theory of 
the quantic (#)(^, and to the number of and relations between 
the covariants, and as part of such theory to the beautiful law of 
reciprocity of MM. Sylvester and Hermite. 


o2 



m 


May 11, 1854. 

The EARL of ROSSE, President, in the Chair. 

'fhe Right Hon. Lord Ashburton was admitted into the Society. 

The following paper was read : — 

** On the relation of the Angular Aperture of the Object-Glasses 
of Compound Microscopes to their penetrating power and 
to Oblique Light/^ By J. W, GaiFFiTii, M.l)., F.L.S. 
Communicated by Arthtjk Henprey, Esq., F.R.S. Re- 
ceived April 29, 1854. 

i 

The explanation given by Dr. Goring and others of the advantage 
of increased angular aperture in microscopic objective- glasses ap- 
pears to the author to be correct, as applied to the case of upake ob- 
jects, and accordingly his remarks in the present communication 
have reference to transparent objects only. 

It is known that delicate markings on a transparent object, such 
as the valve of a Gyrosigma, may be rendered more distinctly visible 
by using an object-glass of large aperture, by bringing the mirror to 
one side, and by placing a central stop in the object-glass or the con- 
denser or in both ; the increased distinctness produced in these seve- 
nd ways being due to the illumination of the object by oblique light. 
Experiment also shows that the degree of obliquity of the light re- 
quisite varies with the delicacy or fineness of the markings, being 
greater as these are more delicate ; so that the finest markings re- 
quire the most oblique light which can possibly be obtained to ren- 
der them evident, and the angular aperture of the object-glass miut 
necessarily be proportionately large, otherwise none of these oblique 
rays could enter it. 

If the parts of an object which refract the light are large in pro- 
portion to the power of the object-glass and of irregular form, they 



61 


trill refract a certain number of rays, so that these cannot enter the 
object-glass ; hence certain parts will become dark, and will mapout» as 
it were, in the image formed of the object, the struct oral peculiarities 
of the same. But if the parts are minute, of a curved form and ap- 
proxlmatively symmetrical, they will act upon the light transmitted 
through them in the manner of iexwes, and their luminous or dark 
appearance will vary according to the relation of the foci of these to 
that of the object-glass. Thus the parts of an object may appear 
dark and defined, from tlie refraction of the light out of the field of 
the microscope ; also, from the concentration or dispersion of por- 
tions of the light by these parts, all the rays being admitted by the 
object-glass, or entering the field. 

Another condition affecting distinctness consists in the relation 
which the luminousness or darkness of an object bears to that of the 
field or back ground upon which it is apparently situated. 

'I'he refraction of the light out of the field of the microscope or 
beyond the angle of aperture of the object-glass is the ordinary 
cause of the outlines of objects becoming visible ; and in these cases, 
an increase of the angular aperture of the object-glass will impair 
their distiuctuess, because it will allow of the admission of those 
rays which would otherwise have been refracted from the field, and 
the margins will become more luminous and less contrasted with 
the lumiuous field. 

The cause of the distinctness of an object by refraction when 
all or nearly all the rays enter the field of the microscope, may 
be investigated in a drop of oil immersed in water, or in a drop 
of milk, as illuminated by light reflected from an ordinary mirror. 
I'he refractive power of the globules is so great and their form 
such, that each acts as a minute spherical lens; and the parts 
within the margin will appear light or dark according to the relation 
of tlm focus of the little lens to tliat of tlie object-glass. Under an 
object-glass of small aperture and moderate power the outline will 
appear black, because the marginal rays do not enter the object-glass. 
If the object-glass be of suficient aperture to admit these marginal 
rays, tkz black margin will disappeat, and the little lens will only be 
disUngt^ishable by the nhove fomil reladou. Its appearance under 
oblique light (thrown from all sides, as when the condenser and a 
central stop are used) will vary ; but taking the case of extreme 



62 


obliquity of the ra3rs« the lens will only be visible by a luminous mar- 
gin from reflexion, ^ving it a very beautiful annular appearance. 
Hence it is more distinct by direct, or slightly oblique, than by very 
oblique light. 

But in certain objects, the irregularities of structure are of such 
extreme minuteness, or the difference of the refractive power of the 
various portions of the structure is so slight, that the course of the 
rays is but little altered by refraction on j)assing through them, and, 
under ordinary illumination, all the rays will enter the object-glass ; 
neither are the rays accumulated into little cones or parcels, of suffi- 
cient intensity to map out the little light or dark spots in the field 
of the microscope, according to the relation of their foci with that 
of the object-glass. 

Let us take the instance of an object with minute depressions on 
the surface, as the valve of a Gyroaigma, These are so minute, that 
when the light reflected from the ordinary mirror is used, the rays 
passing through the depressed and the undepressed portions, are not 
sufficiently refracted to cause either ♦set to be excluded from the 
object-glass, consequently both sets will enter it. llie slightly 
oblique and converging rays passing through a portion of the 
valve become separated into two sets, one passing through the 
thinner depressed portions, the other through the thicker end unde- 
pressed portions: still both sets enter the object-glass. But on trans- 
mitting oblique light through the object, one set of the rays will be 
refracted so as not to enter the object-glass, whilst the other set will 
gain admission ; thus the two parts, which have differently refracted 
the rays, will become distinct. If the markings were more delicate, 
or if the difference between the refractive power of the two portions 
of the valve were less, both sets would enter the object-glass. But 
on rendering the light still more oblique, one set would be again 
excluded by being refracted oat of the field. Hence it is evident 
why the angular aperture of the object-glass must be larger as 
the markings we finer, or the difference between the refractive 
power of the two portions of tissue is less ; because the obliquity 
of the light requisite will be very great to cause the exclusion 
of one set of the rays, and the other set will be too oblique to 
enter the object-glass unless it be of correspondingly large aperture. 
This is the explanation of the advantage of oblique light. It has 



63 


no peculiar power of rendering objects distinct, as has sometimes 
been believed, and the following expernncnt, supposed to show such 
peculiar power, is really to be explained on different grounds. A 
piece of net, or some similar texture, is placed behind a hole made in 
a window-shutter, and when thus viewed, the fibres are not well 
seen ; but when the texture is moved on one side, they become very 
distinctly visible, and this has been erroneously attributed to the 
illumination by oblique light ; whereas the increased distinctness in 
the lateral position is owing principally to the circumstance that 
the object is then viewed on a dark instead of a white ground as in 
the first instance ; although it is also true that in this position the 
oblique rays, being reflected in large numbers from the fibres into 
the eye, contribute to the distinct vision of the object when viewed 
as it then is upon a dark ground. 

The most diflicult point has been to explain, how an object- 
glass of large angular aperture will render markings evident, 
which were not visible under an object-glass of smaller aperture ; be- 
cause it would naturally be imagined that the larger aperture would 
^mit both sets of rays, one of which was excluded by the ob- 
ject-glass of smaller aperture. ITie difliculty vanishes when it is re- 
collected that the additional rays admitted by the ol^ect- glass of larger 
aperture are more oblique ; hence one set of these rays will be re- 
fracted from the field of the microscope, whilst the other set will 
enter the object-glass and will illuminate the more highly refractive 
parts of the object ; thus the two kinds of differently refractive struc- 
ture become distinctly separated, one appearing dark, the other lumi- 
nous ; in fact, by means of the additional rays admitted by the larger 
aperture we illuminate more highly one part of the object whilst the 
illumination of the other is not increased. In short, the object is 
illuminated, first, by rays corresponding to those admitted by an 
object-glass of small aperture ; and, secondly, by the additional rays 
admitted by the olgect-glass of larger aperture. The first set not 
being sofliciently oblique, no part of them is refracted beyond the 
angular aperture of the object-glass ; the second, being more oblique, 
are refracted out of the field by certain parts of the object and not 
by others, and thus contribute to render its different parts distin- 
gui^able by contrast of darkness and illumination. The first set of 
fays, by illuminating all ports of tfce object, tend to diminish tiiis 



64 


contrast) and consequently do not add to but impair the dUcrimiuH- 
tive power of the object-glass for the fine markings of transparent 
objects* and accordingly these are rendered more distinctly visible 
by intercepting the less oblique rays by means of a central stop. 

It has been here assumed that the oblique light requisite for the 
display of the markings upon objects is separated into two sets of 
rays by refraction ; but the author observes that it might be ques- 
tioned whether they are not separated by reflexion. I'here can be 
no doubt that the latter is not generally the case ; perhaps the most 
important reason which may be assigned for this is, the considerable 
comparative breadth of the luminous portions of the valve of the 
Gyrosigma for instance. On transmitting unilateral light obliquely 
through the valve of an Isthmia, in which the depressions are so 
large, in such manner that part of it is reflected by portions of them, 
it is easily seen how small the amount of reflected light is ; and this 
because the surface of the depressions is curved, and thus the por- 
tions inclined at the requisite angle for reflexion are also very small. 
As the amount of light reflected Ms so small in this case, it would 
be inappreciable in that of the Gyrouigmot in which the depressions 
are so exceedingly minute. In fact, attention to this point affords 
a ready means of distinguishing whether an object is iliumi&ated by 
reflexion or refraction. 

The author next considers the relation of the penetrating power of 
an objeot-glasB to its defining power. Penetrating power depends 
upon angular aperture, and consequently on oblique light. The 
question whether there be any essential difference between pene- 
trating and defining power is best answered by experiment. If we 
take a fragment of the valve of an Isthmia and examine it under a 
high power of small aperture, all the parts are very distinctly seen 
by the ordinary light of the mirror; and the various depths of shadow 
of the different parts of the depressions and the undepressed por- 
tions render these also clearly distinguishable ; and when on object- 
glass of very large aperture is used, the distinctness is rather im- 
paired than improved. But if we examine a fragment of the valve 
of a Gyreeigma, and this requires an object-glass of large aperture 
to render the markings visible, no distinction of the various parts of 
the depressions and the undepressed portions is visible ; all we see is, 
that the depressions as a whoU are dark and the undepressed por^ 



65 


tions are lumlnoua. Hence the lathmia requires defining power, 
whilst the Gyrouigma requires penetrating power or large angle of 
aperture to exhibit the markings ; yet the structures differ only in 
size. And there can be no doubt that if we could examine the valve 
of the Gyrosi^ma under a power as high relatively to the size of the 
depressions, as that under which we can examine the lathmia, the 
same relations being preserved between the angle of aperture of the 
object-glass and the angular inclination of the refracted rays, the 
various parts of the depressed and undepressed portions would be 
equally recognizable in both cases. 

This is also true of fine lines scratched or etched on glass ; for 
although the coarser lines upon glass micrometers are well seen with 
an object-glass of small aperture with good defining power and 
direct light, yet the finest lines upon Nobert’s test-slide require 
penetrating power in the object-glass, and oblique light Large an- 
gular aperture or penetrating power is but a very imperfect substitute 
for defining power — an important point which the author believes has 
not hitherto been noticed, and to which he would invite the earnest 
attention of object-glass makers. 

The author concludes by observing that his remarks have been 
principally confined to one class of objects requiring penetrating 
power, viz. the valves of the Diatomacem. This has been done ad- 
visedly, because the scales of insects, which may be regarded as form- 
ing the type of the other class, involve considerations of a mixed 
kind, which would have tended to confuse the subject. The longi- 
tudinfil ridges upon the scales of insects, in their relation to pene- 
tration, may be viewed as representing the undepressed portions of 
the valves of the Diatomaceee ; and the same explanation will apply 
to the visibility of both under various conditions. The transverse 
lines seen upon the scales are not indications of true structure ; but 
their origin, as also that of the lines seen upon the valves of the 
Diatojnacese, from oircxilar or angular depressions, does not come 
within the conditions involved in the principle which it has been the 
object here to elucidate. It will sufiice to say that the true struc- 
tures producing the appearance of transverse markings upon the 
scales of insects are best resolved by small angular aperture and good 
definition. 

It has been assumed also, that the markings upon the valves of 
VOt. VII. H 



the Diatomaceae arise from depressions* This can be proved to be 
the case in the larger ones d(c.); and there is sufficient 

evidence to render it at least highly probable in the remainder. But 
this is an unessential point as regai'ds the principle, and therefore it 
has not been dwelt upon. 



G7 


May 18, 1854. 

The EAllli of ROSSE, President, in the Chair. 

The fallowing gentlemen were recommended by the Council for 
election Foreign Members .• — 

Karl Ernst von Baer. 

Michel Chasles. 

Friedrich Wdliler. 


The following paper was read : — 

On some conclusions derived from the Observations of the 
Magnetic Declination at the Observatory of St. Helena.'’ 
By Colonel Edward Saiunb, K.A., V.P.R.S. Received 
May 18, 1854. 

The author commences with the following preliminary remarks : — 

** The part taken by the Royal Society in promoting, by its influence 
with Government, the establishment of the Colonial Magnetic Ob- 
servatories. and in drawing up instructions for the guidance of those 
w^ho were employed in them, makes it the duty of the person charged 
with their superintendence, to spare no pains to place before the 
Fellows, on suitable occasions, the results of researches designed to 
obtain a foundation of facts, on which a correct theory of the mag- 
netic variations might be framed, and an insight be gained into the 
nature of the physical agency by which they arc produced. 

** In this first stage of scientific inquiry, when we have only the 
phenomena themselves to guide us in their classification, or to indi* 
cate by apparent correspondences the existence of some causal con- 
nexion of which we have no other knowledge than that which the 
obser\^^ns themselves may afford, the first difiSouIty to be met 
consists, in disentangling from the complication in which the mag- 

VOt. VJI. I 



68 


netic variations proceeding from different causes first present them- 
selves* the effects which may appear to be due to certain amongst 
them ; and in presenting these in some methodical order or arrange- 
ment* which may best assist the physicist or the mathematician in 
his conception of the problem or problems, to the solution of which 
he may desire to apply himself, 

“ The first and most obvious separation of the magnetic variations 
is into those which are presented at one time at different parts of 
the earth's surface, and have special reference therefore to space ; and 
those which present themselves at different times at one and the 
same place, and have special reference therefore to time. It is the 
object of magnetic surveys to collect the facts of the first, and of 
magnetic observatories the facts of the second, of these primary divi- 
sions. The present communication belongs to the second, and re- 
gards the variations depending upon time at a single station (St. 
Helena), 

** Still, however, the phenomena, even at a single station are too 
complicated for ready comprehension, and stand in need of further 
subdivision. This is most satisfactorily effected by the customary 
separation into three classes, or elements as they are frequently 
termed, the Declination, the Inclination, and the Intensity of the 
Directive Force. The discussion is limited on the present occasion 
to a single clement, the Declination, and to a portion only of the 
results obtained by the observations of that element at St, Helena/' 

After premising a description of the instrument with which the 
observations were made, and of the mode of observing and of record* 
ing the observations, which is omitted here because it may be found 
in the Introduction to the first volume of the ‘ St, Helena Magnetical 
Observations/ the author proceeds to the conclusions which he de- 
sires to notice, and to the manner in which these have been obtained, 
which we follow, by adopting, as nearly as may be convenient, his 
own words. 

** Before we attempt to examine those periodical variations, or 
fluctuations about a mean value, which, from their having for periods, 
for example, the solar year or the solar day, we naturally refer to 
causes depending in some way upon the earth's place in its orbit re* 
lativcly to the sun, or to the earth's revolution round its axjp, it is 
desirable to examine, and if practicable, to eliminate the effects of a 



09 

variation >vhioh we have reason to believe belongs intrinsically to the 
magnetism of the earth itself. The geographical aspect, if we may 
so express it, of the terrestrial magnetism, or the different measure 
in which the magnetic force exists at different parts of the earth’s 
surface, and the different directions which a magnet assumes in dif- 
ferent places by virtue of this force, so for from being permanent, 
are found to be subject to a continual change, which differs from oil 
other magnetic variations with which we are acquainted, inasmuch 
as it does not j)resent to us the character of an oscillation of the 
phenomena around a mean value in j)eriod8 of greater or less dura- 
tion, but appears, especially when viewed generally in its operation 
over the whole globe, as a continuously progressive change ; it has 
for this reason received the appropriate name of * secular change* 
It is possible indeed that the magnetism of the earth may have 
its periods, — that the phenomena existing at one and the same epoch 
over the whole surface of the globe may be identically reproduced at 
a subsequent epoch, — and that what has been called the secular 
change of each of the magnetic elements, wliich we perceive to be in 
progress at any particular point of the surface, St. Helena for ex- 
ample, may be part of a succession of changes which operate in a 
cycle, of which the duration, vast as it may be, may hereafter be 
found to be calculable. But as far as our knowledge has yet gone, 
it is insufficient to justify the assumption of even approximate pe- 
riodical laws of this variation of the terrestrial magnetism; and 
we must continue to regard it therefore for the present as a secular 
change, of which the j)eriod, if there be one, or the periods, if there 
be more than one. ore as yet unknown. But although the secular 
change has no intrinsic relation, as far as we have been able to dis- 
cover, to any of the periods of time determined by other phenomena, 
either of our own planet or of any other of the heavenly bodies, it is 
obvious that we may assign the average rate at which the change is 
taking place, in any of the magnetic elements and at any particular 
station (the declination for example at St. Helena), corresponding to 
any definite measure of time in usage amongst us (say for example 
a month, or the twelfth part of a solar year), by taking the successive 
differences between the monthly means of all the hourly observations 
in the^'first and second months of their continuance, then between 
tl»e second and ^ird mon^s, then between the third and fourth, and 

i2 



70 


so on. By thus proceeding in the case of the Declination at St. He- 
lena* we have sixty differences thus accruing in the five years of 
hourly observation* by which we find that the monthly increase of 
West Declination during these five years amounted on the average 
to O'* 657, or to an annual increase of 7'' 88. 

“ It is not however necessary for this investigation that the system 
of observation should be hourly x a much less onerous system is suf- 
ficient, provided that the observations be distributed equably through 
the year, and that the intervals between the observations of each 
day be, approximately at least* equidistant. Before the commence- 
ment of the hourly series there had been fifteen months of two- 
hourly observations, and after its close the observations were con- 
tinued for twenty-one months more at five hours of each day, the 
hours being such as to give by their combination a true mean value 
for each day. We are thus enabled to take in a more extended period, 
amounting to ninety- six consecutive months, or eight years, from 
which to derive the average rate of scciJlar change at St. Helena. 
Proceeding a« before, we find for this period an average rate of O'* 661 
for the increase of West Declination in a month, or an annual in- 
crease of 7'* 93 in a solar year. During these eight years the hori- 
zontal magnetic direction at St. Helena had consequently changed 
altogether rather more than one degree. 

When the number of years are few from which an annual average 
rate of secular change is derived, it is necessary to be particular in 
regard to the regular distribution of the observations as to months 
and hours, because observations made at one time of the year or at 
one hour of the day, are not strictly comparable with those made at 
other times of the year or at other hours of the day, unless indeed 
corrections based on a long series of observations at the same spot 
or in its vicinity are applied for the annual and diurnal variations. 
But when the periods of comparison include intervals of consider- 
able length, the comparative infiaence of the annual and diumaJ 
variations is greatly diminished, and, if the comparison extend over 
a great number of years, it may practically be disregarded. Now, St. 
Helena being a naval station, and frequently visited by navigators 
of our own and other countries, who have had the requisite knowledge 
and have been at the pains to take the necessary precautions to 
make trustworthy observations, we are able to collect from the nar- 



71 


ratives of their voyages a succession of determinations of the Decli- 
nation, all made at the same spot, namely, at the one anchorage at 
St. Helena, which extend over a period of 236 years, or from 1610 
to 1846. The following Table contains eleven such determinations, 
all from authorities of high repute, which are fortunately so for 
equably distributed in respect to the years when they were made, as 
to throw light not only upon the average amount of the secular 
change of declination during that long period, but also in a consider- 
able degree upon the regularity, or uniformity with which the change 
has taken place. By treating these eleven determinations according 
to well-known methods, we obtain 1 48^ as the west declination 
corresponding to the middle epoch, the year 1763, and 8^*05 as the 
most probable rate of the annual increase during the 236 years. 


Declinations observed at the Anchorage at St. Helena. 


1610. Davis 

? 18 1 

1677. Halley 

.. - 0 40 1 

1881. Halley 

.. -f I 00 ! 

1724. Mathews 

.. 4 7 30 1 

1776. Wales 

.. +12 18 l| 

1789. Hunter 

.. -f-15 30 1 

1796. Macdonald 

.. +15 48 !| 

1806. Kruseustern 

.. +17 18 Ij 

1889. Ilu retit-Thouar. . 

.. +22 17 ii 

1840. Kota 

.. +22 53 11 

1646. Bdrard 

.. +23 11 || 


Cnlculated- » 44 Ob».— Calcul.+I si 
+ 0 16 „ -0 66 

+ 2 08 - 1 08 

„ + 6 84 .. +0 66 

+13 26 „ -107 

„ +16 18 +0 12 

+16 14 „ -0 26 

„ +17 84 „ -0 10 

„ +22 00 „ +0 17 

„ +22 08 „ +0 46 

+22 87 +0 14 


Mean Epoch 176 3 


Mean Declination 

Annual Increase of West Declination 


“ We have here then a striking example of the magnitude and 
character of the changes wrought at a particular station by this very 
remarkable feature of the earth's magnetic force. In less than two 
centuries and a half, the horizontal direction which a magnet takes at 
St. Helena by virtue of the terrestrial magnetic force has been found 
to have changed more than 30®, or more than a twelfth part of the 
whole circle : and when we further examine the facts more closely, 
we find reason to conclude that this great change has taken place 
by a steady, equable and uniform progression throughout the whole 
pciriod. Hie rate of annual change derived from the ei^t years 
during which the observations were maintained by the detachment 



72 


of the Royal Artillery stationed at the Observatory (7'*93) differs so 
slightly from that derived from the observations made at the anchor- 
age from the earliest period at which observations are recorded 
(i. e. 8^*05) » that we may practically regard them as the same. To 
examine whether this has been a uniform rate throughout the 236 
years » or otherwise, the same calculation which gives 8'*05 as the 
most probable average rate of change between 1610 and 1846, will 
give also for each of the years in which the Declination was observed 
the most probable values of the Declination corresponding to the 
same rate of change supposed uniform. These calculated values are 
placed in the Table opposite to the years to which each belongs, and 
adjoining the observed values. The differences are shown in the 
next column. On inspecting these, we perceive that not one of the 
differences exceeds the limits, which, with a due consideration of the 
irregularities to which magnetic observations made on board ship are 
liable, may be ascribed to accidents of observation ; and, what is still 
more important, that they fall indiscrlmifiately to the east and to the 
west of the values calculated on the supposition of a uniform rate, 
and without the slightest appearance of any systematic character 
which might indicate that the rate had been otherwise than regular. 
We have reason to conclude, therefore, that, from the earliest date to 
which we can refer, the progression of secular change at St, Helena 
has gone on from year to year, as nearly as may be, in one uniform 
annual rate. 

The instruction to be derived from the St. Helena observations 
does not however stop here. By a suitable arrangement of the 
observations of the eight years, they may be made to show that, 
when allowance is made for comparatively very small irregularities 
superimposed upon the regular march of the phenomenon by dis- 
turbing causes which will be treated of in the sequel, the average 
annual change takes place by equal aliquot portions in each month 
of the year. Ilie eight years of observation commenced with June 
1841 ; if we take a mean of the eight monthly means in the eight 
Junes from 1841 to 1848, we shall have a better assured mean value 
of the Declination corresponding to the month of June, than if we 
had confined ourselves to a single year. If we then do the same 
vrith the eight Julys, and with each of the other months in succes- 
sion, we shall have twelve monthly values for a year commencing 



73 


with June and ending with May, which will represent in a simple 
and condensed form the means of the whole eight years. These are 
exhibited in the next table, and we perceive at the first view that 
the increase of west declination is progressive in each month of the 
year without a single exception. If we desire to examine further 
the degree of approximation which these values present to a progres- 
sion absolutely uniform, we may apply an aliquot portion of the an- 
nual value (7^*93) to each of the monthly means corresponding to 
the difference in time from the mean epoch (December 1 ), These ali- 


Month*. 

Mean 

DecUiiA- 

tlon. 

(-’orrection 
for necuiar 
change to 
Dec. 1. 

Mean Dcclina. 
tion in the j^eor. 

Oiffermices 

(+-V-'). 

June 

2^ 23-42 

4-364 

2§ ai o6^'<y 

40-22 

July 

23 24-45 

4297 

23 27 42 = >J/ 

~0 14 

AugUht 

$3 24-91 

+2-31 

23 27'22«a/-' 

4 OO 6 

September 

23 26-30 

41-65 

23 26-95-^' 

40-33 

October 

23 2d‘32 

i 0-99 

23 

-0-03 

November 

(23 27-07 i 

40*33 

23 27’40^^' 

i -012 

December 

|23 2773 ! 

-0-33 

23 27 40 

-0-12 

January j 

23 28-29 

-0-99 

23 27-30=. 

«0*02 

Febniary 

23 29-23 

-1-65 

23 27-53 

-030 

March ! 

23 2970 

-.2'31 

23 27-40- >7-' 

1 - 0-17 

April ! 

23 30*21 

-297 

23 27-24 -.1' 

40-04 

May 

23 30-69 

-3*04 

23 27-«6-4' 

40*23 

Mean, corresponding to Dec, 1|33 27'28 


23 27’28-q. 



quot portions are shown in the second column, and it will be seen 
by the third column, containing the mean declinations of the year 
deduced severally from the observation -values in the different months, 
with the correction for secular change assumed uniform applied, how 
very nearly the results derived from the several months approximate 
to one and the same value. The small differences which are shown 
in the last column are for the most part such as would probably dis- 
appear by a longer continuance of the observations ; but wc may 
notice, by the character of the signs, that there is also visible amongst 
them the indication of a comparatively very small semi-annual afeo- 
tion, depending on the sun's petition on either side of the equator, 
which will be reverted to when treating of superimposed effects, 

** The same features of regularity and uniformity ore manifested if 
the examination be further pursued into shorter periods, by comparing 
with each other the twenty-six means in the year; but 




74 


enough has been already stated to show the magnitude, the reguk* 
rity, and the systematic character of the changes called secular, 
which are thus produced by forces in constant operation at the sur- 
face of our planet. In our entire inability to connect these changes 
with any other of the phenomena of nature, either cosmical or ter- 
restrial. we appear to have no other alternative than to view them as 
a constituent feature of the terrestrial magnetic force itself, and as 
one of its most remarkable characteristics, not to be overlooked by 
those who would seek to explain the phenomena of that force by 
means of a j)hysical theory. The attempts which have sometimes 
been made to explain them by a supposed connection of the ter- 
restrial magnetic phenomena with the distribution of land and sea at 
the surface of the globe, or with the distribution of heat on that 
surface, or by electrical currents excited by the rotation of the earth 
on its axis, contain no provision to meet a systematic variation of 
this nature ; and break down altogether when the facts of the secu- 
lar change are duly apprehended. From^tbe phenomena of a single 
element at a single station, as here presented, we may assure 
ourselves that effects proceeding with so much order and regularity, 
which we cannot ascribe to any other cause than that of the ter- 
restrial magnetism itself, and cannot therefore separate from its other 
manifestations, must find a place in any physical theory which pro^ 
fesses to explain the phenomena of the earth’s magnetism. To learn 
the changes in this and in the other magnetic elements which are 
simultaneously in progress in other parts of the globe, and to appre- 
hend their mutual connexion and the general system of secular 
change which they indicate, it is necessary that the facts should be 
collected in the same manner as at St. Helena, at a great number of 
stations distributed over the earth’s surface, and that they should be 
studied both separately and together. This may indeed appear a 
work of labour ; but it is the most certain, if not the only certain 
mode of arriving at -a correct knowledge of phenomenal laws, when 
the laws of their causation are wholly unknown. In this, as in simi- 
lar studies, however complex the phenomena may appear at the first 
aspect,-*— and it is fully admitted that those of the secular magnetic 
change do appear extremely complex at the first view* — the mind 
soon begins to recognize order amidst apparent irregularity* and 
system amidst incessant variation. The order and regularity with 



76 


which we are impreeaecl at a single station are soon perceived to cha- 
racterize, in an equally remarkable manner, a general systematic 
change taking place connectedly over the whole surface of the globe, 
and which can everywhere be traced to have been continuously in 
operation since the earliest epoch of magnetic observation. To those 
who find pleasure in tracing phenomena of great apparent com- 
plexity to laws of comparative simplicity which appear to embrace 
them all, this study affords its own repayment ; and it is indis- 
pensable towards the acquisition of a knowledge of the laws of 
terrestrial magnetism. By a comparison of the isogonic lines cor- 
responding to different epochs (lines of equal Magnetic Declina- 
tion employed by Halley and since found so useful in generali- 
sation in this branch of the magnetic phenomena), we perceive 
that a secular change of the Declination, almost identical with 
that at St. Helena, has prevailed at the same time over the greater 
part of the southern Atlantic ; and that from the form of the isogonic 
lines in that quarter of the globe (which has undergone very little 
variation in the last 200 years), the regularity of the progression, 
and its persistence in the same direction, is in accordance with that 
general progressive motion from east to west, which magneticians 
have long since recognized as distinguishing the general systematic 
change in the southern hemisphere from that in the northern, which 
takes place in the oj)posite direction ; whilst from the form of the 
isogonic lines in that quarter, we may further anticipate that, at St. 
Helena, the secular change of the Declination will continue to take 
place in the same direction as at present, until the line drawn through 
the conical summits of the isogonic curves shall in its western pro- 
gress pass the geographical meridian of that station.” 

The author then proceeds to the Variations which are found to 
•take place in periods corresponding to a solar year and a solar day ; 
a correspondence which, he remarks, enables us to recognize a phy- 
sical connexion, although we are still uncertain as to the mode of 
operation between cause and effect. A correct* knowledge of the 
phenomena themselves is the surest guide to a correct judgement 
• 'amongst the many theories which have been propounded in anticipa- 
tion of that knowledge ; and I have therefore taken this opportunity 
<tf bringing before the Society a careful analysis of the primary an- 
nual and diurnal variations at St. Helena attributable to solar influ- 



76 


eace» in the heHef that they will he found to place in a very distinct 
light some points which are important to be kept in view in framing 
or in judging of such theories/* For this purpose diagrams were 
exhibited* representing on a large scale the mean diurnal variation 
of the Declination at St. Helena in the different months of the year, 
and the annual variation at each of the twenty -four hours, both de- 
rived from the mean of five years of hourly observation ; the secular 
change having been previously eliminated, these diagrams were re- 
garded by the author as exhibiting what might be considered as 
typical views of the annual and diurnal variations, correct in their 
relations to the mean Decimation in the year, or to the arithmetical 
mean of all the hourly observations in the year, taken as zero. As 
on the first aspect the diurnal phenomena in the several months are 
seen to separate themselves into two groups, having the equinoxes 
as at least approximate epochs of separation, the months in which 
the sun is north of the equator were coloured red, and those in which 
he is south of the equator were coloured blue. 

Having in these diagrams the conjoint representation of two 
distinct classes of phenomena, a diurnal variation in each of the 
months, and an annual variation at each of the hours, the author 
proceeded to treat of each of these variations separately, commencing 
with the annual, which he illustrated by taking the hour of 7 x.m. 
as an example, and (referring to the diagram) showing the order 
and succession of the several months in the annual cycle at that 
hour, which are as follows ; — in April the mean declination is about 
half a minute east of the mean declination in the year ; in May about 
2' east; in June about 2'^ east; in July and August, when the 
sequence is slightly irregular, respectively 2'-l and 2'* 6 east ; in Sep- 
tember the declination is again approaching the mean line, being 
less than Vi east of it; in October it has passed the mean line, being 
about 1'} west of it ; November, December, January and February 
are congregated near the western extremity of the annual range, 
whilst in March we perceive that the declination is again approach- 
ing the mean line, and in April it has passed to the east of the mean 
line, " We have here, then,** the author proceeds, “ in the success- 
ive changes of the declination in the course of the year, the general 
fact of the existence of an annual variation, of which, at the solar hour 
of 7 A.M., selected as an example, or when the sun is five hours east 



77 


of the meridian, the phenomena are such as have been thus cursorily 
described. Were there no annual variation at that hour the different 
months would all have the same mean declinatioHi and the extended 
figure, which in the diagram represents the annual cycle, would 
be concentrated into one point. The annual variation difiers con- 
siderably at the difierent hours ; but it is a general feature amongst 
them that the months on either side of the one solstice are either 
congregated together towards one extremity of the annual range 
at the hour, whilst the months on either side of the opposite sol- 
stice are similarly congregated at the opposite extremity, or the 
months of both solstices are contemporaneously in pretty rapid 
transition from the one extremity to the other. It is this annual 
variation which has been overlooked in the supposition entertained 
by a very eminent authority, that in the vicinity of the equator the 
magnetic direction would be found to be constant at all hours of 
the day and night. If we group together the monthly means of 
each period of six months separated by the equinoxes, we have 
two semiannual mean lines, each differing comparatively very 
slightly from any one of the months of which it is composed, but 
the two differing very greatly from each other, and both differing 
very considerably from the mean diurnal march in the year. If 
the latter line. viz. the mean diurnal march in the year, be projected 
as a straight line, as is done in the zero-line of fig. 1 in the annexed 
woodcut, the semiannual groups take respectively the forms exhibited 
in that figure, tlie continuous line being the semiannual march in the 
half year when the sun is north of the equator, and the dotted line 
the semiannual march when the sun Is south of the equator. It is 
in this form that the phenomena of the annual variation in different 
parts of the globe may be most advantageously compared with each 
other. Fig. 2 represents the analogous phenomena at Toronto in 
43° north, and fig. 3 those at Hobarton in 43° south latitude. The 
semiannual groups at Toronto and Hobarton have been obtained in 
precisely the same manner as those at St. Helena ; the scale is the 
same in the three figures, t. e. *5 of an inch to I'-O of Declination, 
the dotted and continuous lines refer res)}ectively to the same periods 
of the year, and the zero line is in each figure the mean diurnal 
variation in the year at the station. 

** In viewing these three figures, it is scarcely possible to doubt that 



ILLUSTRATIONS OK THE ANNUAL VARIATION OK THE SiAONCTIC BICLlNXTION. 

Black /trtff*— MfJtta SemUnnuia 0uuro»l Variation, March «3 to September ft). 

Voti&i «ne.— Mean Semiannual Diurnal Variation, September M to March SO. 


Fig. L— St. Helena. 









79 


they represent substantially the same phenomenon. The magni- 
tude and inflexions of the curves are not indeed identical, but they 
approach so near to it that we may well suppose the small differ* 
ences to be very minor modifications which will some day receive 
their explanation, It will be remarked that during the hours when 
the sun is above the horizon and the effects are greatest, the corre- 
spondence of the phenomena at the three stations is most striking, 
and that there is no inversion of the phenomena in the opposite Aemi- 
spheres ; in both (as well as at St. Helena, in the tropics), the De- 
clination is easterly of the mean in the forenoon and westerly in the 
afternoon when the sun is north of the equator, and the reverse 
when the sun is south of the equator. The effects are the same at 
the three stations, though iu the one hemisphere the sun being 
north of the equator corresponds to summer, and In the other hemi- 
sphere to winter ; whilst in the tropics this distinction of seasons 
almost ceases to be sensible, and the epochs of maximum and mini- 
mum of temperature do not correspond with either of those of the 
extra-tropical stations. The phenomena thus represented embrace 
above 86” of latitude, presenting not only almost extreme contem- 
poraneous diversities of climate, but also not less remarkable diver- 
sities of absolute dip, declination and magnetic force. 

** No doubt cau, I apprehend, be entertained that the annual 
variation which is here represented, is attributable, primarily, to the 
earth's revolution round the sun in a period of the same duration 
and in an orbit inclined to the equator. But in what way, it may be 
asked, does the sun superimpose upon the earth's magnetism this 
comparatively small but systematic magnetic variation ? The auni- 
larity of effect, amounting almost indeed to identity at the houra 
when the sun is above the horizon of the station, taking place at 
stations where both the climatic and the terrestrial magnetic con- 
ditions are so dissimilar, seems to remove it altogether from those 
physical connexions, which have so often and in so many various 
ways been referred to as affording possible explanations of the mag- 
netic variations. In this cUfficuIty some assistance may perhaps be 
afforded by examining more closely, by means of the St. Helena 
observations, the epochs when the phenomena of one of the semi- 
annual groups passes into the very dissimilar phenomena of the 
other sendannual group. This has been stated to take place 



80 


approtmately at the equinoxes. The approximation, particularly 
at the September equinox, is very distinctly and definitely marked. 
The day of the equinox is the 21st of September; if a mean be 
taken of the diurxial march in the three weeks from the Ist to tlie 
2i8t of September, the luie which represents it scarcely differs 
sensibly at any hour of the twenty-four from the mean line of the pre- 
ceding half-year, taken from the 22nd of March to the 20th of Sep- 
tember ; thus showing that the phenomena of that semiannual group 
are unchanged up to the time of the equinox. If in the same way a 
mean be taken of the diurnal march in the three weeks following the 
21 St of September, the line which represents them shows that the 
passage from tlie phenomena of one semiannual group to those of tlie 
oUier has not only commenced, but that in half the period of three 
weeks, t. e, within eleven days of the equinox, the change has already 
advanced very for towards its completion \ and by the middle of Oc- 
tober it is found to be quite complete, the mean in October retaining 
no trace of those semiannual characterfe which had undergone no 
modification ten days before the equinox." The facts thus stated 
were illustrated by diagrams, 

’‘At the March equinox the commencement of the change is 
equally definite ; no trace of change can be discovered in the mean 
from the let to the 20th of March, when compared with the mean 
of the six months from the 22nd of September to the 20th of March ; 
the change then commences, but from some cause not yet apparent, 
the conversion from the phenomena of the one half-year to those of 
the other is effected less rapidly at this than at the September 
equinox. The mean of the month of April retains the distinct traces 
of the group which it has quitted, and is in feict a month of transition 
between the two groups, but in May the conversion is quite com- 
plete ; the phenomena of that month have no characteristic distin- 
guishable from those of June, July and August. 

From what has been stated in the preceding paragraphs, it will 
be evident that the epochs of the sun’s passage of the equator have a 
very marked influence on the phenomena under consideration, and 
that the influence is the same and produces similar eflfecU whether 
the station itself be north or south of the equator, and however di- 
verse may be its climatic or magnetic conditions. The semiannual 
characteristics continue unchanged up to the days of the respeedye 



81 


equinoxes ; these form the epochs when the transition from the cha- 
racters of the one semiannual group to those of the other commences, 
the transition being completed a very few days after the September 
equinox, but somewhat less rapidly after the March equinox. Like the 
changes in the induced magnetism of ships, which follow immediately 
the changes in the terrestrial magnetism corresponding to the ship's 
altered geographical position, but complete the change only after t«- 
tervah of time of greater or less duration, so the changes which we 
are here considering appear to commence at the equinoxial epochs, 
but to require a greater or less interval of time for their completion," 
The divergence of the semiannual groups at the different hours 
from a mean march in the year has been shown in hgs. 1, 2 and 3 by 
their comparison with the latter projected as straight lines, because 
the accordance of the divergence at the three stations is seen thereby 
in its simplest form. In another diagram the lines thus projected as 
straight lines were exhibited in their true Declination values, and com- 
pared with a Zero-line representing at each station the mean Decli- 
nation in the year. ** In the previous comparison of the annual varia- 
tions at the three stations with each other, it was shown that tliere 
is no inversion, or contrariety, between the phenomena at Toronto and 
Hoborton as representatives of opposite hemispheres, the same semi- 
annual group diverging (during the hours of the day when the cha- 
racters are moat marked) in the same direction at the same hours at 
both stations. But markedly opposite characteristics are shown when 
we compare the divergences of the mean diurnal variation in the 
year from the zero-line at different stations ; these divergences, so 
far from according with each other at the two stations, present a 
strong contrast throughout! the divergence at Toronto being to the 
east at the hours when at Hobarton it is to the west, and vice versd. 
St. Helena, moreover, which agrees with both the other stations in 
the divergences of the semiannual groups, differs from both in those 
of the mean of the whole year. The phenomena of the solar annual 
variation^uperimposed upon those of the solar diurnal variation, — 
and those of the solar diurnal variation itself, — are in this respect 
eontradistinguished by important differences. 

To have completed the view of the solar variations of the Decli- 
nation at St. Helena would have required a notice of the so-called 
irregular disturbances of that element, which are now known to have 



82 


a periodical character dependent on solar hours ; and also of the rt- 
markable cycle >Ybich is found to pervade all the magnetic variations 
depending upon the aun, corresponding in its period and epochs 
with those of the phenomena of the solar spots ; but as both these 
subjects have been recently brought before the Society in separaU^ 
memoirs, the author does not think it necessary to do more than 
merely advert to them on the present occasion/* 


June 1, 1854. 


The Annual General Meeting for the election of Fellows was held 
this (lay. 

The EARL of IlOSSE, President, in the Chair. 


The Statutes respecting the election of Fellows having been read, 
and J. G. Appold, Esq., and John Hogg, Esq. having, with the con- 
sent of the Society, been appointed Scrutators to assist the Secre- 
taries in examining the lists, the votes of the Fellows present were 
collected and the following gentlemen declared duly elected 


George James Allman, M.D. 
Edward William Bray ley. Esq. 
Alexander Bryson, M.D. 

J. Lockhart Clarke, Esq. 
Joseph Dickinson, M.D. 
Ronald Campbell Gunn, Esq. 
Robert Hunt, Esq. 

John Bennet Lawes, Esq. 


Robert Mallet, Esq. 

Charles May, Esq. 

! Capt. Thomas E. L. Moore, R.N. 
i Captain Richard Strachey. 

; Robert Dundas Thomson, M.D. 
j Samuel Charles Whitbread, Esq. 
! William Crawford Williamson, 
! E*q. 


On the motion of Sir Robert Inglis, Bart., seconded by Colonel 
Sabine, the thanks of the Society were given to the Earl of Bosse, 
and the meeting adjourned. 



88 


Jutui 16, 1854. 


The EARL of ROSSE, President, in the Chair. 


The following gentlemen having paid their Fees, were admitted 
into the Society : — 


James Apjohn, M.D. 

Edward William Bray ley, Esq. 
Alexander Bryson. M.D. 

John Bennet Lawes, Esq. 


Charles May, Esq. 

Captain Richard Strachcy. 
Robert Dundas Thomson, M.D. 
Samuel Charles Whitbread, Esq. 


The following gentlemen were elected Foreign Members of the 
Society : — 

Karl Ernst von Baer. 

& 

Michel Ghaslee. 

Friedrich Wohler. 


The following papers were read : — 


L The Bakerian Lecture. — ** On Osmotic Force/^ By 
Professor Graham, V.P.R.S. 

This name was applied to the power by which liquids are im- 
pelled through moist membrane and other porous septa in ex|)eri- 
ments of endosmose and exosmose. It was shown that with a solu- 
tion of salt on one side of the porous septum and pure water on Uie 
other side (the condition of the osmometer of Dutrochet when filled 
with a safine solution and immersed in water), the passage of the 
salt outward is entirely by diffusion, and that a thin membrane does 
not ^sensibly impede tliat molecular process. The movement is con- 
fined to the liquid salt particles, and does not influence the water 
holding them in solution* which is entirely passive ; it requires no 
further explanation. The flow of water inwards, on the other hand, 

VOt. VII, K. 



B4 


affects seuBible masses of fluids and is the only one of the movements 
which can be correctly described as a current. It is osmose, and the 
work of the osmotic force to be discussed. 

As diffneiou is always a double movement — while salt diffuses 
out, a certain quantity of water necessarily diffusing in at the same 
time in exchange— diffusibility might be imagined to be the osmotic 
force, liut the water introduced into the osmometer in this way 
has always a definite relation to the quantity of salt which escapes, 
and can scarcely rise in any case above four or six times the weight 
of salt, while the water entering the osmometer often exceeds the 
salt leaving it, at least one hundred times. Diffusion is therefore 
quite insufficient to account for the water current. 

The theory which refers osmose to capillarity appears to have no 
better foundation. The great inequality of ascension assumed among 
aqueous fluids is found not to exist, when their capillarity is cor- 
rectly observed : and many of the saline solutions which give rise 
to the greatest osmose are undistinguishable in ascension from pure 
water itself. 

Two series of experiments on osmose were described, the first 
series made with the use of porous mineral septa, and the second 
series with animal membrane. The earthenware osmometer con- 
sisted of the porous cylinder employed in voltaic batteries, about 
5 inches in depth, surmounted by an open glass tube 0*6 inch in dia- 
meter, attached to the mouth of the cylinder by means of a cap of 
gutta percha. In conducting an experiment the cylinder was filled 
with any saline solution to the base of the glass tube, and immediately 
placed in a large jar of distilled water ; and as the fluid within the 
instrument rose in the tube, during the experiment, water was added 
to the jar so as to prevent inequality of hydrostatic pressure. The 
rise (or fall) of liquid in the tube was highly uniform, os observed 
from hour to hour, and the experiment was generally terminated in 
five hours. From experiments made on soludona of every variety of 
soluble substance, it appeared that the rise or osmose is quite insig- 
nificant with neutral organic substances in general, such as sugar, 
alcohol, urea, tannin, ; so also with neutxal salts of the earths 
and ordinary metals, and with chlorides of sodium and potassium, 
nitrates of potash and soda and chloride of mercury. A more sen- 
sible but still very moderate osmose is exhibited by hydrocldoric, 



85 


nitric, acetic, sulphurous, citric and tartaric acids. Tfiese ere sur^ 
passed by the stronger mineral acids, such as sulphuric and phos- 
phoric acid and sulphate of potash, which are again exceeded by 
salts of potash and soda possessing either a decided acid or alkaline 
reaction, such as binoxalate of potash, i^hosphate of soda and car- 
bonates of potash and soda. The highly osmotic substances were 
also found to act with most advantage in small proportions, pro- 
ducing in general the largest osmose in the proportion of one-quarter 
per cent, of salt dissolved. Osmose is eminently the phenomenon 
of weak solutions. The same substances are likewise always che- 
mically active bodies, and possess affinities which enable them to 
act upon the material of the earthenware septum. Lime and alu- 
mina were accordingly always found in solution after osmose, and 
the corrosion of the septum appeared to be a necessary condition of 
the flow. Septa of other materials, such as pure carbonate of lime, 
gypsum, compressed charcoal and tanned sole- leather, although not 
deficient in porosity, gave no osmose, apparently because they are 
not acted upon chemically by the saline solutions. Capillarity alone 
was manifestly insufficient to produce the liquid movement, while 
the vis motrh appeared to be chemical action. 

The electrical endosmose of Porrett, which has lately been defined 
with great clearness by Wiedemann, was believed to indicate the 
possession of a peculiar dhemical constitution by water, whUe liquid, 
or at least the capacity to assume that constitution when polarixed 
and acting chemically upon other substances. A large bat variable 
number of atoms of water are associated together to form a liquid 
molecule of water, of which an individual atom of oxygen stands 
apart forming a negative or chlorous radical, while the whole remain- 
ing atoms together are constituted into a positive or basylous radical, 
which last will contain an unbalanced equivalent of hydrogen givtiq^ 
the molecule basicity, as in the great proporrion of organic radicals. 
Now it is this voluminous basylous radical that travels in the elec* 
trical decomposition of pure water, and resolves itself into hydrogeta 
gas and water at the negative pole, eauring t^eoccumularion of water 
observed there, while the oxygen alone proceeds in the opposite direo- 
rion to ^e positive pole. Attention was also called to the fact ^at 
acids, and alkalies, when in solution, are chemically combined with 
much water of hydration, sulphuric acid for instance evolving heat 



86 


when the fiftieth equivalent of water is added to it. In the combi- 
nation of 8uoh bodies, the disposal of the water is generally over- 
looked. Osmose was considered as depending upon such secondary 
results of combination, that is, upon the large number or volumi- 
nous proportions of the water molecules involved in such combina- 
tions. The porous septum is the means of bringing out and render- 
ing visible, both in electrical and ordinary osmose, this liquid move- 
ment attending chemical combinations and decompositions. 

Although the nature and modus opera»c?i of chemical action pro- 
ducing osmose remains still very obscure, considerable light is thrown 
upon it in the application of septa of animal membrane. Ox-bladder 
was found to acquire greatly increased activity, and also to act with 
much greater regularity when first divested of its outer muscular 
coat. Cotton calico also impregnated with liquid albumen and 
afterwards exposed to heat so as to coagulate that substance, was 
sufficiently impervious, and formed excellent septum, resembling 
membrane in every respect. The osmometer was of the usual bulb- 
form, but the membrane was supported by a plate of perforated zinc, 
and the instrument provided with a tube of considerable diameter. 
The diameter of the tube being one-tenth of that of the mouth of the 
bulb or the disc of membrane exposed to the fluids, a rise of liquid in 
the tube, amounting to 100 millimeters, indicated that as much 
water had permeated the membrane and entered the osmometer, os 
would cover the whole surface of the membrane to a depth of one 
millimeter, or one twenty-fifth part of an inch. Such millimeter 
divisions of the tube become degrees of osmose, which are of the 
same value in all instruments. 

Osmose in membrane presented many points of similarity to that 
in earthenware. The membrane is constantly undergoing decompo- 
sition and its osmotic action is exhaustible. Balts and other sub- 
stances, also capable of determining a large osmose, are all chemi- 
cally active substances, while the great mass of neutral organic 
stances and perfectly neutral* monobasic salts of the metals, such as 
chloride of so^um, possess only a low degree of action or are wholly 
inert. The active substances arc also relatively most efficient in 
small proportions. When a solution of the proper kind is used, tlm 
osmose or passage of fluid proceeds with a velocity wholly unprece- 
dented in such experiments. The rise of liquid in the tube with a 



87 


bolutiun containing one-tenth of a per cent, carbonate of potash in 
the osmometer* was 167 degrees, and with 1 per cent, of the same 
salt 206 degrees, in five hours. With another membrane and 
stronger solution, the rise was 863 millimeters* or upwards of 38 
inches* in the same time, and as much water was therefore impelled 
through the membrane as would cover its whole surface to a depth of 
8*6 millimeters or one-third of an inch. The chemical action must be 
dififereut on the substance of the membrane* at its inner and outer 
surfaces* to induce osmose ; and according to the hypothetic view 
which accords best with the phenomena* the action on the two sides 
is not unequal in degree only, but also different in kind. It appears 
as an alkaline action on the albuminous substance of the membrane* 
at the inner surface* and as an acid action on t^e albumen at the 
outer surface. The most general empirical conclusion that can be 
drawn is* that the water always accumulates on the alkaline or basic 
side of the membrane. Hence* with an alkaline salt* such as car- 
bonate or phosphate of soda in the osmometer* and water outside, 
the fiow is inwards. With an acid in the osmometer, on the con- 
trary* the fiow is outw'ards, or there is negative osmose* the liquid 
then falling in the tube. In the last case the water outside is basic 
when compared with the acid within, and the flow is therefoi-e still 
towards the base. The chloride of sodium, chloride of barium* chlo- 
ride of magnesium* and similar neutral salts* are wholly indifferent* or 
appear only to act in a subordinate manner to some other active acid 
or basic substance, which last may be present in the solution or 
membrane only in the most minute quantity. Salts which admit of 
dividing into a basic subsalt and free acid exhibit an osmotic activity 
of the highest order. Such are the acetate and various other salu 
of alumina* iron and chromium, the protochloride of copper and tin, 
chloride of copper* nitrate of lead, 3tc. The acid travels outwards 
by diffusion* superinducing a basic condition of the inner surface of 
the membrane and an acid condition of the outer surface, the favour- 
able condition for a high positive osmose. The bibasic salts of pot- 
ash and soda, again* although strictly neutral in properties, such as 
the sulphate and tartrate of potash* begin to exhibit a positive osmose, 
in consequeuoe, it may be presumed, of their possible resolution into 
an acid supersalt and free alkaline base. 



The following Table exhibits the osmose of substances of all 
classes : — 


Osmose of 1 per cent, solutions in Membrane. 


Oxalic add 

— 

DegreeB. 

148 

Chloride of zinc 

DogrettB. 

54 

Hydrochloric acid (0*1 
j>€r c.) 

_ 

92 1 

Chloride of nickel 

Nitrate of lead 

88 

m to 211 

Terchloride of gold 

— 

54 i 

Nitrate of cadmium 

137 

Bichloride of tm 


46 

Nitrate of uranium 

234 to 458 

Bichloride of platinum... 

-- 

30 

Nitrate of copper 

204 

Chloride of magnesium... 

- 

3 

[ Chloride of copper 

351 

Chloride of sodium 

+ 

2 

Protochloride of tin 

289 

Chloride of ()Otasstum . . . 


18 

Protochloride of iron 

435 

Nitrate of soda 


2 

Chloride of mercury 

121 

Nitrate of silver 


34 

Protonitrate of mercury... 

356 

Sulphate of potash 


21 to 60 

Pernitraie of mercury 

476 

Sulphate of magnesia ... 


14 

Acetate of sesquioxide of 


Chloride of calcium 


20 

ifoii 

194 

Chloride of bariuui 


21 

1 Acetate of alumina 

280 to 393 

Chloride of strontium ... 


26 

Chloride of aluminium ... 

540 

Chloride of cohalt 


26 

Phosphate of soda 

311 

Chloride of manganese... 


34 

Carbonate of potash 

459 


The osmotic actioa of carbonate of potash and other alkaline salts 
is interfered with in an extraordinary manner by the presence of 
chloride of sodium, being reduced almost to nothing by an equal 
proportion of that salt. The moderate positive osmose of sulphate 
of potash is converted into a very sensible negative osmose by the 
presence of the merest trace of a strong acid, while the i>ositive 
osmose of the first- mentioned salt is singularly promoted by a small 
proportion of an alkaline carbonate. The last statement Is illustrated 
by the following observations : — 


Osmose in same membrane. 

Degis 

I per cent, sulphate of potash 21 

+01 per c. carb. potash . . 254 
Same -f- Same 264 

0*1 per cent, carbonate of potash alone 92 

Same 95 



89 


It may i^pear to eome that the chemical character which has 
been aasigned to osmose takes away from the physiological interest 
of the subject^ in so far as the decomposition of the membrane may 
appear to them to be incompatible with vital conditions, and that 
osmotic movement must therefore be confined to dead matter. But 
such apprehensions are, it is believed, groundless, or at all events pre- 
mature. All parts of living structures are allowed to be in a state 
of incessant change, of decomposition and renewal. The decompo. 
sition occurring in a living membrane, while effecting osmotic pro- 
pulsion, may possibly therefore be of a reparable kind. In other re- 
spects chemical osmose appears to be an agency particularly adapted 
to take part in the animal oeconomy. It is seen that osmose is pecu- 
liarly excited by dilute saline solutions, such as the animal juices 
really are, and that the alkaline or acid property which these juices 
always possess is another most favourable condition for their action 
on membrane. The natural excitation of osmose in the substance 
of the membranes or cell- walls dividing such solutions seems there- 
fore almost inevitable. 

In osmose there is further a remarkably direct substitution of one 
of the great forces of nature by its equivalent in another force — the 
conversion, as it may be said, of chemical afiinity into mechanical 
power. Now what is more wanted in the theory of animal functions 
than a mechanism for obtaining motive power from chemical decom- 
position as it occurs in the tissues ? In minute microscopic cells, the 
osmotic movements should attain the highest velocity, being entirely 
dependent upon extent of surface. May it not be hoped, therefore, 
to find in the osmotic injection of fluids the deficient link, which 
certainly intervenes between muscular movement and chemical de- 
composition ? 


II. Examination of the Cerebro-spinal Fluid,^^ By William 
Tuknse, Esq., Scholar of St. Bartholomew'a Hospital. Com- 
municated by Jambs Pa0Bt, F.R.S, Received May 18, 
1864. 

In the Bulletin de TAoad^mie de Mddecine for December 1862, a 
paper is published by M. Bussy, containing an onalyiis by M. Des- 



90 


champs of a fluid » which flowed from the ear of a man who bad 
Bustaiaed a fracture of the base of the cranium. From a comparison 
between the composition of this duid and that given by M. Lassaigne 
as the composition of the cerebro- spinal fluid, M. Bussy arrived at the 
conclusion that they were identical in their origin. In addition, how- 
ever, to the albumen and ordinary saline constituents, M . Deschamps 
found that the fluid obtained from the fractured cranium contained 
a certain constituent which possessed the peculiar property of re- 
ducing the blue protoxide of copper to the state of the yellow sub- 
oxidc. 

As this power of reducing the oxide of copper is possessed also by 
grape-sugar, M. Bussy arrived at the conclusion tliat this fluid con- 
tained a small portion of grape-sugar, and as additional evidence in 
support of this conclusion he quotes the experiments of M. Bernard, 
who, by irritating the base of the encephalon and the origin of the 
vagus nerve, produced an excess of sugar in the secretions. He 
supposes that in the present instance fracture through the base 
of the cranium may have produced some irritation at the origin of 
the pneumogastric, and thus have excited the formation of sugar. 
Such a supposition would have received additional confirmation if at 
the same time an analysis could have been made of the blood, urine, 
or other secretions, so as to determine if sugar was present in those 
fluids — no such analysis however is given. 7'he property of re- 
ducing the oxide of copper was also found by M. Bussy to reside in 
the cerebro-spinal fluid of the Horse and Dog. In none of these 
experiments was he able to induce fermentation. As this reducing 
power is not peculiar to grape-sugar, but is imasessed by other orga- 
nic substances, such as lactine and lactucine, this test alone should 
not be relied on as affording any positive indications of its presence ; 
recourse should therefore be had to other confirmatory experi- 
ments. 

With a view to determine this point, Mr. Paget, in the early 
part of March last^ gave me for examination three separate portions 
of the cerebro-spinal fluid, obtained by puncturing a spina bifida 
in a child, several days intervening between the removal of each 
portion. 

Those removed on the first two occasions were perfectly clear and 
pellucid, giving an alkaline reaction to test-paper, their spec, gray. 



91 


being 1 '006» uu »poutaueou» coagulatiua taking place after standing 
for some time ; that removed on the third occasion had a slightly 
yellow tinge, and a distinct coagulum formed in it on standing. The 
presence of fibrine in this instance was owing doubtless to some 
slight inflammation having been set up, caused by the successive 
puncturings. The three specimens corresponded in the following 
characters ; — 

Ist. No precipitate on applying heat, merely an opalescence being 
produced ; on the addition of a few drops of nitric acid a white flaky 
precipitate subsided. Nitric acid alone, without heat, also caused 
a precipitate. 

The non-precipitation of the albumen, until the addition of the 
acid, was owing to the alkalinity of the. fluid. 

2nd. Boiled with liquor potassa$ a very faint pinkish tint was pro» 
duced; a few white flakes also fell down. 

3rd. Heated in a water*bath with the blue oxide of copper, in a 
few minutes the yellowish red powdery suboxide precipitated. 

This reaction took place both in the original albuminous liquid and 
after the coagulation of the albumen by heat and nitric acid. 

4th. A piece of flannel, saturated with the chloride of tin, was 
well moistened with the fluid, and then heated over a red-hot coal ; 
no brown colour of the flannel was produced, such as occurs when 
grape-sugar is present. (Maumen^'s test.) 

5th. A portion mixed in a test-tube with some German yeast was 
placed for several hours in a warm cupboard, but there was no deve- 
lopment of gas. 

From these experiments it appears that of the various tests em^ 
ployed, only one gave any indication of the presence of grape-sugar, 
that test also being the one which is most liable to deception. The 
lowness of the specifle gravity, in which respect this fluid and that 
analysed by M. Deschamps closely corresponded, would, d priori, 
almost lead to the assumption that no grape-sugar was present. 

The presence of the reducing agent could not in this case depend 
upon any irritation of the origin of the vagus, for the irritation, if 
any, produced by a spina biflda is at the end of the cerebro- spinal 
axis furthest removed from the origin of that nerve. That the ma- 
terial however which effects this reduction is of a very changeable 
nature, was shown by fdlowing a portion of the fluid to stand for 



92 


several days undl putref^tion bad commenced. The fluid was then 
Altered so as to separate the insoluble albuminous flakes, and the 
clear liquid heated in a water^bath with the blue oxide of copper ; 
when, instead of the suboxide being produced, the black anhydrous 
oxide was formed, just as is the case when the blue oxide is heated 
merely with water, thus satisfactorily showing that the reducing 
substance had been destroyed. 

The recent investigations of Virchow* and Buskf have shown 
that substances of a non-nitrogenous nature exist both in the brain 
and spinal cord, but they hold somewhat different opinions respect- 
ing their exact characters ; for whilst the former considers them to 
be cellulose, the latter regards them both in their ** structural, che- 
mical and optical projjerties ** to resemble starch. In conformity 
with these views, it was interesting to determine if any indications 
of the presence of either of these substances could be found in the 
cerebro-spinal fluid ; accordingly a portion of the fluid was evapo- 
rated nearly to dryness and then diviAed into two portions ; to one 
was added an alcoholic solution of iodine and concentrated sulphuric 
acid, when a violet tint was produced, which after a few minutes dis- 
appeared ; but it was also found that this same appearance was pro- 
duced when the acid and iodine solution were mixed together alone, 
the violet colour being evidently owing to the volatilization of a part 
of the iodine and the Evolution of its characteristic violet tint ; to 
the other a solution of iodide of potassium and then nitric acid was 
added, when a brown colour was produced, owing to the liberation 
of the iodine. In neither portion could it be said that any evidence 
of the presence of starch or cellubse was detected. 

A comparative trial was also made between the effects produced 
upon the blue oxide of copper by the cerebro-spinal fluid, solutions 
of grape-sugar, cane-sugar, starch, cellulose, and monnitc, an unfer- 
xoentizablo sugar. These various substances were heated in a water- 
bath for the same length of time, when it was found that whilst the 
grape-sugar effected a reduction immediately, and the cerebro-spinal 
fluid only after the lapse of several minutes, neither the starch, cellu- 
lose, cane-sugar nor mannite effected any reduction at all. 

The power of reducing the blue oxide of copper is not confined to 


* Qusrieily Journal of Mlcroacopioal Science, January 1854. 


t Ibid. 



93 


oon^aitrogenous tubatancee^ for 1 found that if a solution of leucine 
be heated along with it in the usual manner, the reduction is effected 
in about the same length of time> and in the same way as by the 
cerebro-spinal fluid. Tins single experiment is not of itself sufEcient 
evidence that the reducing power in both cases depends upon the 
presence of the same substance. Such an assertion could only of 
course be proved by obtaining irom the cerebro-spinal Euid leucine 
in the crystallized form. A proper quantity of the fluid was not, 
however, left to investigate this point. 

From the above experiments I think, it may be safely asserted that 
the power possessed by the cerebro-spinal fluid of reducing the oxide 
of copper, is not owing to the presence either of grape-sugar or any 
of the allied substances : whether it may depend upon the presence 
of leucine or other modifleations of albumen of a somewhat similar 
nature, or whether it may be due to the presence of a substance be- 
longing to another series, is a point that has yet to be determined. 


Note hy Mr, Paget. — The patient from whom the fluid analysed 
by Mr. Turner was obtained, was a girl hotn of healthy parents. An 
infant cousin had lately died from the same congenital defect as she 
presented. The upper part of the body was well formed, but the 
pelvis and lower limbs were small and nearly powerless. The sac 
containing the fluid was seated over the last lumbar vertebra, pro- 
jecting (as the examination after death showed) through an opening 
between its unclosed arches. It enlarged quickly after birth, but did 
not evidently aflect the child^a health, unless it were connected with 
a very frequent spasmodic action of the muscles closing the glottis, 
which, almost from the time of birth, had produced the peculiar 
“ crowing inspiration/’ or laryngismus stridulus. The fluid was first 
withdrawn when the child was three months old. Neither on this, 
nor on any subsequent occasion, did its removal produce any mani- 
fest effect, although the flaccidity of the emptied sac indicated that 
the pressure upon the spinal cord was greatly diminished. After every 

* Leudne C13 NH), 0^, a weak base, belonging to the same series as glycocine 
and alanine, is generally obtained by the decomposition of albuminous lubstanoes. 
It has been dbtaliied by Scherer from the spleen, and, according to Gregory, has 
been detected as a natural product in the Uver of the Calf. 



94 


evacuation the sac very quickly filled again, notwithstanding pressure 
exercised upon it. 

The examination after death showed that the fluid was collected 
in the expanded tissue of the pia mater, or subarachnoid spaces, 
about the cauda equina. The pia mater presented appearances of 
inflammation long past, as well as of that which had probably been 
the cause of death. The canal in the axis of the spinal cord was 
distinct in its whole length. Commencing, below a large fourth 
ventricle, with a diameter of about one-fourth of a line, it gradually 
widened, till, at the lumbar part of the cord, it had a diameter of a 
line and a half. Its termination at the end of the cord could not be 
traced in the confusion of parts caused by the distension and inflam- 
mation of the membranes. 


III. Oil the Oxidation of Ammonia in the Human Body.^' 
By H. Bence Jones, M.D.j F.R.S., Physician to St. 
George's Hospital. Received June 14, 1854. 

in the last edition of Professor Lehmann's Animal Chemistry, 
vol. ii. p. 863, a very decided opinion is expressed against the con- 
clusion to which I arrived in consequence of some experiments pub- 
lished in the Philosophical IVansactions for 1851. 

I considered it proved that ammonia was partly at least converted 
into nitrous acid in its passage through the body. In opposition to 
this Professor Lehmann states, — 

1st. That the method which I employed must of necessity give a 
reaction resembling that given by nitrous acid ; his words are, ** Es 
ware nun leicht einzusehen dass schwefiige Saure, durch welohe be- 
kanntlich lodwasserstoff zersetzt wird, in die Vorlage iibergeht uad 
so jene venneintliche salpetersaure Reaction bedingt.” 

2ndly. That when nitric acid was added to urine and it was di- 
stilled with phosphoric acid instead of sulphuric acid, no trace of 
blue colour with starch and iodide of potassium could he obtained. 

Das nach Anwendung von Phosphorsaure erhaltene Destillat giebt 
aber auch jene vermeintliche salpetersaure Reaction nicht. ja selbst 
dann nicht, wenn dem Ham vorher absichtlich einige IVopfen 
Salpetersaure zugesetzt worden waren.'* 



95 


It appeared to me undesirable merely to reply to Professor Leh* 
mann» that 1 had expressly stated that the indigo aad protosulphate 
of iron tests were used, and gave as decided proof of the presence of 
nitrous acid in the urine as Pricers test gave ; and that sulphurous 
acid could not have produced the same e£Peot as nitrous acid in these 
tests. It seemed more desirable to repeat the experiments which 
had been made in Professor Lehmann's laboratory on the action of 
sulphurous acid, and on the effect of using phosphoric instead of 
sulphuric acid in the distillation of the urine, 

I was fortunate enough to obtain the assistance of Mr. Malone to 
carry on the experiments continuously from day to day, and through 
the kindness of Dr. Hofmann this was done in the College of Che- 
mistry, 

1st, On the action of sulphurous acid on starch and iodide of 
potassium and very dilute hydrochloric acid. 

In England it is by no means well known that sulphurous acid 
decomposes hydriodic acid. On the contrary, theoretically it sliould 
not liberate iodine, and experimentally not only does it not liberate 
iodine, but it hinders the liberation of iodine und stops the formation 
of the blue colour when Price's test is used and nitrous acid is pre- 
sent ; and If sulphurous acid be added after the blue colour is formed 
it makes it disappear. 

Pure sulphurous acid was prepared, some nitre was fused, and a 
dilute solution was made, and it was tested by Price’s test (starch, 
iodide of potassium and very dilute hydrochloric acid), then the di- 
lute nitre solution immediately gave the deep blue iodide of starch ; 
but when much or little sulphurous acid was added previously to the 
nitre solution, no blue colour at all was produced; and when, 
instead of the nitre solution, much or little sulphurous acid alone 
was added, contrary to the statement of Lehmann, no decomposition 
of the hydriodic acid could be obtained. 

If instead of pure iodide of potassium it was mixed with iodate of 
potassa, an immediate blue colour was of course observed. 1 can 
only suppose that in this way Professor Lehmann obtained the re« 
action which he has attributed wrongly to the action of sulphurous 
acid on hydriodic acid, unless indeed no sulphurous acid at all was 
present and the acidity of the distillate was unneutralized. Dr. Leh- 
mann is however right as well as wrong, in saying that Price’s test 



96 


for nitric acid 'when »ulphitrons acid is present. The test fails, 
not, as he says, because sulphurous acid has the same action as ni- 
trona acid in liberating iodine, bat because it has exactly the oppo- 
site property of hindering the iodide from being set free even when 
nitrous acid in small quantity is present. 

It is possible that in distilling the urine with sulphuric acid, the 
distillation, if carried too far, may give rise to sulphurous acid, and 
that thus Price‘8 teat may fail to detect nitrous acid in the urine. 
Moreover, portions of the distillate may be projected against the 
sides of the hot retort, by which the sulphuric acid acting on the 
organic matter may be decomposed, and minute quantities of sul- 
phurous acid may be liberated. This sulphurous acid, instead of de- 
composing hydriodic acid, causes the reformation of hydriodic acid 
when nitrous acid liberates iodine in Price's test. 

2ndly. Lehmann states that experiments were made by distilling 
urine to which a few drops of nitric acid were added with phosphoric 
acid, and* that then the distillate gave no reaction with Pricers test. 

The following experiments were made with every precaution. 

Anhydrous phosphoric acid was prepared, and it was found to be 
free from nitrous acid. Some healthy urine was taken and some 
pure nitrate of potassa, in tlie proportion of two grains of salt to 
an ounce of fluid, and distilled with phosphoric acid (ten ounces of 
urine, twenty grains of nitre, and one ounce of anhydrous phosphoric 
acid). On concentrating, the neutralized dilute nitrous acid was 
detected by all the teste, namely, the indigo test, the protosulphate 
of iron and Price’s test. 

In a second experiment, five ounces of urine with five grains of 
nitre and half an ounce of anhydrous phosphoric acid, gave nitrous 
acid by all the teats. The distillation was continued until the con- 
tents of the retort were viscid. 

In a third experiment, three ounces of urine with a grain and a half 
of nitre were distilled with three drachms of glacial phosphoric add ; 
the distillate neutralized and evaporated gave no trace of nitrous 
acid; the same urine with the same quantity of nitre and three 
drachms of sulphuric acid, when distilled, gave a distillate, which 
when neutralized and evaporated gave decided evidence of nitrous 
acid. 

In my former paper I showed that by distiUihg with sulphuric 



97 


acid when only one- tenth of a grain of nitre was added to each 
ounce of urine, nitrous acid could be detected. 

From these experiments it appears that distillation with sulphuric 
acid is to be preferred to distillation with phosphoric acid ; but even 
with this last acid, when a grain of nitre is added to an ounce of 
urine, the nitrous acid can be detected. 

I then endeavoured, by using phosphoric instead of sulphuric acid 
in distilling urine passed after a salt of ammonia had been taken 
into the stomach, to detect nitrous acid in the urine. 

Two drachms of muriate of ammonia were taken in seven ounces 
of distilled water. The urine was collected for six hours afterwards, 
Twelve ounces of this urine were distilled with one ounce of phos- 
phoric acid (anhydrous). The distillate, when concentrated, did not 
give any evidence of nitrous acid by Price’s test. 

The same experiment was repeated with no better result. 

In another experiment, sulphuric acid, six drachma to twelve 
ounces of urine, was used instead of phosphoric acid. The distillate 
as soon as it was obtained gave the slightest precipitate with chloride 
of barium insoluble in nitric acid, showing that a trace of sulphuric 
acid was carried over into the receiver. The distillate was made 
alkaline with pure carbonate of soda, evaporated, and nitrous acid 
was immediately detected by the indigo and iron test, as well as by 
Price's test. A portion of the distillate left exposed to the air, on 
the following day had lost the power of liberating iodine. This 
arose from tlie nitrous acid passing into nitric acid. 

Pure nitre gives no colour with starch, iodide of [wtassium and 
dilute hydrochloric acid, but when fused it produces the liberation 
of iodine immediately. If the solution of fused nitre is exposed to 
the air it loses this property, but regains it when the solution is 
evaporated to dryness and refused and again dissolved. 

In another experiment six ounces of urine passed before the mu- 
riate of ammonia was token were distilled with half an ounce of sul- 
phuric acid, the distillate was highly acid, and gave a slight preci- 
pitate with chloride of barium \ it was made slightly alkaline, eva- 
porated to a small residue, and then gave no evidence of nitrous 
add. Then two drachms of muriate of ammonia were taken in seven 
ounces of distilled water, eight ounces of urine passed four hours 
afterwards were distilled with half an ounce of sulphuric acid. The 



m 


diatilkte was fractional ; the first portion gave no colour with starch 
test ; it contained a minote trace of sulphurous acid. The second 
ITortion was highly acid ; it was made slightly alkaline, evaporated 
nearly to dryness, and then gave most positive evidence of nitrous 
acid by Price's test, and also by decolorizing a deep solution of 
indigo. 

Thus before the salt of ammonia was taken no nitrous acid could 
be detected in the urine, whilst after the ammonia nitrous acid was 
proved to be 2)resent, not only by Price's test, but by the indigo test 
also. 

In conclusion, it results from these experiments, — Ist* That in 
Price's test sulphurous acid produces exactly the o2>posite effect to 
nitrous acid, and even hinders nitrous acid from liberating iodine 
from hydriodic acid. 

2 ndly. That phosphoric acid, when mixed with urine containing 
nitre and distilled very low, does liberate nitrous acid ; though when 
used instead of sulphuric acid, it doesWt enable the nitrous acid to 
be detected so readily as when the latter acid is employed. 

Hence the ex2>erimentB performed in Professor Lehmann's labo«- 
ratory by Herr do not iiivalidate Price's test for nitrous acid 

in the way Professor Lehmann supposes; and by again repeating 
some of my former experiments, I still arrive at the conclusion that 
when ammonia is taken into the body nitric acid may be detected 
in the urine, but that the quantity which can be made to a2)pear is 
so small that the most delicate method is required for its detection. 
This however is no proof that a much larger quantity may not be 
lost in the process for obtaining it from the urine. 


• Erdmann’s Journal, vol. Ux. p. 238, 1853. 



99 


IV. the Disintegration of Urinary Calculi by the Lateral 
Disi*uptive Force of the Electrical Discharge/^ fiy Osohgii: 
Robikson, M.Dm Licentiate of the Royal College of Phy- 
sicians of London^ and I/eoturer on Medicine in the New* 
caaile-upon-Tyne College of Practical Science, Commu- 
nicated by Dr. Shaepey^ Sec. R.8. Received June IStb, 
1854 . 

The great mid diversihed powers of electricity have long suggested 
the possibility of its being employed as a means of effecting the de- 
struction of calculi in the human bladder » and thus obviating the 
necessity for the painful and dangerous operation of lithotomy. 
But the attempts hitherto made in this direction have contemplated 
the solution of the stone through electrolytic action rather than its 
disintegration by the mechanical force oi the electrical discharge. 
A moment's reflection will however suffice to convince us that the 
force which shatters a steeple or cleaves an oak, is also capable of 
reducing to fragments the largest urinary concretion. Nor can 1 
imagine any other than the following sources of objection tp the prac- 
ticabilUy of employing this force for the purpose of breaking down 
vesical calculi m Htu, namely, 1. the danger to the living structures 
from the necessity of uting a powerful discharge ; 2. the diffloulty of 
conveying the force to the required spot, or in other words, causing 
the discharge to pass through Uie calculus. The flrst objection is in 
a great measure met by the fact of our being enabled to regulate with 
the utmost precision the degree of intensity of the discharge, and it 
would be almost entirely removed were it possible to apply the dis- 
native force of electricity without any portion of the body being 
included within the circuit traversed by the electriced cumnt. The 
second objection rests upou the mechanical difficulty of bnnging the 
calculus within the direct route of the electrical discharge, but would 
soaroely apply were it demonstrated that the disruptive effects of 
electneity can be obtained without any such direct transmission of 
thecurrexid. 

My own attention was some years since directed to the subject 
by reading an account of the following experiment first performed 
by Mr. Crosse. ** Two platinum wires one- thirtieth of an it^cli 
viiU VII. ^ 



100 


diai&eter were secured to a slip of window glass half an inch wide 
and four inches long* so that they rested upon the flat surfEtce of the 
glass, leamg an interval between their points of one«twentieth of 
an inch* The wires were connected, one with the negative con^ 
duotor of a powerful machine, the other with a ball to receive sparks 
from the prime conductor. On placing the glass in a flat dish filled 
wi^ water and turning the machine, the glass between the points 
soon became fractured, and after 100 revolutions the fracture 
enlarged and two small cracks appeared. After 200 revolutions an 
excavation was formed, but on the side o/^oetVe‘ to that on which 
the wires were tied. After 250 revolutions the glass was completely 
perforated. Many variations of this experiment were made, in all 
of which the same kind of mechanical effect was obtained. Even 
quarts was excavated*.*’ 

It being thus shown that a lateral disruptive action takes place 
within a certain distance of riie seat of discharge, the idea at once 
suggested itself to me, that by using two parallel wires separated at 
their extremities like those in Mr. Crosse’s experiment, and similarly 
connected with an electrical xnachine or Leyden jar, bringing their 
ends in contact with the surface of a calculus, and then allowing a 
series of moderate discharges to take place between the extremities 
of the wires, a disintegrating effect would be produced upon urinary 
calculi of rise same nature as that witnessed in glass and quartz* 
And short of the actual disintegration of a calculus in the bladder 
of a living person, the following experiments will, I trust, be deemed 
conclusive on this point. 

Two copper wires, one^^tweatieth of an inch in diameter, were 
connected, one with the external, the other with the internal suiflsce 
of a Leyden jar, having about 400 square inches of intanud metallic 
coating. These copper wires were soldered to pfatiiiiim wires half 
an inch Imig and one^thirtia^ of an inch in ifiameter. Each wire 
was drawn through a flne gutta peroha ttAe, and rim tubes, having 
first been jdaced p^eotly parallel, wmn warmed and gbnriy pressed 
together so as to aasome somewhat of the appearance of a fiexriile 
boupe; the platmum wires projectiiig beyond the gutta peroha to 

* BsMsribed by Mr* Walker in Cablnel Cyelo|pn&, vri. IL pages 



101 


the exteat of oue^eighth of an inch, and their extremitiee being 
alightlj everted and eeparated from each other hj an interval oio nt 
tenth of an inch. In experimenting, Uxe united gutta percha tubes 
were grasped and the projecting {datinum potnto pressed against the 
surface of the calculus : the jar was then discharged by another 
person> and a series of such discharges thus passed between the free 
extremities of the parallel platinum wires while resting upon the 
surface of the stone. 

With this simple arrangement, fragments a quarter of an inch 
long were broken off dints immersed in water, and the same force 
was applied to urinary calculi with the following results : — 

Exp. 1. June 7th.*-*”A piece of a large liUiic acid calculus was 
|daced in a bladder, nearly filled with water, into which the gutta 
percha bougie containing the wires was then introduced and the 
neck of the bladder tied round the instrument* The bladder ifith 
its contents being placed on a wet board, the projecting platinum 
wires were then kept in contact with the surface of the calculus 
and the jar discharged. On opening the bladder and examining the 
stone, it was found to be broken into numerous fragments by the 
single discharge, 

Exp, 2* — A small phosphatic calculus, very smooth and hard, was 
e3q»eiimented upon in a similar manner* The first five discharges 
produced no perceptible effect, but the sixdi split it into at least 
twenty fragments, and many of these, on being dightly pressed 
between the finger and thumb, readily broke down, 

Exp. 3,-^A very large oxalate of lime or mulbeny calculus with 
projecting tubercles was similarly tested, and the first discharge pro- 
duced a small cavity in the surface to which the wires were ap|>lied, 
separating a oonsidendde quantity of fine sand; but subsequent dis- 
charges did not act so effidently on this very large stone. 

Sxp. 4.-»*On the following day, June 8th, the experiment was 
repeated in the presence of Messrs, Potter, Rayne and Furness, sur- 
geons in Newcastle, and a small calculus, removed a few months 
since by the gentleman last menthmed from ayoung boy, was, after 
a few trials, split through the centre, one«half being reduced to frag« 
ments, and the other exhibiting in its interior a dark«coloured 
nuidsus of Uthio add. 

These experiments appear to demonstrate the practicability of 



102 


applying tht lateral disruptive force of the electrical discharge to the 
disintegratian of calculi in Ihtb bladder. There can be no difidculty 
in bringing tlie end of a gutta percba catheter, conveying two cop* 
per wires, in contact with the surface of a stone in the bladder, and 
a very simple mechanical contrivance will enable the extremities of 
the platinum wires to be protruded when the end of the catheter 
touches the calculus. By employing two wires, one connected with 
the positive, the other with the negative, portion of the jar or ma- 
chine, not only is the intensity of the discharge increased, bat the 
body is also prevented from forming any part of the circuit, and the 
risk of injury thereby materially diminished. The bladder used in 
the above* mentioned experiments was not at all injured, and on re* 
taining a portion of it between the platinum wires so that the dis* 
ciiarge passed tlirough it, no perforation or other destructive clfect 
took place. The gutta pereha tubes, having the projecting platinum 
wires, were placed in the mouth without being in contact with the 
lips, and a discharge sent through th^ wires, but there was no per* 
ceptible shock. When, however, the bladder containing the stone 
rested upon the hand, during the act of disintegration a smart im- 
pulse was felt. 

On the whole, i am of opinion that the electrieai foree applied in 
the manner indicated, will be found quite as efEoient for the disin- 
tegration of calculi in the bladder as the more formidable analogotts 
operation of lithotrity, oooaskmally practised. And, as regards sim- 
plicity and security, tije electrical apparatus certainly appears pre- 
ferable to the instruments used for crushing the stone by ordinary 
mechanical force. 

Communications also were read from Mr. Forreeter, Mr. Huxley, 
Mr. Joule and Prof. Thomson, Dr. Hassall, Dr. Hooker, Dr. Marcet, 
Mr. Brooke, Dr. Sooresby, Sir J. Cw Ross, Mr. Wheatstone, 
Dr. Williamson and Mr, Collins*. 


* Notices of thm wiH appear in suoceediiig Numbsra. 



108 


June 15, 1854. (Continued.) 

The EARL of ROSSE, President, in the Chair. 

The following papers were read : — 

V. The Attraction of Ellipsoids considered generally.” 
By Maxhkw Collins, Esq., B.A. Communicated by 
S. Hunter Christie, Esq., M.A,, Sec. R.S. &c. Received 
April 27, 1854. 

The author commences by etating» that the attraction of an ellip- 
soid on a point on its surface or within it, in a direction perpendi - 
cular to one of its principal planes, is proportional to the distance of 
the attracted point from that plane. 

This general proposition, which is on extension to ellipBoids of 
those already given for spheroids in Airy's Tract “ On the Figure of 
the Earth,” Prop. 8 and 10, and in MacLaurin's 4th Lemma, ** De 
causa physica Fluxus et llefluxus Maris,” he demonstrates— 

1 . In the case when the attracted point is on the surftu^e of the 
ellipsoid. 

The demonstration of this is much like tliose given by the above- 
named authors for the less general case of spheroids, and its final 
step is effected by Cor. 1 to Prop. 87 of the first book of the Prin- 
oipia. 

2. When the attracted point is within the ellipsoid. 

Tl^ demons^don in this case is effected by showing that an 
eiUpsoidal shell, bounded by two similar and similarly placed ellip- 
soidal surfaces, exerts no attraction on a point situated anywhere 
within it or upon its interior surface. 

The foregoing proposition shows that the attraction of an ellip 
aoid on any point on its surface, or within it, can be got at once from 
the attraction of the same ellipsoid on a point placed at the extre- 

voL. vn. M 



104 


mity of an axis, and the author proceeds to show how the latter 
attraction can be found and reduced to elliptic functions. He then 
gtvoB this proposition : 

Let c be the sexniaxes of a homogeneous fluid ellipsoid, and 
A, B, C the forces acting on points at the extremities of «, ft, c, 
caused partly by the ellipsoid's own attractions on its parts, and 
partly by centrifugal forces of revolution about an axis ('ic), or by 
the action of an extraneous force directed towards its centre, and 
varying as tlie distance from the centre, then the ellipsoid will pre- 
serve its form if Aa=:B6=Cc. 

llie last proposition stated in the paper is thus given : let R and r 
be the radii of two homogeneous concentric spheres ; A and a the 
attractions of each on a point on the surface of the other, then 
A a 

— =r— , whatever be the law of attraction as a function of the di- 
ll^ 

stance. 

The demonstration given of the fir^t of these two theorems is very 
concise, and of the second is direct mid elementary. 


VI. “ Researches on the Impregnation of the Ovum in the Am- 
phibia ; and on the Early Stages of Development of the 
Embryo.” (Third Series.) From the MS. papers of the 
late Georos Newport, P.R.S., F.L.S. &c. Selected and 
arranged by Geoaoe Vinbr Ellis, Esq., Professor of 
Anatomy in University College, London. Communicated 
by Sir John Forres, M.D., F.R.S. Received June 6th, 
1854 , 

In this paper the author has given the result of further inquiries 
into the manner by which the frog’s egg is impregnated, and has 
supplied in addition some very interesting facts respecting the de- 
velopment of the embryo during the earlier stages of iU growth. 

In consequence of the difficulties that arose in the course of the 
inquiry, and of the doubts that might be suggested by others from 
the difficulty of manipulating with tlie egg of the Amphibia unless 
certain precautions are taken, the author first describes the apparatus 



105 


used und the mode of proceeding he has employed ; and his results 
show that he has successfully surmounted the obstacles to micro- 
acopic investigation caused by the opacity, the great size, and the 
tendency to movement inherent ui the egg. 

The fact of the impregnation of the ovum through the entrance 
of the spermatozoon into the yelk by its own movement was com- 
municated to the Royal Society in a preceding paper and the ori- 
ginal experiments there referred to as serving to establish the fact, 
are now detailed. lu addition, the circumstances affecting the pas- 
sage of the sperm- body through the thick invc&tiug envelopes are 
considered, and thence it is concluded, that when there is any de- 
ficiency in the usual power, arising from an unhealthy condition of 
the fertilising body, or an increase in the resistance of the yelk mem- 
branes, the spermatozoon is unable to pass through the membranes 
into the yelk and the egg remains unfertilized," 

The two small rounded bodies that appear on the surface of the 
yelk in the interval or chamber between it and the investing mem- 
brane, have been traced from their origin, through their changes, 
till their disappearance after the equatorial division of the yelk. The 
investigations as to the true import of these bodies have not been 
further carried out, in consequence of the untimely death of the 
author ; but his observations have induced him to put forth the fol- 
lowing statement regarding them. viz. '* that they are usually, and 
perhaps invariably, at that part of the yelk at which the head of the 
embryo is afterwards found." 

By following the changes in the segmenting yelk, evidence has 
been obtained of the derivation of different parts of the future being 
from definite segments of the yelk. Thus it has been found, that 
the half of riie yelk on one side of the second or crucial cleft begins 
its subdivisions sooner than the opposite, and that the trunk and 
tail of the embryo are derived from this first subdividing part, whilst 
the head is produced from the other half. 

Having ascertained so much respecting the foundation of different 
parts of the embryo, the author next determined that the axis or 
spine will primarily lie in a line with the first cleft of the yelk, 
though it may afterwards deviate somewhat from that line during 
the growth of the embryo. 

Philosophical Transactions for 1653, p. 271. 

m2 



'106 


Lastly* it has been sought to discover what influence the artiflcial 
application of the spermatozoon to only one side of the egg would 
have upon the direction of the primary cleft of the yelk. The result 
of this inquiry seems, very curiously, to be, that the first cleft of the 
yelk will lie, under the circumstances stated, in a line with the 
point of the egg that has been touched with the impregnating fluid. 


Vfl. Contributions to the Anatomy of the Brachiopoda/^ By 
Thomas H. Huxlky, F.B.S. Received May 18, 1854. 

In the course of the dissection of certain Brachiopoda with which 
I have recently been engaged, I have met with so many peculiarities 
which are unnoticed in the extant and received accounts of their 
anatomy, that although the pressure of other duties prevents me irpm 
attempting to work out the subject With any degree of completeness 
for the present, I yet gladly avail myself of the opportunity of com- 
municating a few of the more important results at which 1 have 
arrived, in the hope that they may find a place in the Proceedings of 
the Royal Society. 

My investigations were principally made upon Ehynchonella psU* 
tacea, for specimens of which I am indebted to Prof. Edward Forbes, 
while Dr. Gray obligingly enabled me to compare them with WaU^ 
heimia flav€8c€n$ and with Lingula, 

I . The Alimentary Canal o/TerehratvJida . — ^Professor Owen, in both 
his earlier and his later memoirs on the anatomy of the Terebratulidaei, 
describes at length the manner in which the intestine, as he states, 
terminates on the right side between the lobes of the mantle. 

On the other hand, Mr. Hancock has declared Kimself unable to 
observe at this point any such anal aperture, and concludes from his 
own observations that the latter is situated on the ventral surface of 
the animal in the middle line, just behind the insertion of the great 
adductor muscle. M. Gratiolet. in a late oommunication to the 
Aeaddmie des Sciences, takes the same view. To get rid of the ob- 
vious dMouIty, that this spot is covered by the shell, and therefore 
that if the anus existed here, there would be no road of esoiqp^e for 
the fsecoB, Mr, Hancock and Mr. Woodward appear to be inclined 



107 


to suppo«e that some cloacal aperture must exist in the neighbour- 
hood of the pedicle. 

The existence of any such aperture, however, has recently been 
denied with great justice by Professor Owen. 

The result of my own repeated examinations of Rhynchonella psiU 
taoea and of Waldheimia flavescens is — 1. that the intestine does not 
terminate on the right side of the mantle as Professor Owen describes 
it, but in the middle line, as Mr. Hancock describes it in Waldheimia, 
while in Rhynchonella it inclines, after curving upwards, to the left 
side ; and 2. that there is no anus at all, the intestine terminating 
in a rounded cascal extremity, which is straight and conical in Wald- 
heimia, curved to the left side and enlarged in Rhynchonella, 

I confess that this result, so exceptional in its character, caused 
me no small surprise, and 1 have taken very great pains to satisfy 
myself of the accuracy of my conclusion ; but notwithstanding the 
strong prejudice to the contrary, to which the known relations of the 
anal aperture in Lingula gave rise, repeated observation has inva- 
riably confirmed it. 

Professor Owen's statement is, that in Rhynchonella {Terehratula) 
psittacea ** the intestine inclines to the right side and makes a slight 
bend forwards before perforating the circumscribing membrane in 
order to terminate between the mantle lobes on that side." — On the 
Anatomy of the Brachiopoda, p. 152. 

1 find, on the contrary (figs. 1 and 2), that the intestine passes 
at first straight downwards in the middle line, as in Waldheimia, but 
instead of terminating in a rounded tapering extremity as in that 
genus, it bends upwards and then curves round to the left side, 
forming a sort of free csscum in the visceral cavity. My reasons for 
believing that it is a free caecum are these ; — in the first place, no 
anal aperture con be detected in the mantle cavity, either on the 
right or left sides, although the small size of the animal allows of 
its being readily examined uninjured, with considerable magnifying 
powers. 

Secondly. If the shell be removed without injuring the animal 
and the visceral cavity be opened from behind by cutting through its 
walls close to the bulb of the pedicle, it is easy not only to see that 
the disposition of the extremity of the intestine is such as 1 have de« 
scribed it to be, but by gentle manipulation with a needle to convince 



lOB 


oneaelf that it i« perfectly unattached. And in connexion with this 
evidence I may remark, that the tissues of the Brachiopods in general 
are anything but delicate ; it would be quite impossible for instance 
to break away the end of the intestine of Lingula from its attach- 
ments without considerable violence. 

Thirdly. If the extremity of the intestine, either in Rhynckondla 


Fig. 1. 



Fig. I. Shyn^k(meUa pHRacM, viewed in profile ; the lobes of the manUe and 
the pedkde being omitted* 

Pig. 2. The iame viewed from behind, the pedide having been cut away. T^e 
left half of the body and the liver are omitted. 

a. mouth ; fi. cesophagus } e. stomach and liver ; 4. intestine ; e. imperforate 
reetum ; /. meaentery \ p. gastro-parietal bands ; A. iUo-parietal bands ; i. superior 
* heart'; A. iaferior * heart’; /. genital bands; m. openings of paUial sinuses i 
«. pyriform vestefe ; o. sac at the base of the arm ; p, ganglion ; p. adductors. 



109 


or in Waldheimia, be cut off und tran»ferred to a glass plate» It may 
resdily be examined microscoxuoally with high powers, and it is then 
easily observable that its fibrous investment is a completely shut 
sac. In Rhynchonella the enlarged csccum is often full of diatoma- 
ceouB shells, but it is impossible to force them out at its end, while 
if any aperture existed they would of course be readily so extruded. 

However anomalous, physiologically, then, this ciecal termination 
of the intestine in a molluscous genus may be, 1 see no way of 
escaping from the conclusion that in the Terebratulida; (at any rate 
in these two species) it really obtains. There are other peculiarities 


Fig. 2. 



about tlie arrangement of the alimentary canal, however, of which I 
can find either no account at all or a very unperfect notice* 

The intestinal canal (figs 1 and 2 b, d, e) has an inner, epithelial, 
and an outer fibrous coat ; the latter expands in the middle line into 
a sort of mesentery, wludi extends from the anterior f^e of tlie 
intestine between the adductors, to the anterior wall of the visceral 



110 


chamber^ and from the upper face of the intestine to the roof of the 
visceral chamber ; while posteriorly it extends beyond the intestine as 
a more or less extensive free edge* I will call this the mesmtery {/)* 

From each side of the intestinal canal, again, the dbrous coat gives 
off two ^ bands/ an upper (^), which stretches from the panetes of the 
stomach to the upper part of the walls of the visceral chamber, 
forming a sort of little sheath for the base of the posterior division 
of the adductor muscle, which I will call the gauiro^parietul hand ; 
and a lower, which passes from the middle of the intestine to the 
parietea, supporting the so-called ' mrich* I will call this the t7to* 
parietal band (A). 

The ilio-parietal and gastro-parietal bands are united by certain 
other ridges upon the fibrous coat of the intestine, from whose point 
of union in the middle line of the stomach posteriorly, a pyriform 
vesicle («) depends. 

The mesentery divides the liver into two lateral lobes, while the 
gastro-parietal bands give rise to the appearance that these are again 
divided into two lobules, one above the other. I am inclined to think 
that these bands are what have been described as ' hepatic arteries,* 
at least there is nothing else that could possibly be confounded with 
an arterial ramification upon the liver. 

This description applies more especially to Rhynchonella and 
WaldJmmia, but the arrangement in lAngula is not essentially cKf- 
ferent. 

2. The Circulatory Byetem of Considerable differ- 

ences of opinion have prevailed among comparative anatomists as to 
the nature and arrangement of the vascular sijrBtem in the Brachio- 
podau A pair of organs, one on each side of the body, have been re- 
cognized as Hearts since the time of Cuvier, who declared these 
hearts in Lingala to be aortic, receiving the blood from the mantle 
and pouring it into the body, the principal arterial trunks being dis- 
tributed into that glandular mass which Cuvier called ovary, but 
which is now known to be the genital gland of either sex. 

Professor Owen in his first memoir follows Cuvier's interpretation, 
stating that in Oriicu/a the pallial veins terminate in the hearts, 
from which arterial branches proceed to the liver and ovary. Pro- 
fessor Owen further adds for the Brachiopoda in general, — 

'' Each heart, fi:>r example, in the Brachiopoda is as simple as in 



Ill 


Ascidia, conaistlng of a single elongated cavity, and not oompoaed of 
a distinct auricle and ventricle a« in the ordinary Bivalves/' and he 
compares the hearts of Brachiopoda to the auricles of Area, Ac. 
(Trans. Zoological Society, vol. i. p. 169). 

In 1843, however, M. Vogt's elaborate memoir on Lingula ap- 
peared, in which the true complex structure of the * heart ' in this 
genus was Erst explained and the plaited 'auricle' discriminated 
from the ' ventricle ;^nd in 1845, Professor Owen, having apparently 
been thus led to re-examine the circulatory organs of Brachiopoda, 
published his * Lettre sur I'appareil de la Circulation chez les Mol- 
lusques dc la Classe des Brachiopodes,* in which he felicitates 
M. Milne-Ed wards on the important confirmation of the views which 
the latter entertains with respect to the lacunar nature of the clrcu- 
laUon in the MoUusca, afforded by the Brachiopoda, and describes 
each heart of the Terebratulidae as consisting of a ventricle and a 
plaited auricle, the pallial veins not terminating in the latter but in 
the general visceral cavity* As tlie Professor does not recal the view 
which he had already taken of the circulation in Orbicula, I presume 
that he considers two opposite types of the circulatory organs to ob- 
tain in the Brachiopoda, the direction of the current being from the 
mantle through the heart towards the body in and from 

the mantle through the body towards the heart in Terehratuh. 

The possibilities of nature are so various that I would not venture, 
without having carefully dissected Orhicula,^no opportunity of doing 
which has yet presented itself, — to call this view in question, but } 
think it seems somewhat improbable. Indeed the structural rela- 
tioufi which I have observed and which are described below, do not 
appear to me to square with any of the received doctrines of Bra- 
chiopod circulation, but 1 offer them simply as fiicts, not being 
prepared at present to present any safe theory on the subject. 

in Waidheimia fia/vescenB there are two ' hearts,* situated as Pro- 
fessor Owen desoriboB them, but so far as I have been able to ob- 
serve, the ventricle cannot be described as an * oval * cavity, inas- 
mueh as it is an elongated cavity bent sharply upon itself, H MtUy^ 
exfunii^d of course this may appear ovaL I have been simihriy 
unable to ijUboover * the delicate inembrane of the venous sinuses/ 
which is Said by Ihrofessor Owen to '^communicate with and 4ose 
the basal apertures of the auricles/* or to perceive that the auricular 



112 


cavity can be correctly described as a closed one, consisting at the 
half next the ventricle, of a beautifully plicated muscular coat in 
addition to the membranous one, but at the other half next the 
venotia sinus of venous membrane only ; the latter might be termed 
the auricular sinus, the former the auricle proper/’ 

I presume that ’ this delicate membrane of the venous sinuses ’ 
is 'what 1 have called the ilio«parietal band, in which the base of the 
auricle is as It were set, like a landing-net in its hoop, but this 
does not close the base of the auricle, the latter opening widely into 
the visceral chamber. 

1 have equally failed in detecting any arteries continued from the 
apices of the ventricles ; and I have the less hesitation in supposing 
1 have not overlooked them, as Mr. Albany Hancock, whose works 
are sufEcient evidence of the value of his testimony, permits me 
to say that he long since arrived at the conclusion that no such arte- 
ries exist. 

What has given rise to the notion oi the existence of these arteries 
appears to me to be this. A narrow band resembling those I have 
already described, is attached in Waldheimia along the base of the 
' ventricle’ and the contiguous outer paiietes of the auricle: infcriorly 
it passes outwards to the sinu4es, and running along their inner 
wall, forms a sort of ridge or axls *^ from which the genitalia, whether 
ovaria or testes, are developed, stretching through their whole length 
and following the ramifications of the sinuses. It is the base of these 
ridges seen through the walls of the sinuses, where they extend 
beyond the genitalia, which have been described as arteries. 

The upper end of the band passes into the sinuses of the upper lobe 
of the mantle, and comes into the same relation with the genitalia 
which they enclose. 

The walls of the auricle in Waldheimia are curiously plaited, but 
1 have been unable, in either auricle or ventricle, to detect any such 
arrangement of muscular fibres as that which has been described. 
The epithelial investment of the auricle, on the other hand, is well 
developed, and in the ventricle the corresponding inner coat isrmsed 
up into rounded villous eminences. 

The ventricle lies in the thickness of the porietes, while the auricle 
floats in the visceral cavity, supported only by the ilio-parietal band. 

* This arrangement is, 1 find, particularly described by M. Gratiolet. 



118 


The former is at first directed downwards, but then bends sharply 
round and passes upwards to terminate by a truncated extremity 
close to the suboesophageal ganglion and bases of the arms. 

Mr. Hancock informs me, that in his dissections he repeatedly 
found an aperture by which the apex of the * ventricle' communi- 
cated with the pallial cavity ; and that, taking this fact in combina- 
tion with tlie absence of any arteries leading from this part, he had 
been tempted to doubt the cardiac nature of these organs altogether, 
and to regard them rather as connected with the efferent genital 
system, had not the difficulty of determining whether these aper- 
tures were artificial or natural prevented his coming to any definite 
conclusion at all. 

Before becoming acquainted with Mr. Hancock's investigations, I 
had repeatedly observed these apertures in RhyncKonelldt but preoc- 
cupied with the received views on the subject, I at once interpreted 
them as artificial. A knowledge of Mr. Hancock's views, however, 
led me to reconsider the question, and I have now so repeatedly 
observed these apertures both in Waldkeimia and in RhynchoneUat 
that 1 am strongly inclined to think they may after all be natural. 

If these organs be hearts, in fact, Rhynchonella is the most remark- 
able of living MoUusks, for it possesses four of them. Two of these 
occupy the same position as in Waldkeimia, close to the origins of the 
calcareous crus (A), while the other two are placed above these, and 
above the mouth, one on each side of the liver (t). It is these latter 
which Professor Owen describes, while he has apparently overlooked 
the other two, at least he says (speaking os I presume of Rhyncho- 
nella) (/. c. p. 148) that the venous sinuses ** enter the two hearts 
or dilated sinuses which are situated exterior to the liver, and in 
T, Ckilmais and T. Sowerhii just within the origins of the internal 
cidcareotts loop." 

The fact is, that while the iHo-parietal bands support two * hearts' 
as usual, the gastro-parietal bands are in relation with two others. 
The base of the * auricle * of the latter opens into the re-entering 
angle formed by the gastro-parietal band with the parietes, while 
its apex is directed backwards to join the ventricle, which passes 
downwards and btmkwards along the posterior edge of the posterior 
division of the adductor muscle. 

The auricles in RhynckoneUa are far smaller, both actually and 



U4 


proportiottally, then in Woldheinm. They exhibit only a few longi* 
tudinal folds, and not only present the same deficiency of muscular 
fibres as those of Waldheimiat but are so tied by the bands which 
support them that it is difficult to conceive how muscular fibres, even 
if they existed, could act. The ‘ventricles' in like manner lie ob- 
liquely in the parietes of the body, and simply present villous emi- 
nences on their inner surface, which has a yellowish colour. 

All these ‘hearts' exhibit the same curious relation with the geni- 
talia in Rhynchonella as in Waldheimia ; that is to say, a ‘ genital 
band ' (/) proceeds from the base of the * ventricle' and becomes the 
axis of the curiously reticulated genital organ. But in Rhynchonella 
the genital bands of the upper genitalia come from their own 
* hearts.* 

'Fhc arrangement of the genitalia in Rhynchonella is very remark- 
able. The sinuses have the same arrangement in each lobe of the 
mantle. The single trunk formed by the union of the principal 
branches in each lobe opens into tliU inner and anterior angle of a 
large semilunar sinus which surrounds the bases of the adductors, 
and opens into the visceral cavity. The floor of this great sinus is 
marked out into meshes by the reticulated genital band, and from 
the centre of each mesh a flat partition passes, uniting the two walls 
of the sinus, and breaking it up into irregular partial channels. 

There are the same anastomosing bands uniting the gastro-pa- 
rietal and ilio-parietal bands on the stomach in Rhynchonella as in 
Waldheimia, and a pyriform vesicle of the same nature, but I did not 
observe in Rhynchonella those accessory vesicles upon the origins of 
genital bands, which I observed once or twice in Waldheimia, 

I could find no truce of arteries terminating the elongated, ovoid 
and nearly straight ‘ ventricles* of Rhynchonella ; their ends appeared 
truncated, and as I have already said, repeatedly presented a distinct 
external aperture. 

Such appear to me to be the facts respecting the structure of the 
so-cadled hearts in the TerehratuUdm ; what I believe to be an import- 
ant port of their peripheral circulatory system, has not hiriierto, so 
far as I am aware, received any notice. 

In Waldheimia the membranous walls of the body, the parieto-ih- 
testinal bands and the mantle, present a very peculiar structure ; 
they consist of an outer and an inner epithelial layer, of two corre- 



116 


i^puadiug fibrous layers, and between them of a reticulated tissue, 
which makes up the principal thickness of the layer, and in which 
the nerves and ^at sinuses are imbedded. 

The trabeculse of this reticulated tissue contain granules and cell- 
like bodies, and I imagined them at first to represent a fibro-cellular 
network, the interspaces of which I conceived were very probably 
sinuses. Sheaths of this tissue were particularly conspicuous along 
the nerves. On examining the arms, however, 1 found that the oblique 
markings, which liave given rise to the supposition that they are 
surrounded by muscular bands, proceeded from trabeculce of a simi- 
lar structure, which took a curved course from a canal which lies at 
the base of the cirri (not the great canal of the arms, of course) 
round the outer convexity of the arm, and terminated by breaking 
up into a network. These trabecultc, however, were not solid but 
hollow, and the interspaces between them were solid. The network 
into which they broke up was formed by distinct canals, and then, 
after uniting with two or three straight narrow canals which ran 
along the outer convexity of the arm close to its junction with the 
interbrachiol fold, appeared to became connected with a similar 
system of reticulated canals which occupied the thickness of that 
fold. 

It was the examination of the interbrachiol fold, in &ct, which 
first convinced me that these reticulated trabecidas were canals ; for 
it is perfectly clear that vessels or channels of some kind must sup- 
ply the proportionally enormous mass of the united arms with their 
nutritive material, and it is so easy to make thin sections of this part, 
that 1 can say quite definitely that no other system of canals than 
these exists in this locality. 

The facts, titien, with regard to the real or supposed circulatory 
organs of the Terebratulid<B, ore simply these : — 

1. There ore two or four organs (hearts), composed each of a free 
funnel-shaped portion with plaited walls, opening widely into the 
visceral cavity at one end, and at the other connected by a constricted 
neck, with narrower, oval or bent, fiattened cavities, engaged in the 
substance of the parietes. The existenpe of muscular fibres in either 
of these is very doubtful. It is certain that no arteries are derived 
from the apex of the so-called ventricle, but whether this naturally 
opens externally or not is a point yet to be decided. 



116 


2, There is a system of ramihod perijjberal vessels. 

3, I'liere are one or more pyriform vesicles. 

4, There are the large ^sinuses* of the mantle, and the Wisceral 
cavity' into which they open. 

To determine in what way these parts are connected and what 
functions should be ascribed to each, it appears to me that much 
further research is required. 

Nervous System of TerebratuUda:, — Professor Owen describes and 
figures the central part of this system as a ring surrounding the oral 
aperture, its Inferior portion being constituted by a mere commis- 
sural band. 

M. Oratioiet, however, states with justiee that the inferior side of 
this collar is the thicker, and 1 find both in Rhynchonella and in 
Waldheimia that it constitutes, in fact, a distinct oblong ganglion, 
of a brownish colour by reflected light. From its extremities com- 
missural branches pass round the mouth, while other cords are 
distributed to the arms, to the superior and inferior pallial lobes, 
and to the so-called hearts. The nerves are marked by fine and 
distinct lougitudinal striations, and can be traced to the margins of 
the pallial lobes, where they become lost among the muscular fibres 
of the free edges of the mantle. 

S/ruc/wre of the Arms, — I have not been able to convince myself 
of the existence of that spiral arrangement of the muscular fibres of 
the arms which has been described in Rhynchonella and Waldheimia, 
I have found the wjsJl of the hollow cylinder of the arm to be con- 
stituted (1) externally, by an epithelium, within which lie (2) the 
reticulated canals, which have been already described ; (3) by a de- 
licate layer of longitudinal or more oblique and transverse fibres, 
which ore probably muscular, and (4) internally by a granular 
epithelial layer. 

In Rhynchonella the bases of the arms are terminated by two con- 
siderable sacs, which project upwards into the visceral cavity. Have 
these the function of distending and so straightening the spindly 
coiled, very fiexible arms of this species ? 

Affinities of the Brachiopoia, — All that I have seen of the struc- 
ture of these animals leads me to appreciate more and more highly 
the value of Mr. Hancock's suggestion, that the affinities of the 
Brachiopoda are witli the Polyaoa. As in the Pol} xoa, the flexure of 



117 


the inteistine is neural, and they take a very natural poaition among 
the neural moUusks between the Polyzoa on the one hand, and the 
Lamelllbranchs and Pteropoda on the other. 

The arms of the Brachiopoda may be compared with those of tlic 
Lophophore Polyzoa, and if it turns out that the so-called hearts 
are not such organs, one difference will be removed , 

In conclusion, 1 may repeat what I have elsewhere adverted to, 
that though the difference between the cell of a Polyzoon and the 
shell of a Terebratula appears wide enough, yet the resemblance be- 
tween the latter with its muscles and the Avicularium of a Polyzoon, 
is exceedingly close and striking. 


VIIL An Inquiry into some of the circumstances and prin- 
ciples which regulate the production of Pictures on the 
lletina of the Human Eye, with their measure of endurance, 
their Colours andChanges.” — Part II. By tbellev. Wini-iAM 
ScoRESHY, D.D., P.R.S., Corresp. Inst, of France, &c. 
Received May 31, 1854. 

This second part of the author's inquiries concerning phenomena 
in optical spectra, embraced the results in respect of colour in the 
images impressed on the retina, as derived simply from the influence 
of light. 

The optical spectra from white, grey, or black Spake objects under 
faint illumination, or of ordinary windows or apertures transmitting 
low degrees of light, were usually found to be without colour. But 
ordinary daylight, and, much more, the light &om bright sunshine 
(as is well known), yield chromatic spectra of vivid or brilliant hues. 
By viewing with slightly closed eyes, the pictures impressed on the 
retina by a few seconds’ steady gazing at some fixed point of an 
illuminated object, and noting the various effects, disappearances and 
changes, a considerable number of characteristic phenomena were 
elicited, and the effects of a variety of modifying circumstances satis- 
factorily determined. The most prevailing influences in modifying 
the phenomena — whatever other causes might tend to the produc- 
tion of variation in the colours — were found to be referable to differ- 



118 


ences in the degree of intensity of the external lights in the extent 
of time occupied in gazing at the illuminated object, in the quanti^ 
of light penetrating the chamber of the eye whilst examining the 
spectra, and in the normal condition of the eye itself. Hiese, with 
other modifying circumstances, had been somewhat elaborately in- 
vestigated* 

Different degrees of light, whether reflected from white objects, 
or transmitted by colourless glass, had obviously the tendency to 
yield differences in the colours of the primarily developed pictures 
on the retina, with corresponding varieties in the nature and number 
of the subsequent changes. Thus the viewing for a few seconds of 
an aperture in a window the size of a pane of glass, whilst all the 
rest was covered with a thick brown-paper screen, gave, with a low 
degree of daylight, transparent pictures of a dingy orange, olive, yel- 
low-grey or bluish black tint, changing, most usually, into a rusty- 
tinted blackish spectrum, and disappearing, for the most part, in a 
minute of time or less. From meMum degrees of daylight, the pri- 
mary pictures embraced a considerable variety of colours, such as 
crimson-pink, purple-pink, violet, purple, indigo, blue,-— the blue 
being the highest in the scale of intensity, llie most marked 
changes, commencing with blue, were usually from blue to red, or 

mmson, olive, black fading into blackish grey. In certain cases 
i^pid and evanescent glances were had of several intermediate colours* 
'JThe general photochromatic effects of the higher degrees of light, 
such as from a clear sky in full sunshine, were far more uniform 
than those from inferior light The spectrum first elicited, even 
after viewing a window or window-aperture for three or four seconds 
only, was almost always green, with the character of illuminated 
transparency ; the shades of colour however varied with the inten- 
sity of the impression. The picture always appeared within four 
or five seconds after closing the eyes, and when the light had been 
strong and the gazing continued for a quarter of a minute or more, 
the picture would burst out almost instantly. The restoration of 
the picture in new colours, after the vanishing, had very much the 
character and appearance of the dissolving views effected by the magic 
lanthom. The frame of the window or aperture, and the cross- 
bars, were always pictured in colours different from those of the 
panes, besides a fine marginal line of another colour dividing the 



119 


glass and the frames, lliese consequentiai colours t constitute, as is 
well known, a remarkable feature in the phenomena. They have 
generally a certain complementary relation, or tendency to such, to 
the colours of the primary picture. Thus in the clear green or blue 
spectrum of a window, derived from strong illumination, the re- 
mainder of the field of the eye will generally, in the first instance, 
be covered with a ground of glowing crimson, with cross-bars simi- 
lar, and purple edgings ; and when the picture changes to crimson 
or red, the antagonistic tint will also change, perhaps to purple, or 
orange or brown, 'fhe original spectra were found to fade away at 
intervals, often of tolerable equality, such as of eight or nine seconds, 
disappearing perhaps for two or three seconds, and then reappearing 
under, generally, some change of shade or tint, through an extent of 
very numerous repetitions. The changes of colour from the bright 
or emerald green, as very frequently traced, went rapidly through 
yellow-green, yellow, orange,red, scarlet, crimson and brown, or olive. 
And this series, it is observable, is particularly accordant, in respect 
to the principal or fundamental colours, with that of the prismatic 
spectrum from green to yellow, orange and red. These visual photo- 
graphs, besides having the sharpest definition, and often the most 
brilliant illuminated colours, were found to possess, under strong 
intensities of impression, a remarkable degree of permanency— 
tending sometimes to endurance for an hour or longer after the act 
of gazing. 

Investigations on the relation of the photochromfitic developments 
to the time of gazing, gave results in many respects corresponding 
with those derived from differences in the degree of external light. 
Thus the higher colours of the spectral series elicited by strong light, 
could, within certain limits, be also developed by more continuous 
gazing with inferior light ; so that the pink-coloured spectrum de- 
rived from ten to twenty seconds* gazing in low degrees of light, 
could be elicited by a single glance under bright sunshine. Hie 
results, therefore, were clearly in relation to the intensity of the im- 
pression ; and, taken in the form of a general proposition, we shall 
not be far wrong, perhaps, in considering the intensity of impression 
as the product of the time of gazing into the relative quantity of 
light admitted by the aperture. 

The relation of the colours primarily elicited to the intensity of 
voi, VII. N 



120 


the impression, yielded (comparatively and roughly taken) the fol- 
lowing scries, — crimson -pink, purple-pink, purple, blue, green, the 
latter being the produce of the highest intensity tried. 

As in the foregoing researches, the relative degrees of light were 
but broadly assumed, whilst the comparative experiments comprised 
a variety of differences affecting the photoohromatic results, 
another series of experiments on the simple effects of degrees of 
light was instituted, in which all these other differences were elimi- 
nated. In this scries the quantity of light woe varied by partial or 
sectional screens of glass, or other transparent or semitransparent 
substances. The results were particularly satisfactory, — different 
tints or shades of colour being obtained by the same view and in the 
same spectrum of a window- aperture, when different thicknesses of 
window glass were placed in the several sections (six in number) into 
which the aperture was divided, 

A beautiful example of the chromatic effects of partial and varied 
screening of light on the optical spectrum elicited, was incidentally 
obtained by viewing an aperture in the clouds, when the sky was 
otherwise densely covered. After gaxing for a few seconds on the 
middle of this aperture, the spectrum, as viewed with gently closed 
eyes, exhibited a singular variety of the richest tints according to the 
.difi^nces in the light screened off by the edges of the cloud and 
by certain little patches within the aperture. The spectrum resem* 
bled the variegation and richness of colouring as elicited in certain 
transparent or semitransparent substances when examined by polar- 
ixed light. 

The experiments on binocular and multiple spectra, as described 
in Part I. of the author's paper, being repeated under degrees of 
light adequate for yielding colour, gave pictures, in many cases, of 
much interest and beauty. The multiple spectra, however, which 
proved the most strikingly beautiful, were derived from the sun, 
which was viewed tndirecily, and on occasions, neat setting, in winter, 
when the intensity of its light was subdued bypassing through 
a dense condition of atmosphere. Under such ciroumstanoes. images, 
sometiines in 100 to 150 repetitions, were impressed on the retina 
by rapid glances at the sky immediately around the sun. These were 
taken by quick movements of the head, winking intermediately, at 
the T^te of 60 to 1 20 impressions in the minute ; and the result. 



121 


when viewed with closed eyes, presented a splendid tpectaole like a 
cluster of coloured stars, or rather of round planetary discs, brilliant 
in green, yellow, orange, red, crimson and purple ! 

Besides the experiments thus for described, in which the spectral 
images were viewed, for the most part, with gently closed eyes kept 
steadily in the direction in which the objects were gazed on, — the 
differences, which were often very remarkable, produced by alter- 
ations in the quantity of light admitted into the chamber of the eye 
whilst the image was viewed, were also investigated. Sometimes 
the smallest change in the light thus transmitted was found to niter 
greatly the character of the spectrum. In certain cases, the com- 
pressing of the eyelids, or the mere passing of the hands betwixt the 
eyes and the light, would serve to change a negative picture into a 
positive, or the colours, as viewed in the usual way, into their com- 
plementary tints. 

The paper concludes with a considerable series of deductions, ap- 
plications and general results. — 1. As to the elucidation yielded by 
these ocular spectra, of the theory of vision. — 2. Of the principles of 
binocular and simple vision. — 3. Of the action of the retina for the 
obliterating of impressed images, and the recovery of a normal con- 
dition. — 4. Of the nature of certain disturbing and dazzling effects 
of vision by strong light. — 5. Of the phenomena of certain spectra), 
illusions. — 6. As to the practical me of the process of examining the 
ocular spectra, for the determination of quantities of light relatively 
intei’cepted by different portions or thicknesses of glass or other trans- 
parent media.— -7. For assisting in the determination of the relative 
degrees of illuminatian of lamps> candles, &c., and of quantities of 
light reflected from opake objects. — 8. For aiding in the selection 
and harmonizing of colours in ornamental and decorative depart- 
ments of art. — 9. For the examination of the condition of the inte- 
rior of the eyes in certain states of disease. The author having had 
the opportunity of trying this pi^cess in case of amaurosis, found 
that it afforded a perfect picture of defects in the surface of the re- 
tina of the eyes separately, when there was no visible defect, and 
when the patient had no other perception of a diseased eye, or patch 
on the retinal surface, except the partial distortion or interruption 
of vision. Founded on this, the author suggests a plan of scatome* 
irical examination of retinal defects, by which not only the accurate 

N 2 



122 


form and relatira proportions of diseased patebes on the retina may 
be determined, but their actual dimensions may probably be de- 
duced. 


IX. On the frequent occurrence of Indigo in Human Urine, 
and on its Chemical, Physiological and Pathological 
Relations.^^ By Arthur Hill Hassall, M.D., Member 
of the Uoyal College of Physicians, Physician to the Royal 
Free Hospital, See, Communicated by Professor Sharpry, 
Sec. R.8. Received June 10, 1854. 

The present communication embraces some further observations 
and experiments on the occurrence of indigo in human urine. 
From these it appears that the presence of that substance is even 
more common than the author was led to anticipate from hU first 
inquiries, the results of which were communicated to the Society in 
June last 

The author furnishes additional proofs of the blue colouring matter 
in question being really indigo, by converting it into isatine and 
aniline ; for this purpose it was necessary to obtain the pigment in 
considerable quantity. 

Contrasting its chemical and physiological relations with hasma- 
tine and urine pigment, he shows that indigo is closely allied in its 
nature and origin to those substances, and he considers that when 
indigo is met with in urine in considerable amount, it forms a vehicle 
for the elimination of any excess nf carbon contained in the system. 
This view is borne out by the important fact, that the greater 
number of cases in which indigo has been observed to be developed 
in the urine in large amount have been cases of extensive tubercular 
disease of the lungs, and in which the decarbonizing functions of 
those organs are greatly impaired. 



128 


X. ** On the Effect of the Pressure of the Atmosphere on the 
Mean Level of the Ocean/^ By Captain Sir Jambs Clark 
Ross, B.N., F.R.S. Received June 15, 1854. 

l*he author states that» iu September 1848, Her Majesty's ships 
Enterprise and Investigator having anchored in the harbour of Port 
Leopold in lat. 74^ N. and long. 91° W., a heavy pack of ice was 
driven down upon and completely closed the harbour's mouth, thus 
effectually preventing their egress, and compelling them there to 
pass the winter of 1848-49, It was during that period that the 
series of observations here presented to the Royal Society was ob- 
tained ; and, as the observations were made under peculiarly favor- 
able circumstances, the author considers they will throw some light 
on tlic movements of the tides, and on some of the causes of their 
apparent irregularities. 

Soon after the harbour had been completely frozen over, a very 
heavy pressure from the main pack forced the newly- formed sheet 
of ice, which covered the bay, far up towards its head, carrying 
the ships with it into such shallow water that at low spring- tides 
their keels sometimes rested on the ground. Under these circum- 
stances the movements of the tides became to the author an object 
of great anxiety, and consequently of careful observation, in order 
to ascertain the amount of irregularities to which they were liable 
in that particular locality. 

The first few days' observations evidenced much larger differences 
in the elevation or depression of successive high or low- waters than 
could be accounted for by any of the generally received causes of 
disturbance ; and the author was at once led to connect them with 
changes of the pressure of the atmosphere, from perceiving that on 
the days of great atmospheric pressure high-water was not so high 
os it ought to have been, and low-water was lower than its proper 
height; and that the reverse took place on the days of smaller 
pressure. 

As it was found that the usual method of determining the mean 
level of the sea, by taking the mean of successive high- and low- 
waters, was inadequate to the detection of small quantities arising 
from a change in the pressure, a system of observation w'as adopted 



124 


different from that heretofore practised, in order to determine the 
mean level of the sea on each day. 

In the first instance, simultaneous observations of the height of 
the tide and of the mercury in the barometer were made every 
quarter of an hour throughout the twenty- four hours. From these 
it was found that the mean level of the sea for each day could be 
determined with great accuracy, and that the variation in the daily 
mean level and in the mean pressure of the atmosphere followed 
each other in a remarkal)le manner, so that a rise in the former cor- 
res landed to a diminution in the latter. Subsequently however 
hourly observations were adopted. 

The peculiar advantages of the position of the ships at Port Leo- 
pold for making tidal observations are stated to have consisted in : — 

1. The great width of the entrance of the harbour admitting 
the free ingress and egress of the water, combined with the large 
field of ice which covered the whole of the bay, completely subduing 
every undulation of the water. * 

2. The steady movement of the immense platform of ice, rising 
and falling with such singular regularity and precision as to admit 
the reading off the marks of the tide-pole with the greatest exactneass, 
even to the tenth of an inch. 

3. Tlie shallowness of the water and the evenness and solidity 
of the clay bottom admitting the fixture of the tide-pole with im- 
moveable firmness. 

4. The whole surface of the sea in the neighbourhood bang, for 
the greater part of the time, covered by a sheet of ice, preventing 
those irregularities which occur in other localities from the violence 
of the wind raising or depressing the sea in as many different de- 
grees as it varied in strength or duration. 

Fc^ fixing the tide-pole for the "Enterprize" a hole 2 feet square 
was Itet through the icy platform, and a strong pole, nearly 40 feet 
long, was passed through it and driven firmly down several feet into 
tiie clay, being fixed by heavy iron weights, which also rested on 
the clay and prevented any movement of the pole. It was placed in 
about 21 feet depth of water at the time of mean level of the sea. 
Another such tide-pole was, in a like memner, fixed through a hole 
in the ice close to the ‘"Investigator," for the sake of reference and 
comparison. 





Hourly observations of the height of the tide and of the barometer 
were commenced on the l»t of November, and were continued by 
the officers of each ship throughout the whole of the nine following 
months to the end of July. After forty- seven days of observation 
an interruption in one of the series occurred in consequence of the 
tide-pole of the Enterprize'^ having been drawn up by the ice, to 
the under part of which it had become frozen. The amount of dis- 
placement of the pole was easily determined by a comparison with 
that of the ** Investigator/' but several days elapsed before it could 
be satisfactorily fixed at the same point in which it had been origi- 
nally. The observations of these forty-seven days arc those which 
are given in the paj>er, and their discussion is the immediate object 
of the communication. 

It is stated that subsequent observations seem to show that, from 
the time of the interruption to the middle of July, there was a pro- 
gressive elevation of the mean level of the sea, which, although of 
small amount, was sufficiently evident from month to mouth to 
render the subdivision of the series desirable, in order that the indi- 
vidual observations of each separate division should be strictly com- 
parable. 

The height of the sea and the corresponding height of the mer- 
cury in the barometer, at every hour in each day, from the 1st No- 
vember to the 18th December 1848 are given in tables. In these 
the arithmetic mean of the hourly heights of the sea for each day is 
taken as the mean level of the sea for that day, and the mean of 
the hourly heights of the barometer is taken as the corresponding 
height of the barometer. These mean levels and corresponding 
mean barometric heights are given in another two-column table, 
arranged in the order of the days of observation ; and in a third 
table tliese are arranged in the order of the heights of the barometer 
with the corresponding mean levels, without regard to the d^s of 
observation, for the purpose of showing the dependence which the 
latter have on the former. 

On these tables the author makes the following remarks. The 
forty-seven days of hourly observations give for the mean height of 
the barometer 29*874 inches, and of the mark of the mean level of 
the sea 21 feet 0*21 in. 



126 


“d of oonrenK«ding l«irel 20 bet 8-4 inch. 

«»««»PO'"«»>8 >«»•> 21 »•< ‘»eb. 

Dlff. -f 0-668 Die -9*0 

Thus a difference of pressure equal to 0*6C8 inch produced a didfer- 
ence of 9 inches in the mean level of the sea. As the ratio of 9 to 
*668 is 13*467 to 1, the author considers that the effect of the pres- 
sure of the atmosphere on the level of the sea is 13*467 times as 
great as the effect it produces on the mercury in the barometer, or 
very nearly in the inverse ratio of the specific gravities of sea- water 
and mercury. He however states that this remarkable coincidence 
must be considered in a great measure accidental, for if a greater 
number of days* observation be taken in order to deduce the mean 
greatest and mean least pressure, and the corresponding mean levels, 
a different result will be obtained. From these observations however 
he considers that he has been enabled to deduce results which plainly 
point to the law which governs the efifdct of the pressure of the atmo- 
sphere on the mean level of the sea, and may be encouraged to 
pursue the investigation through a more extended series of observa- 
tions, in order to arrive at the most accurate conclusion that the ob- 
served facts may justify. 

In conclusion a formula is given for determining the correct height 
of the tide, or of the mean level of the sea : — 

Let L denote the correct height of the tide, or of the mean level 
of the sea ; 

B the mean pressure of the atmosphere ; 

X the observed height of the tide, or of the mean level of the 
sea; 

)3 the corresponding height of the barotneter ; 

D the ratio of the specific gravity of mercury to that of sea- 
water : 

then L=X-h(^-B)D. 

Examples are given of the application of this formula. 



127 


XL the Thermal Effects of Fluids in Motion/^ — No. 11. 
By J. P. JouLB^ Esq., F.E.S. and Professor W, Thomson, 
F*B.S. Received June 15, 1854. 

llie first experiments described in this paper show that the ano- 
malies exhibited in the last table of experiments, in the paper pre- 
ceding it*, are due to fluctuations of temperature in the issuing steam 
consequent on a change of the pressure with which the entering air is 
forced into the plug. It appears from these experiments, that when 
a considerable alteration is suddenly made in the pressure of the en- 
tering stream, the issuing stream experiences remarkable successions 
of augmentations and diminutions of temperature, which are some- 
times perceptible for half an hour after the pressure of the entering 
stream has ceased to vary. 

Several series of experiments arc next described in which air is 
forced (by means of the large pump and other apparatus described 
in the first paper) through a plug of cotton wool, or unspun silk 
pressed together, at pressures varying in their excess above the 
atmospheric pressure, from five or six up to fifty or sixty pounds on 
the square inch. By these it appears that tlio cooling effect which 
the air, as found in the authors' previous experiments, always ex- 
periences in passing through the porous plug, varies proportionally 
to the excess of the pressure of the air on entering the plug above 
that with which it is allowed to escape. Seven series of experi- 
ments, in each of which the air entered the plug at a temperature of 
about 16® Cent., gave a mean cooling effect of about *0175® Cent., 
per pound on the square inch, or *27® Cent, per atmosphere, of dif- 
ference of pressure. Experiments made at lower and at higher tem- 
peratures showed that the cooUng effect is very sensibly less for 
high tlxah for low temperatures, but have not yet led to sufficiently 
exact results at other temperatures than that stated (16® Cent.) to 
indicate the law according to which it varies with the temperature. 

Experimentii on carbonic acid at different temperatures are also 
de^ribed, which show that at about 16® Cent., this gas experiences 
4^ times as great a cooling effect as lur. 'They agree well at all the 

* Commualcstsd to the Rorsl Society, June 1853, and publhhed in the Tram- 
tettoas. 



diifereat temperatureB vpith a theoretical result derived according to 
the general dynamical theory from an empirical formula for the 
pressure of carbonic acid in terms of its temperature and density, 
which was kindly communicated by Mr. Rankine to the authors, 
having been investigated by him upon no other experimental data 
than those of Regnault on the expansion of the gas by heat and its 
compressibility. 

Experiments were also made on hydrogen gas, which, although 
not such 06 to lead to accurate determinations, appeared to indicate 
very decidedly a cooling effect amounting to a small fraction, per- 
haps about of that which air would experience in the same cir- 
cumstances. 

The following theoretical deductions from these experiments are 
made 

I. The relations between the heat generated and the work spent 

in compressing carbonic acid, air and hydrogen, are investigated 
from the experimental results. In each case the relation is nearly 
that of equivalence, but the heat devel(>ped exceeds the equivalent 
of the work spent, by a very small amount for hydrogen, consider- 
ably more for air, and still more for carbonic acid. For slight 
cumpressions with the gases kept about the temperature 16*^, this 
excess amounts to about whole heat emitted in the case 

of carbonic acid, and in the case of air. 

II. It is shown by the general dynamical theory, that the air ex- 
periments, taken in connexion with Regnault’s experimental results 
on the latent heat and pressure of saturated steam, make it certain 
that the density of saturated steam increases very much more with 
the pressure than according to Boyle’s and Gay-Lussac’s gasepus 
laws, and numbers are given mipresaing the theoretical densities of 
saturated steam at ditferent t6m{>eratvum(, which it la desired iibould 
be verified by direct experiments^ 

III. Carnot’s function in the •* Theory of die Motive Power of 
Heat” is dhown to be very nearly equal to the mechanical equivalent 
of the thermal unit divided by the temperature from the xero of the 
airrthennometer (that is, temperature Centigrade with a number equal 
to the reciprocal of the coeflhjient of expansion added), and correc- 
tions, dc 2 )ending on the amount of the observed cooling ejects in the 
new air experiments, and the deviations from the gaseous laws of 



12 ^ 


expansion cmd compression determined by Regnault, are implied to 
give a more preciae evaluation. 

IV. An absolute scale of temperature, that is^ a scale not founded 
on reference to any particular thermometric substance or to any 
special qualities of any class of bodies, is founded on the following 
definition : — 

If a physical system he subjected to cycles of perfectly reversible 
operations and he not allowed to take in or to emit heat except in loca- 
lilies, at two fixed temperatures, these temperatures are proportional to 
the whole quantities of heat taken in or emitted at them respectively 
during a complete cycle of the operations. 

The principles upon which the unit’^or degree of temperature is to 
be chosen, so as to make the difierence of tempcrat\ires on the abso- 
lute scale, agree with that on any other scale for a particular range 
of temperatures. If the difference of temperatures between the 
freezing and the boiling-points of water be made 100'^ on the new 
scale, the absolute temperature of the freezing-point is shown to be 
about 273*7 ; and it is demonstrated that the temperatures from the 
freezing-point on the new scale will agree very closely with Centi- 
grade temperature by the standard nir-thermometer ; quite within 
the limits of the most accurate practical thermometry when the tem- 
perature is between 0^ and 100° Cent., and very nearly if not quite 
within these limits for temperatures U]> to 300° Cent. 

V. An empirical formula for the pressure of air in terms of its 
density, and its temperature on the absolute scale, is investigated, by 
using forms such as those first proposed and used by Mr. Rankine, 
and determining the constants so as to fulfil the conditions (1) of 
giving the observed cooling effects, (2) of agreeing with Regnault’s 
observations on expansion by heat^ and (3) of agreeing with Reg- 
nauit's experiiimtd r^ults op ooi^pressibility at a pardculor tem- 
perature. 

A table of comparison of temperature by the air-thermometer 
under varied conditions of temperature and pressure with the abso- 
lute scale, is deduced from this formula. 

Expressions for the specific heats of any fluid in terms of the ab- 
solute temperature, the density, and the pressure, derived from the 
general dynamical theory, ere worked out for the case of air accord- 
ing to the empirical formula ; and tables of numerical results derived 



130 


exclusively from these expressions and the ratio of the specific heats 
aa determined by the theory of sound* are given. These tables 
show the mechanical values of the specific heats of air at difiFerent 
constant pressures* and at different constant densities. Taking 
1390 as the mechanical equivalent of the thermal unit as determined 
by Mr. Joule's experiment on the friction of fluids, the authors 
find, as the mean specific heat of air under constant pressure* 

*2390, from 0^ to 100® Cent. 

*2384* from 0® to 300® Cent. 


XII. “NoteonNitro-glycerine.'^ By A. W. Williamson, Ph.D., 
P.C.S., Professor of Practical Chemistry in University Col- 
lege. Communicated by Dr. Sharpby, Sec. R.S. Received 
June 15, 1854. 

This compound is formed by actinj^ upon glycerine with a mix- 
ture* in equal volumes* of concentrated nitric and sulphuric acids, 
the glycerine being added by a few drops at a time. 

It is heavier than water, in which it is slightly soluble* and is 
soluble in alcohol and in ether. 

From its proneness to decomposition in drying* even by the air- 
pump, a complete analysis could not be made, but a qualitative ex- 
amination of the relative amounts of carbon and nitrogen gave the 


following results ; — 

Volumes of mixed gases. . 



1 . 

. 101 

2 . 

91*5 

3. 

99 

4 . 

97 

Volumes of nitrogen not absorbed by potash. 

32 

80*5 

34 

33 

Carbonic acid absorbed by potash . 

■ t 

. 69 

61 

65 

64 

Mixed gases 

1 . 

ITS 

2 . 

194 

d. 

173 

4 . 

194 

hi 

192 


Nitrogen 

61 

66 

58 

65 

65 


CO 5 

117 

128 

115 

129 

127 



From these results the following formula was deduced ; — 


C, H, O, + 3NO,=C. O, + 8 HO. 

It would therefore appear that 3H are replaced by SNO^. 

On boiling this compound with concentrated solution of potash, it 
is decomposed into glycerine and nitrate of potash. 



131 


XIII. a New Phosphite of Ethyl, 3C^ By 

A* W, Williamson, Ph.B., &c. Communicated by Dr. 
Sharpey, Sec. R.S. Received June 15, 1864. 

The following results were obtained by Mr. Rail ton in an in- 
vestigation undertaken in connexion with the idea that the water 
of constitution discovered by Wurtz may be conceived os basic. 
The processes for preparing the compound are thus described by 
Mr. Hailton. 

1 st. When three atoms of absolute alcohol are acted upon by one 
atom of PCI 3 , this compound is formed. The alcohol is introduced 
into a retort which is connected with an apparatus for upward distil- 
lation* and the retort is surrounded with a freezing mixture. The 
terchloride is then added drop by drop, the whole is then gently 
heated for some time, the vapour being allowed to run back into the 
retort. It is now distilled and the portion which comes off between 
140° C. and 196° C. collected and redistilled, that portion being pre- 
served which boils between 188° and 191° C. The quantity of pure 
ether obtained by this process was not large, and there was left in 
the retort a considerable amount of POj, and other products, which 
on further heating evolved inflammable phosphuretted hydrogen^ 

2nd. This ether is obtained with the greatest facility from ethy- 
late of soda and terchloride of phosphorus. 

I introduce into a thirty ounce stoppered retort about a pint of 
ether, which must be perfectly free from alcohol and from water. 
The ethylate of soda is then added, and os much PClg is taken as 
is necessary to form chloride of sodium and phosphite of ethyl. The 
ether is absolutely necessary, fot without it, the action of the PCI 5 is 
so violent, as to set fire to the ethylate. 

The PClj is introduced into die mixture of ether and ethylate of 
soda through a long funnel, which is drawn to an extremely fine 
point, by which means it enters drop by drop into the mixture, thus 
avoiding the violent action which otherwise occurs. 

The retort should be kept quite cool and frequently shaken. If 
these precaudona are neglected considerable lose is experienced. 

When the whole of the PCI 3 has been added, the ether is distilled 
off by a water-bath. The retort is then transferred to an oil-bath 



ui 


which is gradually heated up to about 240^ C. The whole of the 
distillate obtained by the oil-bath is collected in a dry receiver, and 
as it is prone to decomposition if distilled in air, it is distilled in an 
atmosphere of hydrogen, the pordon which comes off at 188° C. is 
the phosphite of ethyl. I may here notice the remarkable fact, that 
this substance has two boiling points, as doubtless have many other 
bodies, if distilled under similar circumstances. In air it boils at 
191° C, while, as I said before, it boils in hydrogen at 188° C. Its 
specifio gravity is 1*075. 

3rd. The reaction which occurs on the formation of this ether 
may be represented by the following formula : — 

3NaO, C,H, 04 ^PCl 5 = 3 NaCH- 3 C,H, 0 , PO,. 

The carbon and hydrogen were estimated in the usual manner by 
oxide of copper, the phosphorus as follows. A weighed portion of 
the ether was introduced into a twelve ounce stoppered bottle ; 
concentrated nitric acid was poured upon it, and the bottle allowed 
to stand in a warm place, loosely stopped, for several days. When 
nitrous fumes no longer appeared, the oxidation of the phosphorous 
acid was deemed to be complete. The acid liquid was then saturated 
with ammonia, some chloride of ammonium and sulphate of magnesia 
then added, and the mixture well shaken. It was allowed to stand 
for some time, when a precipitate of phosphate of magnesia and 
ammonia was formed ; this was washed, dried, and ignited, and the 
amount of phosphorus calculated from the result. These are the 
results. 


Grros. 

CO, HO 

•3784 and 1920 

2MgO, PO, 

‘2405 ether gave 

ft 

5115 

•8047 and *4156 

II 

4513 

rt It 

*302 

•4110 

tl II 

■278 


From these results the following per centages are calculated. 


C,j 

Required. 

43*11 

42*91 

Found. 

42*89 

H,5 

8-98 

8*87 

9*03 

p 

19*16 

18*92 

19*10 

0, 

28*75 

29*30 

28*98 


100 

100 

100 



183 


These results being stttbfacturjr as regards the formula, the den- 
sity of the vapour was then ascertained and found to be In strict 
accordance with theory. The method of taking the vapour densiticB 
of bodies liable to oxidation was described by me about twelve months 
ago, in the Chemical Society’s Quarterly Journal. It was used in 
the following experiments. 

1st. Weight of globe filled with air at 53® F. and 30‘2 in. baro- 
meter, 188*213 grs. 

Weight of empty globe, 186*313 grs. 

Weight of globe and vapour at 521° F. and 30*3 in. barometer. 
192*387 grs. 

Capacity of globe at 60® F., 6*00 cub. in. 

Residual hydrogen *05 cub. in. 

Capacity of globe at 521° F., 6*40 cub. in. 

Six cubic inches of air at 53® F. and 30*2 in. barometer, become 
at 60° F. and 30 in. barometer 6*12 cub. in., and weigh 1*90 grs. 

*05 cub. in. hydrogen at 60° F. become *094 cub. in. at 521° F., 
and weigh *002 grs. 

6*40 — *094=6*306 cub. in. vapour at 621° F., which at 60° F. 
and 30 in. barometer =3*376 cub. in. 

Hence 192*387-*002=192*385-186*313 = 6*072 grains, the 
weight of 3*376 cub. in. vapour. 

100 cubic inches , . = 1 79* 86 grs. 

100 cubic inches air= 31*01 grs. 

The density is therefore 6*800, from which it appears that its com- 
bining measure is four volumes. 

Density by calculation =5*768. 

A second experiment gave 5*877. 

Thil substance has a highly offensive odour, it burns with a bluish 
white fiame, is soluble in water, alcohol, and ether, and is slowly 
decomposed in contact with *air. 

On boiling phosphite of ethyl with concentrated solutkm of baryta, 
in water, it is decomposed into alcohol and a salt which varies 
according to the amount of baryta used. If one atom of the e^r>^ 
be treated with one of baryta, a crystallized salt is produced on eva* 
poration, the carbon and hydrogen in which are, according to an 
analysis I have just completed. 



Voiiud* Required. 

Carbon .... 20*354 24*158 

Hydrogen . . 5*356 5*050 

Baryta 36*880 37*090 


In that marked * required' 1 have supposed the salt to bear the fol- 
lowing formula and to be completely anhydrous* 2C4HAO* BaO* PO,* 
but if we suppose that four atoms of water are present in the salt 
analyzed, the relation will stand thus 

Found* Required* 

20*354 20*453 

5*356 5*540 

The formula would then be 2C4HJO, BaO» PO3 + 4HO. 

When two atoms of baryta are made to act upon one atom of 
the ether, a salt is obtained which does not crystallize, and it may 
be evaporated in air without sensible decomposition. This salt is per- 
fectly neutral to test paper ; when dry it is a white friable delique- 
scent mass, the formula of which will be C4HJO, 2BaO, PC,. If 
an excess of baryta is used, a whitef salt is thrown down on boiling, 
which I suppose to be HO, 2BaO, PO,. 

I have prepared another compound with three equivalents of amyle. 
This was obtained from amylate of soda by an analogous process to 
that described for the phosphite of ethyl. 

Analysis has pointed out the formula SCioHuO, POg. Like 
phosphite of etliyl it is easily decomposed on being heated in air ; 
heated in hydrogen it is more stable and then boils at 236° C* It is 
soluble in ether and in alcohol, but only slightly soluble in water* 



XIV. “ On ftome new derivatives of Chloroform/^ By A. W. 
WitLiAMsoN, Ph.D.^ See. Communicated by Dr. SHAftPB v, 
Sec. R.S. Received June 15, 1854. 

According to tlie results of recent researches in the constitution 
of salts and the methods thence introduced of explaining chemical 
reactions, it is equally correct to represent such a reaction as that of 
hydrochloric acid on hydrate of potaSh. as consisting in an exchange 
of hydrogen of the one for potassium of the other, or of chlorine in 
one for peroxide of hydrogen in the other. In Mr. Kay's researches 
as described in the following brief outline, this notion has obtained 
very striking illustration ; for he has obtained a peculiar body in 
which the chlorine of chloroform is replaced by peroxide of ethyle 
by the action of chloroform on three atoms of ethylate of sodium, 
which product may be equally well conceived to be a body in which 
the hydrogen of three atoms of alcohol is replaced by the tribasic 
radical of chloroform. 

According to the older theories of the capacity of saturation of 
salts, this compound would contain a tribasic modification of formic 
acid, for it has the same relarion to formic ether as a so-called tri- 
basic phosphate has to a monobasic one. 

To one equivalent of chloroform were added, by degrees, three 
equivalents of dry and powdered ethylate of soda, a violent action 
taking place with the evolution of much heat ; the liquid was entirely 
distilled from the residue (chloride of sodium) by means of an oil- 
bath, and then subjected to a series of fractional distillations, which 
yielded a small distillate between 50° and 60° C., smelling strongly 
of vinous e(tlter, a large distillate (about three-fourths of the whole) 
between 77° and 78° C., which was chiefly alcohol, and another smtdl 
distillmte (about one-sixth) between 145° and 145*5° C« 

The distillates obtained by the above process, except Biat of alcohol, 
being smaB, the foRowing modificarion was adopted. 

Smittta was dissolved in absolute alcohol until the actiem became 
feeble, chlorofonn was then added, care being taken to keep the 
liquid alkaliae ; more sodium was then added, and the process re- 
peated several times, until the chloride of sodium precipitated be- 
came very btdky. Ihe liquid was then distilled oS and chloroform 

VOJU wu. o 



136 


added to the residue » and alao distilled of!'. To this first distillate 
sodium was again added » and treated with the last distillate instead 
of pure chloroform, the same precautions being used as before. This 
method gave similar distillates, and in about the same proportion as 
that first used ; the highest distillate however boiled constantly at 
1 46° iiutead of at 145*3° C. 

lliis compound which boils at 145° to 146° C. is a colourless 
limpid liquid^ only slightly soluble in water, having a strongly aro- 
matic odour, readily inflammable and burning without much smoke ; 
its specific gravity is *8964 ; It remained liquid at 0° F. 

Several analyses made of this body agree in giving to it the for- 
mula C 7 Hi,!! Oj, which would also be the empirical formula of a 
tribasic formic-ether ; the density of its vapour also corresponds very 
closely with the same formula. 

Pentachloride of phosphorus added to a portion of the compound 
produced a heavy liquid having the odour of chloroform, 

A small quantity of the bod^ was dissolved in alcohol distilled 
upwards for two or three hours with solid hydrate of potash and 
then distilled off ; the residue was next dissolved in water and made 
exactly neutral by hydrochloric acid, filtered to remove the turbidity, 
and then a few drops of chloride of mercury added ; after a little time 
and by the application of heat, a very slight precipitate of subchlo- 
ride of mercury was formed; also the colour of sesquichloride of 
iron was a little darkened by another portion of the solution, thus 
showing that the action of potash on the compound had produced 
formic acid, but in very small quantity. 

An equivalent of dry hydrochloric acid was passed into a portion 
of the compound ; the gas was wholly absorbed, a considerable amount 
of heat being evolved and the liquid assuming a brownish colour ; the 
liquid after the absorption of the gas still remmned perfectly neutral. 
It was next distilled with the thermometer : it began to boil at 20° C. 
and rose gradually to 100 °; it was collected in three portions, the first 
(about one-sixth of the whole) passing over between 20 ° and 50?, the 
second (about one-third) between 50° and 68 °, riie third (one-half) 
between 68 ° 100 °. 1 was unable to carry these distillations 

further in consequence of the small quantity of the liquid available. 

Two equivalents of dry hydrochloric acid were passedl into a 
larger quantity of the compound ; towards the close the gas was ab- 



187 


sorbed less freely, a portion passing through ; after this treatment, 
the liquid fumed and was highly acid ; it was distilled upwards for 
some time by which a portion of free hydrochloric acid was expelled, 
and then distilled fractionally ; about one -third came over between 
56^ and 60° C., one-fourth between 60® and 70°. one-sixth between 
70° and 80°, and the remainder {about one-fourth) between 80° and 
88°» To the lowest distillate about an equal bulk of water was 
added ; the substance floated on the surface and seemed to be little, 
if at all dissolved by the water ; a sufficient quantity of carbonate 
of soda was next added to neutralize the free acid, and the liquid 
pipetted from the water, it was then distilled upwards for some time 
with dry chloride of calcium, and afterwards distilled off; this distil- 
late was found to boil constantly at 55*5° C. An analysis made of 
this body agrees closely with the formula CeHi 40 ,,. 

The distillate which came over between 60° and 70° after being 
treated in the same way as the lower distillate, also yielded a liquid 
which boiled at 56° C. 

As both methods hitherto used for the purpose of obtaining the 
body Cy Hje Og afforded only small quantities, the treatment of 
chloroform with an alcoholic solution of potash was tried ; for this 
purpose 12 oz. of solid hydrate of potash and 20 oz. of quicklime 
were added to about three pints of absolute alcohol, and the alcohol 
distilled upwards for six or seven hours ; 6 oz, of chloroform were 
then added gradually, the upward distillation being continued about 
two hours longer; the liquid was next distilled off to dryness by 
means of an oil- bath, and submitted to fractional distillation ; by this 
method a much larger quantity of the compound was obtained than 
by the former processes ; it was found to boil constantly at 146° 0., 
and its analysis agreed almost exactly witli the formula. In this 
process the lowest distillate had the same smell of vinous ether 
which was before observed in the other methods. 

An attempt was made to produce the intermediate compounds 
CHCl^, AcO, and CHCl, 2AeO, by adding dry and powdered 
ethylate of soda very gradually to a large excess of chloroform ; but 
the liquid after being Bcpmted from the precipitate, was found, on 
distlUing fractionally, to resolve itself into chloroform, alcohol* and 
the body (C, O,) already obtained, the presence of no other sub- 

stance being observable. 



Wltit a view of dbtaiuing a compound anaiogoun to the body 
Hj/) in which amyle should be introduced instead of ethyle, 
dry umylate of soda was prepared, to three equivalents of which one 
equivalent of chloroform was added, the liquid separated from the 
precipitate and then distilled fractionally ; a large proportion of fusil- 
oil was obtained, together with a small proportion of a body which 
boiled at a high temperature. — from 260° to 290° C.. but chiefly from 
260° to 270°; the purification of this substance was not carried 
further, as at each distillation a consideraMe portion was decomposed 
even in an atmosphere of hydrogen, the small quantity of the liquid 
available precluding any more attempts at distillation. 



Juna 15, 1854* (Continued.) 


The EARL of ROSSE, l^resident, in the Chair. 


The following papers were read : — 

XV. " On the Structure of certain Microscopic Test-objects, 
and their Action on the Transmitted Rays of Light By 
CHARnns Brooke, M.A.^ F.R.S., Surgeon of the West- 
minster Hospital* Received June 1, 1854. 

In order to arrive at any satisfactory conclusions regarding the 
action of any transparent medium on lights it is necessary to form 
some definite conceptions regarding the external form and 
temal structure of the medium. This observation appears to apply 
in full force to microscopic test-objects ; and for the purposes of the 
present inquiry it will suffice to limit our observations to the struc- 
ture of two well-known test-objects, the scales of Podura plumbea, 
and the siliceous loricse or valves of the genus Pleurosipma, freed 
from organic matter ; the former of these is commonly adopted as 
the test of the defining power of on achromatic object-glass, and the 
several species of the latter as the tests of the penetrating or 
rating power as it has been termed. The defining power depends 
only on the due correction of chromatic and spherical abenrarions, so 
that the image of any point of an object formed on the retina may 
not overlap and confuse the images of adjacent points ; this correc- 
tion is never theoretically perfect, since there will always be residual 
terms in the general expression for the aberration, whatever prac- 
ticable number of surfaces we may introduce as arbitrary constants ; 
but it is practicaliy perfect, when the residual error is a quantity 
less than that which the eye can appreciate. The separation of the 
markings of the Plemrosigmati and other anitiogpus objects, is found 
vot* vn. t 



to depend on good defining power associated with large angle of 
aperture. 

The Podura scale appears to be a compound structure, consisting 
of a very delicate transparent lamina or membrane, covered with an 
imbricated arrangement of epithelial plates, the length of which is 
six or eight times their breadtli, somewhat resembling the tiles on a 
roof, or the long pile of some kinds of plush. This structure may 
be readily shown by putting a live Podura into a small test-tube, 
and inverting it on a glass slide ; the iriSect should then be allowed 
for some time to leap and run about in the confined space. By this 
means the scales will be freely deposited on the glass, and being 
subsequently trodden on by the insect, several will be found, from 
which the epithelial plates have been partially rubbed off, and at the 
margin of the undisturbed portion, the form and position of the 
plates may be readily recognized. This structure appears to be ren- 
dered most evident by mounting the scales thus obtained in Canada 
balsam, and illuminating them by r^ieans of Wenham's parabolic re- 
fiector. The structure may also be very clearly recognized when 
the scale is seen as an opake object under a Hose's i^th (specially 
adjusted for uncovered objects), illuminated by a combination of the 
parabola and a fiat Lieberkuhn, as the writer has elsewhere de- 
scribed*. The underside of the scale thus appears as a smooth 
glistening surface with very slight markings, corresponding probably 
to the points of insertion of the plates on the contrary side. The 
minuteness and close proximity of the epithelial plates will readily 
account for their being a good test of definition^ while their promi- 
nence renders them independent of the separating power dne to large 
angle of aperture. 

The structure of the second class of test-objects above mentioned 
difiers entirely tlmt above described ; it will suffice for the pre« 
sent purpose to notice the valves of three species only of the genus 
Fkuraeigma, which, as arranged in the order of easy visibilityj 
P./ermosam, P. hippocampus, P. anguhtum. 

These appear to consist of a lamina of homogeneous tiranspm(ant 
silex, studded with rounded knobs or protuberances* which* in 
and P. nsiw/aram. are arranged lihe a tier of round shot 
m a triangular pUe, andi n hippaeampm, similar tier in a 
« See Udddi imtMm jtaaam fiar 



141 


4miigaiar pile, m has frequently been described ; and the visibility of 
these projeotions is probably proportional to their convexity. The 
* ■ dots ^ have by some been supposed to be depressions ; this how- 
ever is clearly not the case, as fracture is invariably observed to take 
plaoe between the rows of dots, and not through them, as would na- 
turally occur if the dots were depressions, and consequently the sub- 
Itance thinner there than elsewhere. 

This in fact is always observed to take place in the siliceous loricee 
of some of the border tribes that occupy a sort of neutral, and not 
yet undisputed, ground between the confines of the animid and vege- 
table kingdoms ; as for example the Isthmia, which possesses a reti- 
culated structure, with depressions between the meshes, somewhat 
analogous to that which would result from pasting together bobbin- 
net and tissue paper. 

The valves of P, mgulatum and other similar objects have been 
by some writers* supposed to be made up of two substances pos- 
sessing different degrees of refractive power ; but this hypothesis is 
purely gratuitous, since the observed phenomena will naturally re- 
sult from a series of rounded or lenticular protuberances of one 
homogeneous substance, Moreover, if the centres of the markings 
were centres of greatest density, if in fact the structure were at all 
analogous to that of the crystalline lens, it is difficult to conceive 
why the oblique rays only should be visibly affected. When P. Up^ 
ppampue or P,formo9um is illuminated by a Gillett's condenser, with 
a centrid stop placed under the lenses, and viewed by a quarter- inch 
object-glass of 70^ aperture, both being accurately adjusted, we may 
observe in succession, as the object-glass approaches the object, first 
a series of well-defined bright dots ; secondly, a series of dark dots 
replacing these ; and thirdly, the latter ore again replaced by bright 
dots, not however as well defined as the first series. A similar suc- 
oassion of bright, dark, and bright points may be observed in the 
centre of the markings of some species of CoBcinoiiecus from Ber- 
muda* 

Tfaeie appearances would result if a thin plate of glass were studded 
minute, e<|ual and equidistant plano-convex lenses, the foci of 
which would nacewm^ly lie in tfie same plane. If the focal surface 
or pJbmc of vilum qf object'^glasB be mode to coincide with tbis^ 
* Vjdc|h«|!^ feemri of 



142 


{>lane^ a series of bright points would result from the accumulatioii 
of the light falling on each lens. If the plane of vision be next mad^ 
to coincide with the surfaces of the lenses, these points would ap- 
pear dark, in consequence of the rays being refracted towards points 
now out of focus. Lastly, if the plane of vision be made to coincide 
with the plane beneath the lenses that contains their several foci, so 
that each Jens may be, as it were, combined with the object-glass, 
then a second series of bright points will result from the accumula- 
tion of the rays transmitted at those points. Moreover, as all rays 
capable of entering the object-glass are concerned in the formation 
of the second series of bright focal points, whereas the first series 
are formed by the rays of a conical shell of light only, it is evident 
that the circle of least confusion must be much less, and therefore 
the bright points better defined, in the first than in the last scries. 

If the supposed lenses were of small convexity, it is evident that 
the course of the more oblique rays only w'ouid be sensibly in- 
fluenced j hence probably the structure of p! angulatum is recognized 
only by object-glasses of large angular apertures, which are capable 
of admitting very oblique rays. 

The writer has recently, in an address to the members of the 
Royal Institution, proposed to explain the extreme darkness of the 
dots, under certain conditions of focus and illumination, by the hy- 
pothesis that some of the oblique rays are thrown out of the field by 
internal reflexion, being incident at the upper surface at an angle 
too large for emergence ; but this does not appear to invalidate the 
present hypothesis respecting the course of the transmitted rays. 

It does not appear to be desirable that objects should be illumi- 
nated by an entire, or, as it may be termed, a solid cone of light of 
much larger angle than that of the object-glass. The extinction of an 
object by excess of illumination may be well illustrated by viewing 
with a one -inch object-glass the Isthmia illuminated by Gfillett's 
condenser. Wlien this is in focus, and its full aperture open, the 
markings above described are wholly invisible ; but as the aperture 
is successively diminished by the revolving diaphragm, the object be- 
comes more and more distinct, and is perfectly defined when tlie 
aperture of the illuminating pencil is reduced t6 about 20®, The 
same point may be attained, although with much of defini^ 

tion, by gradually depressing the condenser, so that; royt may 



148 


diverge before they reach the object ; and it may be remarked gene- 
rally that the definition of objects is always most perfect, when an 
illunainating pencil of suitable form is accurately adjusted to focus, 
that is, BO that the source of light and the plane of vision may be 
conjugate foci of the illuminator. If an object-glass of 120'^ aper* 
ture or upwards be used as an illuminator, the markings of Diato- 
macecc will be scarcely distinguishable, with any object* glues ; the 
glare of the central rays overpowering the efiPects of structure on 
those ttiat are more oblique. 


XVI. the Constitution of Coal-tar Creosote.^^ By Pro- 
fessor Williamson. Communicated by Dr. SharpbVi 
Sec. R.S, Received June 15, 1854. 

For some years past it has been a debated question among che- 
mists, whether the peculiar body originally described by Reichen- 
bach as creosote, and subsequently analysed by Ettling and others, 
has any real existence, or whether the properties which were attri- 
buted to it are not to be more correctly ascribed to the hydrate of 
phenyl, which can be obtained in a state of great purity from at 
least one sort of commercial creosote by mere distillation, and which 
possesses in an eminent degree the antiseptic properties for which 
creosote is remarkable. 

With a view of obtaining some light on this question, Mr. Fairlie 
undert;ook, in the laboratory of University College, an investigation 
of the portions of coal-tar creosote which boil higher than the hydrate 
of phenyl. The result of his experiments has been Ao show that a 
body homologous to hydrate of phenyl may be obtained from the 
crude creosote, in fact the next term of the scries above hydrate of 
phenyl itself. Some qualities of commercial creosote contain a 
greater quantity of this hydrate of creeyl (as it may be termed) than 
others ; and it is most advantageously prepared from those portions 
Vrhich in the first distillation come over between 200*^ Cent, and 220°, 
After a great number of iriictional distillations, a colourless, highly 
dispersive llql^d ls obtained, boiUngat 203° Cent., and possessing 
the eom);koriiti^;?eptfisented by the formula C^HeO,. 



144 


This hydmte of crcByl resembles the corresponding phenyl oom* 
pound in most of its properties ; but it may be easily distinguished 
from that compound by its almost complete insolubility in aqueous 
ammonia. 


When gtaduaUy mixed with sulphuric acid, it becomes of a beau* 
tiful rose- colour* and gives rise to sulpho-cresylic acid. 

The action of jaitric acid upon hydrate of cresyl is very violent* 
and almost explosive if the acid is used in a concentrated state and 
at 80 liigli a temperature as the common atmospheric j even very 
dilute nitric acid transforms the compoimd into a brown tarry mass 
from which no definite substance can be extracted. By cooling 
some nitric Scid in a frigorific mixture and allowing some similarly 
cooled hydrate to fall into it drop by drop and with constant agita- 
tion, a red-coloured solution was obtained, which by dilution with 
water and subsequent neutralization by potash yielded a crop of 
short needle-shaped crystals of an orqnge-red colour, and possessing 
a greater solubility In water than the skit of carbazotic acid* This 
salt was found by analysis to possess the composition of a homologue 
of carbazotate of potash ; so that it is the potash salt of a hydrate 
of cresyl in which three atoms of hydrogen are replaced by hypo- 


nitric acid, 


H 

(N0,)3 


o. 


KO. 


The same acid was obtained by the action of nitric acid upon an 
alcoholic solution of the hydrate containing urea ; but in attempting 
to repeat this experiment on a larger scale the mixture became hot, 
and the whole of the substance was destroyed with almost explosive 
violence. 

When treated with pentachloride of phosphorus this hydrate of 
cresyl is decomposed in like manner with the hydrate of phenyl^ as 
described by Mr. Scrugham, yielding a chloride of cresyl and a 
phosphate of the same radical* 

By the action of this phosphate in an alcoholic solution of acetate 
of potash, a peculiar oleaginous body is obtained possessing an odOur 
enrirely different from that of tlie hydrate, and deoomposaUe bj 
potash with production of acetate and cresylate* 

A similar reaction ensues when the phosphate is distilled wiUi 
ethylate of potash, and a ciesylate of ethyl is thus obtHhiadt 



145 


In th^ numeroue distillations which were performed fbr the puri- 
fication of th» hydrate of eresyh some circumstances were observed 
which led to a suspicion that the body undergoes a change ol 
composition* either through the distillation itself* or by some in- 
fluences accompanying it. These circumstances were, — Ist. A tarry 
residue, from a liquid which when introduced into the retort was 
perfectly colourless. 2nd. The formation of a small quantity of 
water in the commencement of such a distillation, though none was 
contained in the substance used. 3rd. The gradual lowering of the 
boiling-point of the whole liquid by a great number of distillations. 
These facts, taken in conjunction, naturally suggested that the oxy- 
gen of the air contained in tlic retort might act upon tj^e substance, 
and thus gradually reduce it to hydrate of phenyl. 

In order to test the correctness of this hypothesis, the atmospheric 
air was expelled from the distilling apparatus by dry hydrogen gas, 
and the distillation performed in a pure atmosphere of this gas. A 
great number of distillations ^performed in this manner were at ex- 
actly the same temjierature, and all the other anomalies were simul- 
taneously removed. It was however found that the liquid always 
boiled at a lower temperature in hydrogen than in atmospheric air, 
the difference being about 2° Cent., and this without any alteration 
of the pressure on the surface of the boiling liquid. A similar fact 
was noticed in the distillation of hydrate of phenyl, and also of some 
other liquids. 


XVIi. ** On the Formation of Powers from Arithmetical Pro- 
gressions.^' By C, Whkatstone, Esq., F.B.S. Received 
June 15, 1854. 

The same sum n* may be formed by the addition of an arithmetical 
progression of n terms in various ways. Hence we are enabled to 
construct a great variety of triangular arrangements of arithmetical 
progressions, the sums of which are the natural series of square, 
cube imd other powers of numbers. Among these there are several 
which render evident some remarkable relations. 



146 


Each of the following triangles is formed of a series of arithmetic 
cal progressions, the number of terms increasing successively by 
unity. 

The first term of an arithmetical progression of n terms having a 
common difference and whose sum is is equal to 

«)• 


§ 1. SQUARE NUMBERS. 

If the first term =sn+^(l— «). 

A 


A. 


Every square is the sum of an aripimetical progression of n 
terms, the first term of which is unity and the difference 2. 

1 

l*f3 

l-(-3 + 5 =8^ 

1+3+54-7 

H.3 + 5 + 7 + 9 =5« 

1+3 + 5 + 7 + 9 + 11 =6« 

1^3 + 5+7 + 9+11 + 13 =:7« 


Thus, every square number is formed by the addition of a series 
of odd numbers commencing with unity; a result universally 
known. 

The difference of any two squares is either an odd number, or the 
sum of consecutive odd numbers. 

Each series may be resolved into two others consisting of alter- 
nate odd numbers, the reepectw. sums of which are two a^acent 
triangular numbers, the addition of which it is w ell known forms a 
square. : 

l+5 + 9 + 13»28 
3 + 7+llis:^ 

49«7® 



U 7 


B, 


Every square is the finm ol an arithmetical progression of n 


terms, the first term of which is 


H^l 


and the common difference 1. 


1 

114*21 

34 - 34-4 =: 3 « 

214 - 314444-51 = 4 ^ 

344454647 “ 5 * 

3444l45|46l47l481 ^ 6 * 

44046474842410 ^ 7 ^ 


This arrangement renders evident that every square of an odd 
number is the sum of as many consecutive natural numbers as the 
root has units » 

Every square of an odd number is the difference between two tri- 
angular numbers the bases of which are respectively ( 3 tt 4 l) and «. 
For, the sum of any series of natural numbers is the difference of 
two series of natural numbers commencing with unity ; and since, 
as it is shown above, every square of an odd number is the sum of a 
series of natural numbers, it is also the difference between two tri- 
angular numbers. 

It is also evident that series, the sums of which are squares of odd 
numbers, may be so token that, when placed in succession, they will 
form an uninterrupted progression of natural numbers commencing 
with unity, the sum of which is a triangular number ; 

(1)4(24344)4(5464748494 104 11 4 12413 ).. .&c.^ 

( 1 « 4 S'* 4 9 ^ 4 27 ® 4 (S’*)®) = 

a triangular number the base of which is the series 

(1+349427 43 ”). 


§ 2 . CUBE NUMBERS. 

If S=«*, the first term =:»®4 -(1 -”«)* 

m 



148 


G. 

Every cube is the sum of an arithmetical progression of n 
terms, the first term of which is unity, and the difference 2(»4*1). 


1 =sis 

1+7 

1+9 + 17 =33 

1 + 11 + 21+31 =43 

1 + 13 + 25 + 37 + 49 =5^ 

1 + 15 + 29+43+57 + 71 =6^ 

1 + 17+33+49 + 65 + 81+97 =7^ 


D. 

Every cube is the sum of an arithmetical progression of « 
terms, the first term of which is the root «, and the difference 2>*. 


1 1 

2 + 6 -23 

3 + 9 + 15 srS* 

4+12 + 20 + 28 =54* 

5+15 + 25 + 35 + 45 =5» 

6+18 + 30 + 42 + 54 + 66 ^^=6* 

7 + 21+35 + 49 + 63+77 + 91 .. .* ==73 


The last terms of these series are the alternate triangular num- 
bers, If they be respectively divided by the first terms, the quo- 
tients will be the series of odd numbers. 


E, 

Every cube is the sum of an arithmetioal progression of n 
terms, the first term of which is («'*-»«+!), and the difference 2, 


1 =:P 

3+6 = 5 : 2 * 

7 + 9 + 11 = k 3 s 

13 + 15 + 17 + 19 = 4 * 

21 + 28+26 + 27 + 29 
31+83 + 35+87 + 39 + 43 :=ze^ 


43 + 45 + 47 + 49 + 61+53 + 65 



14 » 


ThU^ it will be obterved, is a triimgular currangement of the UtteVen 
numbers in their regular order. 

Every cube is the sum of as many consecutive odd numbers as 
there are units in the root'*'. 

The known theorem, that the sum of the cubes of any succession 
of the natural numbers comxhencing with unity is equal to the square 
of the sum of the roots, or, in other words, to the square of the cor- 
responding triangular number, is an immediate consequence of the 
above. 

(P+2’ + 3“ + 4'‘ + «“) = (! +2 + 3+4... 

The sum of any series of odd numbers commencing with unity 
being equal to the square of the number of terms (A.), the sum of 
the numbers in any triangle formed as above is necessarily equal to 
the square of a triangular number. It is also easy to see that each 
cube is the difference between the squares of two consecutive trian- 
gular numbers ; and» that the difference between the squares of any 
two triangular numbers whatever is the sura of consecutive cubes. 
The following equations have been found by ascertaining what dif- 
ferences of the squares of two triangular numbers ore equal to single 
cubes : — 

iP-h 12^+13®+ 14^=20®. 


F, 


Every cube n” is the sura of an arithmetical progression of n terms, 


the first terra of which is a triangular number 


2 ' 


and 


the dif- 


ference=». 

1 

3 + 5 

6+9 + 12 4 ** 3 ® 

10+14 + 18 + 22 = 54 ® 

15 + 20 + 25 + 30 + 85 = 5 ** 

21+27 + 33+39+45+51 attB* 

aa+854.42+49+56+63+70 . . . . a67* 


* Since, the present note wu comioiinicated to the Royal Society, 1 have found 
that this relation has been already noticed by Count d’Adh^mar (Comptes Hendua, 
mm. X«UL p. hbl)* Cauchy observes, quoiqu’eUe poiase, eomme on le volt, se 
Mttfm 4 m piitteqms 4^ eoattHS, Mttteims» eUe est asses euneaise at Irdt simple/' 



150 


Eiwb number contained in tliis triangle ia itself the sum of an 
aritibmetical progression of n terms. Thus, taking the hfth row for 
example ; — 

1 + 24-8+4 + 5= 15 

2 + 3+4 + 5 + 6jsa 20 
34 - 4 ^ 5 ^- 64 - 7 = 25 
44-5 + 6 + 7 + 8= 30 
54-6 + 7 + 8 + 9= 35 

125 = 5 ^ 

The sum of all the numbers contained in a square thus formed 
ia equal to the cube of the number which occupies the upper right- 
hand and lower left-hand corners. The sum of the numbers in either 
of the diagonals is the corresponding square, and in the case of the 
odd numbers the sum of the middle horizontal or vertical line is also 
the square. 

This last-mentioned relation was pointed out by Lichtenberg*, 
who stated the theorem thus ; — If a be a whole number, and A be the 
sum of all the natural numbers from 1 to a, then : 


o®=A + (A + a) + (A+2o) + (A + 3fl) . . 

|-(A+[a— l]o). 

G. 

Every cube above I is the sum of an 

arithmetical progression 

of n terms, the first term of w^ch is (»— 2^, and the difference=8. 

0+8 

=2® 

1 + 9 + 17 



4+12+20 + 28 .... 

,.=4» 

9 + 17 + 25 + 33+41 

=5* 

16 + 24 + 32 + 40+48+56 

=6« 

25 + 33+41+49 + 57 + 65 + 73 ....=7’' 


Each progression of this triangle, consisting of an uneven number 
of terms, contains two consecutive odd square numbers. 

An uninterrupted arithmetical progression commencing with unity 
and proceeding by the constant addition of 8, arranged in a trian- 
gular form^ presents some curious results. 1st, The first terms of 
* G. C. Lichteaberg’s Vermlschte Sohriltenr Baad he. p. 359. Gbitiagea 1306, 



each line are the squares of the odd numbers in their regular sequence^ 
2nd* The sum of all the numbers in any two adjacent lines is the 
cube of an odd number* 


9-fl7 { 

25 + 33 + 41 I 

49 + 57 + 65 + 73 | 

81 + 89 + 97 + 105+113 .. | 

121 + 129 + 137 + 145 + 153+ 16r 

It is evident from the preceding arrangement that 
(2n+l/=l + 8^^^| 

Thus any triangular number multiplied by 8 with 1 added is equal 
to the square of an odd number; or, any square of an uneven 
number minus 1 is divisible by 8, and the quotient is a triangular 
number* 


= 

= 5 » 
= 7 ^ 

rr 9« 

= 11 ® 


§ 3 . 

Of the higher powers I will confine myself to one example* 


H. 

Every fourth power is the sum of an arithmetical progression 
of n terms, the first term of vrbich is n% and the difference 2«®. 


1 = 1 ^ 

4+12 = 2 ^ 

9 + 27 + 45 = 3 ^ 

16 + 48 + 80+112 

25 + 75 + 125 + 150+225 = 5 ^ 


36+108 + 180 + 252 + 324 + 396 ..*,= 6 ^ 

This triangle consists of the progressions in (D.) multiplied re- 
spectively by «, or of those in (A.) multiplied by nK 



XVIII, " On the Structure and Functions of the Rostellum in 
lAstera ovata.^^ By J. I). Hookek, M,D,, F.R.S. Re- 
ceived June 15, 1854, 

The auUior first gives an account of the form and structure of the 
rostellum of Listera ovaia^ and its relation and position to the anther 
and stigma. He finds that the rostellum is divided by parallel septa 
(at right angles to the plane of that organ) into a series of longitu- 
dinally elongated loculi, which gradually taper from the base up- 
wards, and terminate at two opake cellular spots, one on each side 
of the apex of the rostellumi towards which latter the loculi also 
converge. When the flower is fully expanded, these loculi are dis- 
tended with a viscid grumous fluid, full of chlorophyll granules. 
Their external walls, and the septa dividing them, are formed of a 
delicate, transparent tissue, which is cellular at the base and apex of 
the rostellum only. 

Their grumous contents, when examined at the earliest period of 
development, present the appearance of opake club-shaped comt 
pressed bodies, with areolated surfaces ; a form and appearance that 
may be restored at a later period by coagulating with alcohol. 

At the period of impregnation the slightest irritation of the ros- 
telium causes the sudden, and forcible discharge of the contents of 
these loculi (through the rupture of the cellular tissue at the apex 
of the rostellum) and its protrusion in the form of two viscid glands, 
which coalesce into one, after which the rostellum rapidly collapses 
and contracts. 

The pollen-masses, when freed from the anther-case, fall naturally 
upon the rostellum ; they are retained there by their viscid gland-like 
contents, and, breaking up, the pollen-grains become (by the con- 
traction of the rostellum) applied to the subjacent stigmatic surface. 

The author adds remarks on the structure of the rostellum in 
allied genera of Orchideee, and indicates some of the more import«mt 
morphological changes to which that organ is subjected, in connec- 
tion with the development of various appendages to the column and 
pollen in the same natural family. 



tS8 

XIX. " On the Immediate Principles of the Excrements of Man 
and Animals in the Healthy Condition.^^ By Wilijam 
Mabcdt, M.P. Communicated by F. Mabcet, F.B.S. 
Received June 14, 1854. 

Hie author describes a new method of extracting the immediate 
chemical constituents of the excrements of Man and animals, and 
gives an account of the substances obtained by its employment. 

Healthy human feecea are boiled to exhaustion in alcohol. The 
residue is insoluble in ether, and yields to boiling water nothing but 
ammoniaco-magncsian phosphate. The strained alcoholic solution 
deposits, on standing, a sediment, from which it is decanted and then 
mixed with milk of lime. The subsiding lime is of a yellow-brown 
colour ; it is dried on hltering-paper and treated with ether, cold or 
hot, and the solution thus obtained yields, on spontaneous evapora- 
tion. beautiful silky crystals, which are purihed by solution in a 
mixture of alcohol and ether, repeated filtration through animal 
charcoal and recrystallization ; they then appear in circular groups, 
have the form of acicular four-skied prisms, and polariae light very 
readily, This crystalline body the author proposes to call Excretine* 
It is very soluble in ether, cold or hot, but sparingly soluble in cold 
alcohol; its solution has a decided though weak alkaline reaction. 
It is insoluble in hot or cold water, and is not decomposed by dilute 
mineral acids. It fuses between and 96"^ C., and at a higher 
temperature bums away without inorganic residue. When boiled 
with solution of potash it does not dissolve. As to its qualitative 
constitution* it is found to contain nitrogen and sulphur, though in 
smell proportions ; the products of its decomposition have not yet 
been investigated. 

The author has in several cases observed the excretine to crystal- 
liae directly in the alcoholic solution of fasces before the addition of 
Ume* and has scarcely any doubt that it exists for tlie most part in 
a Irea state in the excrements, and constitutes one of their ivm^ 
diate principles. As to its source, he observes that it appeared in 
fgccai vhen a considerable quantity of beef had been taken* and in 
Um than the usual quantity in a case of diarrhcea attencM with 
hm «f appetite} hut none could he directly obtained from beef on 



154 


subjecting it to the same process of extraction as faeces. Neither 
could it be found in ox«bile, the urine, or the substance of the spleen. 
From the difHculty of obtaining the contents of the human small in- 
testine in a healthy state, its presence or absence in that part of the 
alimentary canal has not yet been satisfactorily determined. 

The Jime precipitate, after having been thus thoroughly deprived 
of the excretin e by ether, is next treated with hydrochloric acid, 
and water or alcohol, by which means margaric acid is extracted 
from it. I'he author is uncertain whether the margaric acid of the 
fasces is free or combined with excretinc, but he is disposed to con- 
clude that the neutral fata are decomposed in the intestinal canal 
and their acid set free. Not having been able to detect stearic acid 
in human evacuations, he supposes that what is contained in the fat 
of mutton or beef tsken as food must be converted into margaric 
acid in its passage through the alimentary canal. 

The lime precipitate, freed from excretine and dissolved in alcohol 
by means of hydrochloric acid, forms adafk port- wine-coloured solu* 
tion, from which the margaric acid is deposited. On tlien adding 
water to the solution and concentrating it on the water-bath, a flaky 
colouring matter separates, which, being purified by solution in etbet 
and washing with water, is obtained us a dark-brown or black amor- 
phous substance, similar to the colouring matter of blood, and to 
that which Dr. Harley has lately extracted from urine. 

The matters brought down with the lime having been thus ex- 
tracted, the sediment which spontaneously subsides from the alco- 
holic solution of fseces before its treatment with the milk of lime, is 
next examined. This deposit appears to be complex in its nature ; it 
has a strongly acid reaction, and presents under the microscope small 
oily globules, mixed sometimes with crystals of excretine and accom^ 
panied by a yellow amorphous matter. By boiling with alcohol and 
filtration, a residue remains which the author has not yet examined, 
and two substances are obtained from the filtrate. The first is de- 
posited on cooling ; when collected and dried on filtering-paper it 
has a granular character and is quite colourless ; it is very sparingly 
soluble in ether, fuses by heat, and bums with a bright fuliginous 
fiame, leaving a white residue consisting of phosphate of potash. 
The author has not yet been able satisfactorily to decide whether 
thift is 4 pure immediate principle or not; he is tncliaed to conridet 



165 


it «« a combination of phosphate of potash and a pure organic sub- 
stance. The titered fluid* alter separation of this matter* still con- 
tains a substance which he has called Excretolic acid. It is obtained 
by Bvv^porating to dryness* extracting the residue with ether* adding 
to the ethereal solution alcohol and lime-water, and heating. The 
acid is precipitated in combination with lime* from which it is sepa- 
rated by means of sulphuric or hydrochloric acid (urd solution in 
ether. ITie ethereal solution* after being well washed with water 
to remove mineral acid, yields the pure excretolic acid on evapora- 
tion. This body is of an olive colour ; it fuses between 25° and 
26° C.* and at a higher temperature burns without residue. It is 
insoluble in water and in a boiling solution of potash ; very soluble 
in ether, sparingly soluble in cold alcohol, readily so in hot; its 
solutions having a marked acid reaction. The author is disposed to 
believe that in excrement it is combiued in form of a salt, with ex- 
cretine or a basic substance closely allied to it, which is obtained in 
the filtrate from which the excretolic acid is precipitated in com- 
bination with lime in the process of its purifleatiun. 

The author failed to obtain evidence of the presence either of 
butyric or of lactic acid in the clear alcoholic solution of fmces fllterefl 
from the precipitate formed by the milk of lime. From the above 
investigation, therefore, it appears that healthy human excrements 
contain : — 

1 . A new organic 8 ubstan 9 e* poasesaing an alkaline reaction, which 
the autlior names E^creiinc. 

2. A fatty acid, having the properties of margaric acid, but not 
constantly present. 

-3. A colouring matter, similar to that of blood and urine. 

4, A light granular substance, whose properties have not yet 
been sufficiently examined to admit of its being considered a pure 
substance. 

6, An acid olive-coloured aubstauce, of a fatty nature, named 
Excretolic acid, 

6. No butyric acid and no lactic acid. 

Thflf f»ces of various ammals were submitted to tbe same process 
of analysii, with tl^e following results : — 

I, Tbo oxoromants of carnivorous mammalia, viz. the Tiger^4^- 
fiaid nvi4 oa moat), contain a substance allied in 

vat. ru, <4 



166 


ture to excretine, but not identical with it. They contain no ex- 
cretlne; they yield butyric acid, which is not present in human 
excrements. 

2. The excrements of the Crocodile contain cholesterine and no 
uric acid, whilst those of the Boa yield uric acid and no cholesterine. 

3. The fasces of herbivorous animals, viz. the Horse, Sheep, Dog 
(fed on bread). Wild Boar, Elephant, Deer and Monkey, contain no 
excretine, no butyric acid and no cholesterine. 


XX. On the Vine-Disease in the Port- wine Districts of the 
Alto-Douro, in April 1864. With a Supplementary Note 
on the Proposed Remedies for its Eradication." By 
Jos, James Fokeestee, Esq., F.R.G.S. Communicated 
by J. P. Gassiot, Esq., F.R.S. Received May 17, 1854. 

In Portugal, where the vine-disease committed great ravages last 
year, no measures have as yet been adopted for ascertaining whe- 
ther the disease is radicai, or only superficial; or whether any 
practical remedy may be adopted in order to arrest the progress of 
the evil. 

At Oporto, and in the north of Portugal, an opinion prevails — 

" lliat the Oidtum is the effect, and not the cause of the epidemic. 

" That the roots and the wood of the vines are diseased. 

That sporules of the Olfdiwm exist in the interior of the vine, and 
about its roots. 

**Tbat the obstruction to the ascent of the sap through the 
various ducts, originates in the roots. 

lliat black spots appear in the joints of the branches, indicating 
that disease exists throughout the body of the vine. 

That a new fungus has appeared on the vines, in the shape of 
small globules, containing carbonic acid. 

And '*that, although vegetation may continue iot a while, the 
fruit will not ripen, and the vines will die in a couple of years from 
this date.'* v 

Considering that it would be of some importance to determine 
whether the disease has its origin in the roots or from external 



167 


causes^ and with a hope that some practical cure for the dieeaBcd 
vines grown in the open air may be discovered, I record the results 
of my own observations of the progress of the vine-malady in the 
Alto-Douro. 

The Port- wine restrict extends eight leagues west and east from 
the Serra do Mar&o (an elevation of 4400 feet* from the level of the 
sea) to the Quinta do Baleira, near Sam Joao da Pesqueira, and 
four leagues north and south, between Villa Real and the city of 
Lamego t* 

The winter streams, tributaries to the Douro, on the right bank, are 
the Sermenha, Corgo, Ceira, Pinhio, and Tua ; and, on the left, the 
Varozn, Temilobos, Tedo, Tavora, and Torto. 

At Baleira, the Douro runs at an elevation of not more than 250 
feet ; whence some opinion may be formed of the nature and inequality 
of the country, and of the numerous abrupt mountain ridges, on the 
inclines of which the vines are grown. The Wine-Districts of the 
Alto-Douro form a long irregular basin, girt by the granite chains 
of the Tras-os-Montes and Beira ; and this being for the most part 
of schist formation, and protected from the bleak winds, is parti- 
cularly adapted for the cultivation of the vine. The strata of the 
margins of the Douro differ fr*om the higher and middle grounds 
in character, being composed of strong clays, more or less 
micaceous/* 

The extreme northern and southern boundaries — from the Serra 
do MarSo to Favaios, and from the Serra do MUnte Muro (near 
Lamego) to Sam JoSo da Pesqueira — are undulating mountain 
plains of still heavier soil, and more suitable for the growth of firs 
than vines. In former years, this fact was clearly defined by the 
Royal Wine Company, who divided the districts into two, one 
being termed Feitoria (where the most siiperior wines were produced 
and classified for exportation), the other Ramo, where only very 
inferior wines, for the consumption of the country and for diatilla* 
tion, were produced to a small extent. Now, the two districts have 
become one ; the plantations of pines on the heights and the corn- 
producing valleys having alike been converted into vineyards ; the 

- V Conxidericoes geraet sobre s Conititui^uo Oeologioso do AJto-Douro.*' By 
h P. Eebello. Porto, J846. 

t fiee map of the Wino-DUtriotx of the AUo-Uoaro. By J. 

m2 



16 ^ 

quantity^ and hot the qiidlity, of thk produce being the resutts sought 
by the wine-grower within this privileged demarcatioh* 

One thousand vines generally produce a pipe of wine, and the 
total number of vines in the Port- wine Districts above described 
may be estimated at 90,000,000. 

In the summer time, there is great scarcity of water throughout 
the district. The vineyards are for the most part situated on abrupt 
mountGun slopes, the vines being planted on terraces, which are not 
appropriate for the cultivation of anything else. The Vines are 
grown not higher than three feet from the ground, and are planted 
about six feet apart, supported with canes or stakes. The labour 
in the vineyards is performed by the natives of Gallicta, who visit 
the district three or four times a year in search of employment. 

In July 1850, I first observed a blight on three or four vines, at 
a considerable distance from each other, in the Wine Districts. The 
genenil appearance of this blight to the ^aked eye greatly resembled 
that which appears on the peach-tree and the rose. The Douro 
farmers had often previously noticed a similar po* brancd (white 
powder) on the vines. 

In 1851 the season was favourable, and the vinea (on which we 
had observed the blight in the previous year) were vigorouii, and 
produced perfect fruit. The vintage of 1851, throughout the Alto- 
Dviuro, was excellent. In 1852 there was much wet and cold ; the 
blight again appeared, and the rines were attacked to the extent of 
about one in fifteen hundred. The Vintage df 1852 was of inferior 
quality ; but no one ascribed the failure to any disease in the vine. 
From the autumn of 1852 until midsummer 1853, continued rain, 
sleet, luul, and bleak winds prevailed, and in 1853 there was no 
spring. In March of the same year the navigation of the Douro 
was impeded, and the bar rendered impassable on account ctf the 
floods ; and in April atid May of the same year, prayern were ofifered 
up in the churches throughout the Wine Districts for fine weather. 

In March 1854, only half-cargoes could be brooght down the 
river Douro, on account 6f the want of watefr, and rain was prayed 
for. 

Early in June 1853, the heat became suddenly intenae, and the 
vines had already burst forth with great vigour; whilst, in 
middle of tlie same month, the nights became as cold as in Vrlnter. 



m 


In lise mo»t exposed Situations the vines received the ^preatest 
shock ; the circulation of the sap was evidently deranged, and their 
fruit withered as soon as it appeared. In some neighbouring viae« 
yardsi less exposed, the grapes grew no larger than peas; they 
were then suddenly covered with the blight (now designated the 
Ofdiuni)^ and in about three days became rotten. 

On the inclines of the mountains on either bank of the river 
Douro, the waters had run off, and but little blight appeared. In 
the low and heavy grounds, the most sheltered from the winds, 
the waters remained stagnant ; yet the fhiit grew to its full sise, 
and had come to maturity, when the new wood, leaves, and fruit 
Were all, to a greater or less degree, covered with the Oidium, ll&e 
blight sometimes attacked entire vineyards, and at other times only 
partially affected one property, and then showed itself in others at a 
distance — ^intermediate estates being for the time wholly untouched. 

It was in July 1853 that the existence of the disease in the 
vineyards of the Douro first attracted particular attention ; but 
many vines betrayed no unhealthy symptoms until the fruit was 
nearly ripe. The upper part of the branches was first attacked, in 
some instances the woody part of the young branches was speckled 
with the Otdiatn, while the bunches cd fruit were apparently alto- 
gether free from it. In other instances, the gri^s became touched 
with the disease immediately before the vintage, but the woody 
part of the branches betrayed no such symptoms. In some vines, 
which 1 supposed had altogether escaped the disease (and long 
after the fruit was gathered and the leaves had fidlen off), blotches 
or stains, evidenitly the myceliiirm of the Otdium, appeared on the 
wood. 

The usual number of seeds in a black grape is two or three ; hut 
in the year 1853, in all instances the gn^s, which at first pro- 
mised abundance of wine, were found each to eontam firom three to 
five seeds. 

Twenty-one baskets of grapes usually produce one pipe of Wine ; 
bat in the year 1853, a pipe of wine was rarely obtained even from 
thirty baskets of grapes. From seven to nine pipes of ordinary wine 
l^nerally give a pipe of brandy, 20 per cent, above British proof ; 
tint in the year 1853, from ten to twelve pipes of ordinary Wine 
were required to give one pipe of brandy of that strength. 



160 


Win««, when properly made, should be trodden continuouely for 
36 hours in the Hgar (an open stone vat), and remain there for 36 
to 48 hours more, until the tumultuous fermentation be completed, 
when they should be run off into larger toneh (wooden vats, not 
tightly bunged), where the second fermentation will be completed 
about Christmas. In 1863, in situations where the disease most 
prevailed, the grapes fermented before they had been trodden more 
than twelve hours, when the wines were drawn off and passed into 
tonels, where brandy, as a precautionary measure, was given to them. 
The fermentation of these wines ceased altogether before the 15th 
October. In other situations, where the disease had not made pro* 
gress, the grapes were sound ; and, where they were properly crushed 
and fermented, they produced excellent wine, without the addition 
of brandy. 

Wines, during their second fermentation, deposit a thick coating 
of argolon the sides of the tonels* In 1853 there was very little 
argol deposited j but the gross lees of the wine were in great de- 
mand, and sold for about 15^. per basket,*— a sum which in former 
years might almost have purchased double the quantity of gi^pes. 

In the same manner as the form and colour of the wood, leaves, 
and fruit of vines differ, so does their pith vary in appearance, 
according to the age of the wood or the quality of the vine, llie 
pith in an old vine, when the sap is rising, graduates from a deep 
vandyke-brown colour to a pale yellow, the shade being always 
darker near the joints. 

In April 1854, 1 rooted up many vines of different qualities, and 
in various situations, and I was unable then to detect any remarkable 
appearance in the interior of the vine different from what I had 
seen in other years after continued wet and cold weather; but the 
exterior of all the last year's branches bore palpable evidence of 
having been violently attacked with the Oi^dtam. Some vines had 
suffered more than others, and many of their vessels were evidently 
choked; but, in most instances, in cutting the vine longitudinally, 
this obstruction was found to have arisen either from wounds, bad 
pruning, or natural decay. I found no black spots at the joints of 
the branches; and. with the exception of the stains left by the 
disease of last year, the vines looked healthy and vigorous, throw* 
ing out strong shoots and promising an abundance of fruit. 





Towards the end of April 1854, much rain fell in the district ; 
the easterly winds destroyed the young branches ; and in the most 
exposed situations and heavy soils the Otdium again made its ap- 
pearance. 

In 1 853, the disease attacked the vines bodily, and almost simul- 
taneously: whereas, in 1854, the Oldium appears to l>e creeping 
out of the skin of the last year’s wood, and insidiously to extend 
itself over the bitches. 

The globules (to which allusion has been made above) cover the 
young shoots. I have been familiar with these for twenty -three 
years past, and the Douro farmers call them the perspiration of 
the vine. They do not indicate disease, whereas the smallest 
possible quantity of the po' hranco, or white powder, being transferred 
to a perfectly healthy vine, immediately infected it. 

In the Alto-Douro the oranges, lemons, citrons and limes have 
all been blighted, and every kind of vegetable appears to be suffer- 
ing from sickness. 

The vines which suffered most in the Alto* Douro, in 1853, were 
the Muscatel, Malvazia, AlvaiiOi&o, Ferral, Agadanho and Senz9*o. 

Since my arrival in this country 1 have noticed that the vines 
grown on walls in the open air, vines grown in greenhouses, vines 
grown in hot-houses, vines forced, all show identically the same 
effects of the Oidiww of last year, as exist on the vines in the Alto- 
Douro. 

Taking into consideration all the circumstances above narrated, 
I have come to the conclusion, — 

That the Oidium is the cause, and not the effect of the disease ; that 
the inclemency of the season in 1853, by checking the circulation 
of the sap in the vines, produced a predisposition for disease ; that 
if the Oidium continues to appear on the branches of the vines, it 
is only too probable that it may in a very few years be destroyed ; 
that the globules are a sign of health and not of disease, and have no 
connexion whatever with the fungus called Oidium ; and that if the 
germ of the Oldtum, probably still larking on the old branches, can 
be destroyed in the open air as efibctually as it appears to have been 
destroyed under glass, then I fe<d persuaded that all the vines in the 
Port- wine districts of the Alto-Douro may be saved. 



162 


'^Supplementary Note on the proposed Remedies for the Era- 
dication of the Vine-Malady ” Received June 1, 1854. 

Ist. I will take the annual production of wines in the Port- wine 
districts of the Alto-Douro at 80,000 pipes instead of 90,000, and 
the number of vines to be treated as diseased at 80,000,000. 

2nd. The value of freehold land in that district, for the growth of 
1000 vines, or one pipe of wine, may be estimated at 50/., yielding 
an interest or rental of 3/. per annum. 

Srd. The total freehold value of the vineyards in those districts 
may be estimated at 4,000,000/. sterling, giving an annual revenue 
of 240,000/. 

4th. In the event of the disease not being checked in its progress, 
and tlie grapes being destroyed this year in the Alto-Douro, a mtW- 
mum loss of 240,000/, will bensustained, and should the vines perish, 
the loss may be 4,000*000/. 

6th. Portugal is said to produce annually 1,000,000 pipes of 
wine of all sorts and qualities, but I will estimate the total produc- 
tion at 800,000 pipes, and the total number of vines in the country 
at 800,000,000. 

If Flour of Sulphur be used, the leaves* branches and shoots are 
first moistened as equally as possible with a syringe; then the 
whole is dusted with sulphur, which adheres to the moistened 
surface. 

This operation would have to be repeated thrice, and would con- 
sume two ounces of sulphur for every vine, in each of the operations, 
making a total of 480,000,000 ounces, or about 13,392 tons for the 
treatment of the 80,000,000 vines in the Alto-Douro, and 133,920 
tons for the vines of the whole country. 

Salphur would not cost less than 10/. per ton, delivered in the 
eentre of the Alto-Douro districts, or in any other part of the ante- 
rior of Portugal. llie expense of sulphur required for the Douro 
would be 1^32^920/., and for tiie whole country 1,839,200/. 

One man oould moisten one vine in one minute, and axtother man 
could dust it with sulphur in the same time, so that two man 
perform riie complete operation on about 700 vines daily, at a cost 



163 


of U, each man for labour, making a total of 14,285/. in the 
Alto-Douro. and 142,850/. for all Portugal. 

I will suppose that there are 4000 vineyards in the Alto-Douro, 
planted each with 20,000 vines. The first cost of syringes and 
fumigatora would amount to not less than 10/. for each vineyard, or 
a total of 40,000/. for the Alto-Douro. 

One quart of water would be required for every vine in each ope- 
ration, making a total of about 90,000 pipes, the cartage of which, 
and the labour of distributing it over the mountain vineyards, in 
tubs, on men’s heads, would cost a minimum of 10s. per pipe, or a 
total of 45,000/. for the Alto-Douro, and 450,000/. for the whole 
country. 


Recapitulation, 



In the Douro. 

In the whole 
country. 

For sulphur, say 

For labour, at £1.5,000 for each of the] 

three operations J 

For water, at £45,000 for each of the i 

£136,000 
^ 45,000 

1 

£1,350,000 

450,000 

three operations, or as much a» the 
sulphur J 

^ 135,000 

1,350,000 

For instruments 

40,000 

£355,000 

400,000 

£3,550,000 


This is independent of any charge for factors or superintendents, or 
for the extra expense in treating vines and vineyards which are so 
much further apart than are those in the Alto-Douro. 

This expense to be incurred in the endeavour to save one year'$ 
crop, would be equal to a charge of 4/. 10^. per pipe, or to a year 
and a rental of the vineyards, or to more than the whole revenue 
of Portugal for an entire year. 

If a solution of lime and sulphur be employed instead of flour of 
sulphur, the operation would not be less expensive. 

If, in cot^uncHon with the sulphuring of the branches, the roots 
were to be exposed, and sulphur and lime thrown upon them, I could 
not estimate the total expense at less than to Hd. per vine, 
which would entail a charge equal to another year and a half’s 

VOL, VII, » 



164 


rental of the vineyarcU, or 18 j>er cent, on their freehold value for 
the chance of saving one year's crop. 

Again, if the trunks of tlje vines be bored and the sulphur in- 
seited, this most delicate oj)eration could only be performed by the 
factors themselves, and if the vines were to be cut down to the 
ground and grafted with cuttings from sound vines, the entire ope- 
ration (which could only he performed by the factors) would cost 
1 ;};//* to for each vine, or as much as the sulphuring process; 
and besides this, there would be a loss of four years' produce at ZL 
|K’r pipe per annum, making a total loss of 16/. lOi?. in every vine- 
yard grow ing vines capable of yielding one pipe of wine, or about 

\ ])cr cent., or one-third of the freehold value of the estate. 

Lastly, tlic dressing of the trunk and branches of 800,000,000 
vines with mineral tar could not be carried into operation within 
any reasonable period, on account of the tediousness of the process 
and the scarcity of labourers. The expense of the tur would also 
be a bar to its being used. ^ 





105 


November 16, 1854. 


Colonel SABINE, R.A., V.P. and Treasurer, in the Chair. 


J. Lockhart Clarke, Esq., and Captain Moore, R.N., were ad- 
mitted into the Society. 


The following communications were read : 


L Letter from Lieutenant Maury to Admiral Smyth, For. 
Sec. R.S. 


“ National Observatory, Washington, 
October 21, 1B54. 

Sir, — I have the honour to state, for the information of the 
Royal Society, that a new asteroid was discovered here by Mr.^James 
Ferguson, Assistant Astronomer, at 11 p.m., 2nd of Sept. 1854. 

** He was observing Egeria at the time, and found that, the 13th, 
and this, the 31st, in the field together. 

“ I have delayed this communication, waiting to ascertain whether 
the planet might not have been discovered by observers in other parts 
of the world ; and it appearing that it hod not, the priority of the 
discovery, therefore, belongs to the National Observatory ; and this 
new star is added to the family of asteroids as the first representa- 
tive of America among them, and a memorial of her zeal in the 
cause of astronomy. 

As a testimony of the high appreciation in which the talents and 
the industry of Mr. Ferguson are held, the honour of naming this 
planet was left to him. Following the rule adopted by astronomers 
with regard to the asteroids, he has selected the graceful name of 
Euphrosyne. 

VOL. vir. 


B 



166 


Its approximats ephemeris, with the lost observations, are here- 
with enclosed. 

** I have the honour to be, 

" Uesj^ectfully, &c., 

“ M. F. Maury, 

Lieut. IJ.S.Nr 

** Rear-Admiral W, H. Smyth, R.N** 


Ephemeris of Euphrosync- 
M. T. WftRUitigton. «. 

h m R It ra R f n 

1854, Oct. 19. 9 2 p 41-9 1 12 15 11 -1 56 7'21 

Elements of Euphrosyne, computed by Prof. Keith, from 
observations of Sept. 2nd, 6th and 1 0th . 

M. 13 36 33*3 Sept. 2 721 M. T. Greenwich, 

rr 352 5 60’6l M. Eqii. 1854 0. 

A 33 29 21*7/ 
t 22 39 15*6 
p 4 22 30*2 
log « 0*469530 

log y*. 2-S45712 


Ephemeris for October. 


M.T. Berlin. 

h 

m » 

1 59 21 

log r. 

log 4. 

1854, Oct. 19*5 

1 

12 0 

0*43828 

0-246l?2 

23*5 

1 

7 49 

I 47 29 

0*43850 

0-24937 

27*5 

1 

3 49 

1 33 49 

0*43873 

0 25343 

31-5 

1 

0 3 

1 18 18 

0*43897 

0-23861 


II. Letter from W. Gravatt, Esq., F.R.S,, to CoL Sabine, 
Treas. R.S, 

The writer announced the arrival in London of the Swedish 
Calculating Machine constructed by Mr. Schkutz. 



167 


11 L Observations on the Kespiratory Movements of Insects/^ 
By the late William Frkderick Barlow, F.li.C.S. 
Arranged and communicated by Jambs Paget, F.R.S, 
Received August 20, 1854. 

Tliia ossay contains the greater part of a series of observations 
made between 1845 and 1850. The following are some of the 
conclusions which they plainly indicate 

(1.) The respiratory movements of Dragon-flies (Libcllulaj), and, 
probably, of other insects also, are naturally subject to considerable 
and frequent variations in force and rate, the causes of many of 
these variations being as yet unknown. 

(2.) The respirations of these insects are always quickened by 
exercise, emotion, rise of temperature, galvanism, and mechanical 
irritation; and the last three agents quicken them in the decapitated, 
as well as in the perfect, insect. 

(3.) The respiratory movements of each segment of the trunk are, 
in some measure, independent of those of the rest, although in the 
perfect insect they concur in all the segments. They continue to 
be performed, though feebly and slowly, in separated segments, pro- 
vided their nervous cords and ganglia are entire ; and they may be 
abolished in single and successive segments by the local action of 
chloroform. 

(4.) The removal of the head, including the supra- and sub- (eso- 
phageal ganglia, does not, like the removal of the medulla oblongata 
of the vertebrate animal, put a stop to the respiratory movements of 
the insect ; but it diminishes their frequency and force, and deprives 
them of all influence of the will and of mental emotions, 

(5.) The shock inflicted by the sudden destruction of tl^e head, or 
of the terminal part of the abdomen, generally stops all the respira- 
tory movements' of the insect for a time, and much enfeebles them 
during the remainder of its life. 

(6.) The general tendency of the observations is to corroborate 
the opinion of the self*su£flciency of the several ganglia for the 
movements of their appropriate segments, and, thus far, to maintain 
the belief in their essential independence. At the same time, the ob- 

s2 



168 


servations on the difliised influence of shocks accord with those of 
the coordinate similar movements of all the segments, in proving 
their close mutual relations and mutual influence* 


November 23, 1854. 

THOMAS BELL, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 

W. C* Williamson, Esq., was admitted into the Society, in accord- 
ance with the Statutes. 

The Cliairman gave notice of the ensuing Anniversary Meeting, 
and read the names of the noblemen and gentlemen proposed as 
Council and Officers for the ensuing year. 

The following gentleincn were elected Auditors of the Treasurer's 
Accounts on the part of the Society : — 

Sir B. Brodie, Bart., C. Darwin, Esq., Dr, Hofmann, James 
Paget, Esq., and Robert Stephenson, Esq. 

The following communications were read : — 

L ^'On the Impregnation of the Ovum in the Stickleback,” 
By W, H. Ransom, M.D. Communicated by Dr. Suabpev, 
Sec. R.S. Received October 20, 1854. 

I purpose placing before the Royal Society in this communication, 
the principal results of experiments made during the months of 
June and July last, on the impregnation of the ovum in GasteroBteua 
leiuruB and G» pungitiuBt and hope to be able to furnish a more 
detailed account of my observations bn a future occauon. 

The ovarian ovum of these Ashes, at a very early stage of its 
development, is provided with a proper investing membrane, the 
future chotion. At a later period, one portion of this membrane 
presents a number of cup-shaped pediculated bodies scattered over 
its surface, and in the centre of this part of the chorion there is a 



169 


funoel-ehaped depreasion, pierced bj a canal which leads towards the 
centre of the egg. 

In the nearly ripe ovum, the germinal vesicle occupies an excentrio 
position with respect to the egg as a whole, but imbedded in the 
centre of a semi-solid accumulation of dne granular matter at that 
part of the surface which corresponds to the funnel-shaped depres- 
sion ; BO that the apex of the funnel, projecting inwards beyond the 
level of the inner surface of the chorion, makes a depression in the 
centre of the layer of granular matter, and comes nearly into contact 
with the germinal vesicle. 

For convenience of description, the funnel-shaped depression will 
now be called micropyle, and the layer of granular matter before 
impregnation, diacus proUgerua, 

The germinal vesicle disappears before the ovum leaves the ovary, 
and no remnant of it or its spots can be seen. 

A very delicate membrane invests the yelk within the chorion ; 
this membrane is more distinct after impregnation, or after the 
action of water upon an unimpregnated egg ; it may be isolated, and 
then exhibits a remarkable degree of elasticity. It is not a yelk-mem^ 
brane, and it will be spoken of as the inner membrane. 

The layer of the yelk immediately internal to the inner membrane 
passing over the discus proligerus, is formed by yellowish highly 
refractive drops which disappear in water, undergoing some remark- 
able changes, and by a fluid substance which water precipitates in 
a finely granular form. 

The principal mass of the yelk consists of a clear and very con- 
sistent albumen. The oil is collected into a few very large drops 
which come up to the surface. 

When the ovum escapes from the ovary, it enters a cavity which 
may be considered as the ovarian extremity of the oviduct, in which 
a oonwdcrable quantity of clear viscid fluid is previously secreted 
and collected, to be expelled with the ova. 

More exact observation of *the micropyle in the free eggs proves 
that the inner end of the canal is either open, or at most closed by 
a very delicate membrane. When looking into the funnel from the 
wide mouth, the apex being in focus, a bright, clear, round or oval 
spot, such as an aperture would produce, is always visible. If a 



170 


Acctiou l>e made of the egg» and the a|>ex brought into focua from 
within, the same clear spot is well seen, and the hue and regularly 
dotted structure of the chorion is seen to cease suddenly at the 
margin of the clear spot. 

The general form of the ' egg after deposition is round, but it is 
rendered irregular by indentations caused by the pressure of other 
eggs. It is inelastic, and retains impressions made in it by a needle ; 
and when placed in water, these characters remain for a lung time if 
it be not impregnated, — a fact whicli indicates that water does not 
pass through the micropyle, or by imbibition through the chorion. 
The viscid secretion of the oviduct which invests the eggs may 
defend them against the action of water, in which it does not readily 
diiFuse or dissolve. This secretion has an alkaline reaction. The 
substance of the yelk has a decidedly acid reaction, — more than 
enough to neutralize the alkalinity of the viscid secretion. This 
reaction is, I believe, due to a peculiar organic acid, but the ex- 
periments relating to this question are not yet complete. The 
seminal particles of the* male continue to move for a considerable 
period in the viscid secretion which envelopes the ripe ova, but they 
very quickly become still in water. 

In the act of impregnation one or mure (as many os four have 
been seen) spermatozoids pass into the micropyle, and probably by 
their proper motion overcome the obstruction which prevents the 
entrance of water. Actively moving spermatozoids may remain in 
contact with the chorion for eighteen minutes at least without pro- 
ducing any sensible change in the ovum, provided none of them enter 
the micropyle, but when one is seen to enter, in about a quarter 
of a minute a change is observable. 

The changes which are observed to follow the entrance of the 

spermatozoids into the micropyle are the following; In about a 

quarter of a minute the tube is shortened, and very soon a clear space 
becomes visible within the chorion near the micropyle : this space, or 
respiratory chamber, gradually extends^ the opposite pole of the egg 
end increases in diameter, as does also the whole ovum. During 
the formation of this apece the surrounding fluid enters through the 
micropyle, and this gradually retracts and is at length closed. This 
entrance of fluid into the egg effaces the depressions, restores the 



171 


vvund form, and makes it £rm and elastic ; but does not cause 
any such precipitation of granular matter as is produced by its arti- 
ficial introduction. 

While the respiratory chamber is yet in progress of formation, the 
yellow drops of tlie superficial layer of the yelk grow pale and 
disappear ; the change beginning near the micropyle. As a result 
of this, the whole egg becomes clearer, and the disms prolifferus^ 
which may be now more correctly denominated the germinal mass, 
is more distinct. 

The yelk now very slowly alters its form, one surface becoming 
flattened ; but about fifteen or twenty minutes after impregnation a 
remarkable and more vivid contraction begins, causing the yelk to 
pass through a series of regularly recurring forms. The contraction 
begins on one side near the equator, and soon forms a circular con- 
striction which gives the yelk the figure of a dumb-bell, the longer 
axis of which is the polar axis of the egg. The constriction travels 
towards the germinal pole, and next produces a flask' shaped figure ; 
this is at length lost by the constriction passing on, and the round 
form is regained in about a minute. This wave reappears and 
travels forward again without any distinct period of rest, and 1 have 
seen these movements continue for forty-five minutes, though towards 
the latter part of this period they are less distinct and more limited 
in extent. The germinal mass has itself during these contractions, 
which strongly resemble the peristaltic movements of the intestine, 
undergone changes in form, and has increased in bulk and distinctness. 
These movements are unalFected by weak galvanic currents. 

During the passage forward of each wave of contraction there is 
an oscillation of the whole mass of the yelk, so that its germinal 
pole passes once to the right and once to the left of the micropyle, 
to which it at first corresponded. The plane of this oscillation may 
be vertical, horizontal, or inclined, but always cuts the micropyle ; 
it begins and ceases with the contractions already mentioned, and 
would seem to be a mechanical result of them. 

For some time before cleavage 1>egin8, the only changes of form are 
the appearance of wave -like elevations and depressions along the 
tinder surface of the germinal mass, and its alternate concentrarion 
and diffusion. Cleavage begins in about two hours after impreg- 



172 


uation ; no embryonic oeU waa obaerved before it begani nor in any 
of the cleavage masses. 

The inner membrane is folded in during cleavage ; it is easily 
seen thrown into folds at the cleft, and for this reason I do not 
consider it a yelk^memhrme^ which term would be better applied to 
the chorion. 


IL On the Applicability of Gelatine Paper as a Medium for 
Colouring Light/^ By Houack Dobell, Esq. Communi- 
cated by James Paget, F.R.S. Received November 9, 
1854. 

The object of this communication is threefold. 

(1.) To point out the properties of a material called Gelatine 
Paper, which render it applicable as a medium for colouring light. 

(2.) Through the means of gelatine paper, to introduce the use 
of coloured light in the arts for the preservation of the sight of 
artisans. 

(3.) To introduce tlie use of gelatine paper for the relief of 
persons suffering from impaired vision : for the preservation of the 
sight of travellers, and of aU those who are much engaged in reading. 

This material was invented in 1829 by the late M* Grenet, of 
Rouen, and was exhibited by him in its present state of perfection 
at the Great Exhibition of 185L But up to the present time it has 
not been successfully applied to any more useful purposes than the 
manufacture of artificial flowers, address -cards, tracing-paper, wafers, 
wrappers for confectionary, and the like. 

It is commonly manufactured in sheets, measuring 22 inches in 
length and 16 inches in diameter, which are sold at a smaH price ; 
but the sheets can as easily be made of any dimensions not ex- 
ceeding those of which plate-glass is capable. It can be made of 
any thickness, from that of the flnest tissue paper upwards. It may 
be obtained as transparent as the best glass, and more free from colour, 
or of all colours and shades of colour, without interfering with its 
transparency. It is exceedingly light, and may be bent or rolled 
up without injury. It con be cut with scissors like ordinary paper. 



178 


and may easily be stitched mth a needle and thread. By means of 
an aqueous solution of gelatine> it can be made to adhere accurately 
to plates of glass without any interference with its transparency. 
When varnished with collodion it becomes perfectly waterproof, more 
pliable, capable of bearing a considerable degree of heat without 
injury, and its transparency is not affected. 

Hence it appears, that, in addition to its transparency and suscep- 
til)ility to various colours and forms, gelatine paper is cheap, por- 
table, and durable. 

Such being the properties of the material, the following are 
enumerated by the author as some of the forms in which he suggests 
that it may be employed, and in which it has already been found 
useful. 

1. A small sheet of very pale green or blue gelatine paper, to 
be used in reading. The sheet is simply to be laid upon the page 
of the book, and the reading to be conducted through the coloured 
medium. If used in a faint light, the reading paper is to be raised 
a little from the book to admit more light beneath it. 

2. A sheet of gelatine paper of pale green set in a light frame, 
and placed like a screen before the window or lamp of the engraver, 
the watchmaker, the jeweller, and the like ; thus providing a light 
of genial colour in which they may pursue their occupations. 

3. A similar appliance to the last-mentioned for the use of 
needlewomen. For this purpose screens are to be provided, both of 
green cmd of blue gelatine paper ; so that the white materials em- 
ployed iu needlework may be changed to a pleasant green, by the 
screen of that colour, the yellow materials to a green by the blue 
screen, and by one or other of these screens the reds softened down 
into violets or browns. 

4. For either of the two last purposes cm a larger scale, the 
gelatine paper may be attached to the window glass of the apart- 
menti thus colouring, if necessary, all the light admitted during day- 
light. 

5. Shades for the eyes in certain idfections of the sight, to take 
the place of the green or blue silk and card shades worn by many 
persons. The gelatine paper being transparent, will allow the 
wearer to see his way about, at the same time that the eyes are pro- 
tected from a glaring light. This may be especially useful in cases 



174 


where it is desired not only to shade a diseased eye, but also to pro- 
tect its nerves from strong light admitted by the sound eye. When 
not only coloured light but a certain degree of darkness is required, 
this can be readily and delicately graduated by employing shades of 
different depths of colour, 

6. Masks of gelatine paper for protecting the eyes of travellers 
agmnst the glare of snow-fields and of sandy deserts. 


Ill, the Theory of Definite Integrals.^^ By W. II, L. 

Russell, Esq., B.A- Communicated by A. Cayley, Esq,, 
F.R.S. Received October 30, 1854, 

I propose in the following paper to investigate some new methods 
for summing various kinds of series, including almost all of the more 
important wliich ore met with in analysis, by means of definite 
integrals, and to apply the same to the evaluation of a large number 
of definite integrals. In a paper which appeared in the Cambridge 
and Dublin Mathematical Journal for May 1854, I applied certain 
of these series to tho integration of linear differential equations by 
means of definite integrals. Now Professor Boole has shown, in an 
admirable Memoir wlxich appeared in the Philosophical Transactions 
for the year 1844, that the methods which he has invented for the 
integration of linear differential equations in finite terms, lead to the 
summation of numerous series of an exactly similar nature, whence 
it follows that the combination of his methods of summation with 
mine, leads to the evaluation of a large number of definite integrals, 
as will be shown in this paper. It is hence evident that the discovery 
of other modes of summing these series by means of definite integrals 
must in all cases lead to the evaluation of new groups of definite 
integrals, as will also be shown in the following pages. I then point 
out that these investigations are equivalent to finding all the more 
important definite integrals whose values can be obtained in finite 
terms by the solution of linear differential equations with variable 
coefficients. Again, there are certain algebraical equations which 
can be solved at once by Lagrangc^s series, and by common alge- 
braical processes ; the summation of the former by moans of definite 



^ 176 


ntegnde affords us a new class of results, which I next consider. 
A continental mathematician, M. Smaasen, has given, in a recent 
volume of Crolle’s Journal, certain methods of combining series 
together which give us the means of reducing various multiple inte- 
grals to single ones. The series hitherto considered are what have 
been denominated ** factorial series;*’ but, lastly, I proceed to show 
that analogous processes extend to series of a very complicated 
nature and of an entirely different form, and for that purpose sum 
by means of definite integrals certain scries, whose values are obtained 
in finite terms in the ‘‘Exercices des Math^matiquea ” by means 
of the Residual Calculus. 7'he total result will be the evaluation 
of an enormous number of definite integrals on an entirely new type, 
and the application of definite integrals to the summation of many 
intricate series. 


November 30, 1854. 

Anniversary Meeting. A llt?port of the Proceedings will appear 
in a future Number. 


Decefnher 7, 1854. 

Colonel SABINE, V.P., in the Chair. 

The Chairman announced that the President had appointed the 
following noblemen and gentlemen Vice-Presidents for the ensuing 
year : — 

The Earl of Rosse, K.P., M.A. 

Colonel Sabine, R.A. 

, Sir Benjamin Brodic, Bart. 

Thomas Bell. Esq. 

Charles Darwin, Esq,, M.A. 

Charles Wheatstone, Esq. 

Robert Hunt, Esq., was admitted into the Society. 



176 


The following communications were read 

I. the Attraction of the Himalaya Mountains, and of the 
elevated region beyond them, upon the Plumb-line in 
India/' By the Venerable John Henky Pkatt, M.A,, 
Archdeacon of Calcutta. Communicated by the Rev. Pro- 
fessor Challis, M.A., F.R.S. &c. Received October 23, 
1854. 

The author commences by observing that it is now well known 
that the attraction of the Himalaya Mountains, and of the elevated 
region beyond them, has a sensible influence on the plumbdine in 
North India. This circumstance was brought to light during the 
progress of the great trigonometrical survey of that country. It 
was found by triangulation that the difference of latitude between 
the two extreme stations of the northern division of the arc, namely 
Kalianpur and Kaliana, is 5'^ 23^ 42''*2i)4. whereas astronomical ob- 
servations show a difference of 5® 23' 37"*058, which is 6"*236 less 
than the former. 

That the geodetic operations are not in fault, appears from this ; 
that two bases, about 7 miles long, at the extremities of the arc 
having been measured with the utmost care, and also the length of 
the northern base having been computed from the measured length 
of the southern one, through a chain of triangles extending about 
370 miles, the difference between the measured and the computed 
lengths was only 0*6 of a foot, which would produce, even if wholly 
lying in the meridian, a difference of only 0''*006 in the latitude. 

The difference 5" *236 must therefore be attributed to some other 
cause. A very probable cause presents itself in the attraction of the 
superflcial matter which lies in such abundance on the north of the 
Indian arc. It is easily seen that this disturbing force acts in the 
right direction, that is, it diminishes the difference of astronomical 
latitude between the two stations. Whether the cause here assigned 
will account for the error in the difference of latitude in quantity as 
well as in direction, is the question which the author proposes to 
discuss in the present paper. 



177 


It might seem at first sight that if mountain attraction were so 
influential as is here supposed, it would disturb the geodetic opera- 
tions, since in observing the altitude or depression of one station as 
seen from another, the error in the plumb-line must come into cal- 
culation. The author shows, however, by mathematical calculation, 
that the effect of mountain attraction on the geodetic operations is 
perfectly insensible, so that it is clearly the astronomical operation 
of finding the difference of latitude that requires the correction. 
This is further apparent from the results obtained by Colonel Everest 
on attempting to determine the azimuths of the arc at seven stations 
astronomically. 

To show the importance of considering mountain attraction in the 
delicate problem of the figure of the earth, the author investigates the 
effect of a small error in the difference of latitude of the extremities 
of an arc on the deduced value of the earth’s ellipticity. As two 
unknown quantities occur in the determination of the spheroid of 
revolution which most nearly agrees with the earth, namely a the 
equatorisl radius and $ the ellipticity, two arcs are required in order 
to determine them. The author selects the Russian arc, measured 
near North Cape, as the most advantageous with which to combine the 
northern portion of the Indian arc, and shows that an error of 5 '^‘236 in 
defect in the amplitude of the latter would diminish the value of the 
ellipticity resulting from the two by about the *^th part of the 
whole. If the effect of mountain attraction be as great as the author 
calculates it to be, (15'^* 885 in the northern portion of the Indian 

arc,) the ellipticity would be diminished by i «, and even by as much 

8 


as ~ s if the whole Indian arc from Kaliana to Damargida were 
6 


employed. 

Hie author then proceeds, first to develope his method of calcula- 
tion, and then to reduce his formula to numbers, according to the 
best data which he was able to collect. 

An expression is first investigated for the horizontal attraction of 
a prism of the earth’s crust standing on a given small base, having a 
amfdl height, and situated at a given angular distance (measured 
from the centre of the earth) from the station, A, at which the at- 
traction is sought. In the cases to which this expression is employed 



178 


it reduce* itaelf without sensible error to 



where M i* the attracting mass, a the chord joining its base with A, 
and 5 the angle subtended by this chord at the earth's centre. 

In applying this expression to the problem in hand, the author 
divides the earth's surface into lines, by vertical planes passing 
through at equal angular distances. These lines are further sub- 
divided by small circles having A for their common pole, and in this 
manner cutting the whole surface into curvilinear quadrilaterals. He 
then investigates what the law of dissection must be, that is, accord- 
ing to what law the radii of the small circles must be taken to in- 
crease, in order that the horizontal attraction of the portion of the 
crust standing on one of the quadrilaterals may be equal to the pro- 
duct of its average height and density by a constant quantity, inde- 
pendent of the distance of the quadrilateral from A. If a and a + ^ 
be the angular radii of two cohsecutive small circles, there results 

^ cos constant quantity =c. 

To fix the value of this constant, the author assumes a when 

4 

p and a are indefinitely small, which gives The above 

equation may then be solved numerically with sufficient approxima- 
tion. In this manner a table t» calculated of the radii of the suc- 
cessive small circles. 

These distances should be laid down, and the circles drawn, on a 
map or globe, as well as the lines dividing the surface into lines. 
Nothing then remains to be done but to ascertain the average heights 
of the masses standing on the compartments thus drawn. 

The author's paper was accompanied by a plate representing an 
outline of the continent of Asia. On this was laid down a polygonal 
figure DEFGHIJKL, (which for convenience the author calls the 
** enclosed space/') marking tlie boundary of an irregular mass, 
which is the only part of the earth's surface that appears to have a 
sensible effect on the plumb-line in India. The boundary of this 
space is thus defined : — 

DEF is the Himalaya range, having a bend at E from north-west 



179 


on the left, to east-by-Bouth on the right. FG ia a range running to 
the table-land of Yu-nan in lat. 25^ and long. 103". GH is the 
range of the Yun-Ling mountains, in which there are many peaks of 
perpetual snow. HI is the Inshan range. IJ is the Khing*khan 
range, very steep on the cast side, not so on the west ; the passes 
are said to be 5525 feet above the sea. JK is the Altai range, the 
highest peak of whicli is 10,800 feet; the average height is 6000 : the 
range declines towards the east. KL was once thought to be a 
range of mountains, but is now found to he a line of broken country. 
LD is the Bolor range, rising to an elevation similar to that of the 
Hindoo Koosh. There are besides these two ranges of mountains 
running into the enclosed space, parallel to the Altai and Southern 
Himalayas, namely the Thian-Schan range, or Celestial Mountains, 
and the Kuen-Luen range, being a continuation of the Hindoo Koosh, 
which rises from on altitude of 2558 feet near Herat to about 20,000 
where it meets the Bolor range. It is, however, with the elevation 
of the enclosed space itself that we are principally concerned, since 
ranges of mountains have not so important an influence, when 
distant, as table-lands of elevation. 

Before describing Uie country within these limits, the author gives 
a general sketch of the parts which lie outside, from which it ap- 
pears that the calculations may be confined to the enclosed space. 
He then describes in detail the nature of the country within the 
boundaries of the enclosed space, commencing with the Himalayas, 
which rise abruptly from the plains of India to 4000 feet and more, 
and cover an extensive broken space* some 100 or 200 miles wide, 
rising to great heights ; perhaps 200 summits exceed 1 8,000 feet ; 
the highest reaches to more than 28,000. The general base on 
which these peaks rest rises gradually to 9000 or 10,000 feet, whore 
it abuts on the great plateau north of the range. The character of 
the country to the south of this plateau is much better known than 
that to the north. If a circle with a radius 6°' 046 (the value of one 
of the radii employed in the dissection) be drawn around Kaliana, 
it will pass over the highest part of this plateau. This circle divides 
the enclosed space into two portions, of which the southern is called 
by the author the "Known*' and the northern the "Doubtful 
Region." The eflPects of the two portions are separated in the cal- 
culation by the introduction of an arbitrary fieictor. 

After describing the doubtful region, as far as was possible from 



180 


the data to which he had access, the author assumes, as the best 
general representation of the facts, that to the north of a line run- 
ning through Leh and H'Leiasa the doubtful region slopes gradually 
from 10,000 feet down to 2500 along a parallel line nearly in its 
centre, and then rises again at the same angle to the north, and that 
the portion to the south of the line first mentioned, and not included 
in the known region, slopes at four times that rate. 

The author then proceeds to numerical summations replacing an 
integration to be extended over the whole of the enclosed space. 
The breadth of the lines employed in the calculation is taken at 30®, 
which is shown not to be too large to give good results. The fol- 
lowing are the results obtained : — 

Arising from 



known 

Doubtful 


Station A, Kaliana. 

region. 

region. 

Total. 

Deflexion of plumb-line in meridian 
Correction of same for every 1001 

12*972 

0*312 

14-881 

0-260 

-27-853 

feet of change in heights . . , . J 


DefleKion of plumb-line in prime 1 
vertical / 

8*136 

8*806 

16-942 

Station B, Kalianpur. 




Deflexion in meridian 

3*219 

8*749 

11-968 

Correction for 100 feet 

0059 

0*158 


Deflexion in prime vertical . • . ^ . 

0*789 

3*974 

4-763 

Station C, Damargida. 




Deflexion in meridian 

1*336 

5*573 

6-909 

Correction for 100 feet ^ 

0*022 

0*100 


Deflexion in prime vertical 

0*000 

2*723 

2-723 


whence there results. 

Total deftexion at A=:i32*601, and in azimuth 3i 18 East. 
Total deflexion at 82 = 12 * 880 , and in azimuth 21 42 East. 
Total deflexion at C= 7*426, and in azimuth 21 31 East. 

Difference of meridian deflexions at A and 15*885. 
DifiFerence of meridian deflexions at A and Csc20*944. 
Differenoe of mendian deflexions at B and Ga= 5^059. 

The first of ^ese difFerenoes is considerably greater than 6'^‘236, 
the quantity brought to light by the Indian Survey. 



181 


The author then examines these values more minutely, and con- 
siders the effect of various hypotheses for reducing them. 

In the first place, the density of the attracting mass may have been 
assumed too large. The density assumed is 2*75 that of distilled 
water, the value assumed as the mean density of the mountain 
Schehallien in the calculations of Maskelyne. This can hardly be 
too great, but at any rate no remarkable supposition relative to the 
density can reduce the attraction by more than a small fraction of 
the whole. 

Next, the mass of the doubtful region may have been assumed 
too great. This hypothesis is then examined by the author, who 
concludes that even the extravagant supposition of the non-exist- 
ence of that region will not reduce the difference of meridian de- 
flexions at A and B lower than to 9''*753. 

A third means of reduction may be looked for in the known region. 
A large part of the attraction belonging to this region arises from 
the Great Plateau. It would be necessary to cut down this plateau 
as much as 6000 feet to reduce the deflexions at A and B to 5^^* 236, 
even were the whole moss on the doubtful region non-existent ; so 
that it appears to be quite hopeless, by any admissible^ hypothesis 
relative to heights, densities, &c., to reduce the calculated deflexion 
so as to make it tally with the error brought to light by the 
survey. 

After entering into some elaborate calculations confirmatorj'^ of 
the previous results, the author concludes by calculating the form of 
the Indian arc, that i«, by determining what spheroid of revolution, — 
the axis of revolution being the earth's axis, — would most nearly 
coincide with that arc without reference to the rest of the earth, the 
data employed being the lengths and amplitudes of the northern and 
southern portions of the arc, and of course their sum, and likewise 
the latitudes, or at least approximate latitudes, of the middle points 
of the arcs. By using the amplitudes uncorrected for mountain 
attraction, the author obtains for the value of the eliipticity deduced 
from the Indian arc alone nearly agreeing with which is 
CoL Everest's result; but by using the amplitudes corrected for 
mountain attraction according to the author's calculation, the ellipti- 
city is reduced to He concludes that the arc is more curved 
than it would be if it had the mean ellipdcity of the earth, and 

VOt. VII. T 



182 


regardB the eupposition of a general deviation of the earth's sur&ce 
in that region froiQ the mean spheroidal form as the most satisfactory 
mode of accounting for the discrepancy. 


IL the Value of Steam in the Decomposition of neutral 
Fatty Bodies/^ By Geoegis Wilson, Esq. Communicated 
by Warren De la Rub, Esq. Received November 80, 
1854. 

In the course of a long scries of experiments conducted on a large 
scale, the autlior has observed that the so-called neutral fatty bodies 
may be resolved, without danger of injurious decomposition, into 
glycerine and fatty acids, provided the still is mainhiined at a uni- 
form high temperature, and^that a continuous current of steam is 
admitted into it. 

The temperature required to effect the splitting of the fats into 
their proximate elements varies with the nature of the body itself, 
but all hitherto tried may be resolved into glycerine and fatty acid 
at a temperature of 560° Fahr., many at much below that tempera- 
ture. At a further period it is the author's intention to lay before 
the Society a detailed account of his experiments, with the confirma- 
tory analyses, but in the mean time he states that palm oil, cocoa- 
nut oil, fish oil, animal tallow, Bornean vegetable tallow, " Japan 
vegetable wax" (more properly tallow), and several others have 
yielded satisfactory results, the fatty acid and glycerine distilling 
over together, but no longer in combination, and separating in the 
receiving vessel. 



183 


December 14, 1854. 


The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

Robert Mallet. Esq., was admitted into the Society. 

The following communications were read 

1. "The Physical Theory of Muscular Contraction.’^ By 
Charles Bland Radcliffe, M.D., Licentiate of the 
Royal College of Physicians, Assistant-Physician to the 
Westminster Hospital, and Lecturer on Materia Medina. 
Communicated by Charles Brooke, Esq., P.R.S. Re- 
ceived November 18, 1854. 

The theory set forth in this paper is, that muscle prevented from 
contracting by the several vital and physical agencies which act as 
stimuli upon muscle, — volition, nervous influence, blood, electricity, 
light, heat, and the rest, — and that contraction happens on the cessa- 
tion of stimulation, by virtue of the operation of that universal prin- 
ciple of attraction which belongs to muscle in common with all 
matter, and, so happening, that it is a physical phenomenon of the 
same nature as that contraction which takes place in a bar of metal 
on the abstraction of heat. 

This theory is supported by various arguments, some of which 
are now stated for the first time. It is argued : — 

(a.) That nervous influence cannot cause muscular contraction. 
(1) because the degree of innervation, as measured by the supply of 
nerves, is inversely related to the tendency to contraction ; (2) be- 
cause contraction does not take place so long as the nerve gives 
evidences of electricity (Du Bois Reymond) ; (3) because, in some 
instances at least, contraction does not happen so long as the nerve 
gives evidences of irritability ” — ^Ibr contraction is not caused by 

T 2 



184 


heat, by acids and alkalies, and by several other chemical and xnedi* 
cinid subatanoes, until the possibility of provoking contraction by the 
touch of a needle haa been destroyed by the action of the agent — 
until, that is to say, the " irritability ” of the nerve has been de* 
stroyed by this action (Eckardt); and (4) because the influence of 
the nervous centre in causing contraction is to suspend the natural 
electricity of the nerve and muscle. This last conclusion is evident 
in the fact, that the signs of electricity, which are absent during 
tetanus, immediately reappear in the muscle and in the portion of 
nerve connected with it, when the influence of the nervous centre is 
cut off and the tetanus resolved by dividing the nerve. 

(b,) That blood cannot cause contraction, (1 ) because the tendency 
to contraction is inversely related to the supply of blood ; thus, this 
tendency is greater in the voluntary muscles of Ashes and reptiles 
than of mammals and birds — greater in involuntary than in volun- 
tary muscles — greater in the muscles of any given animal during the 
state of hybernation than during the period of summer life; and 
(2) because the state of rigor mortis may be relaxed more than 
once, and the lost “ irritability ” restored to the muscle by the in- 
jection of living blood into the vessels (Brown- S^guard), 

(c.) That electricity cannot cause contraction, (1) because there is 
a constant current of electricity in a muscle during rest, but not 
during contraction (Du Bois Reymond), — because, that is to say, 
contraction is absent when muscle is in a state of electrical or polar 
action, and present when this state is absent, so that contraction ap- 
pears to be antagonized by this state of polar action; and (2) because 
contraction is never coincident with the passage of a current of arti- 
ficial electricity ; for, not only is it true that a muscle does not con- 
tract during the time that a current of artificial electricity is passing 
through it, but contraction is invariably relaxed if contraction pre* 
existed (Eckardt). There is, indeed, momentary contraction at the 
opening or at the closing of the circuit, but this contraction can be 
shown to be coincident with neutralization of electrical action, 
which neutralization is consequent upon the momentary opposition 
of the natural current of the muscle and the artificial current, 

(d.) That mechmical ageMs cannot stimulate contraction, (1) be- 
cause the electrica] phenomena of muscle are opposed to such an 
idea ; thus muscle aflFbrds evidences of electricity during rest, but 



185 


not during contraction^ and hence the probabilitjr is that electncify 
has been discharged when a muscle contracts on being touched by a 
needle, — a probability which is supported by the analogy which exists 
between the structure of muscle and the structure of the electrical 
organ of the Torpedo, and between the circumstances producing 
contraction on the one hand and discharge on the other (Owen, 
Faraday, and others); and (2) because the movements of the sto- 
mach, or uterus, or any other viscus are not to be accounted for on 
the supposition that the contractions are stimulated by the contents 
of the viscus ; thus the food accumulates and the stomach expands 
until the appetite is satisfied, and contraction docs not happen until 
the preliminary processes of digestion are at an end, and thus also the 
child grows and the uterus expands, and labour pains do not begin 
until the growth of the child is com])leted, and the stimulus of that 
growth suspended. 

(e.) That heat and cold do not stimulate contraction, because con- 
traction does not happen until the natural polar action of the muscle is 
suspended, — an event which happens equally under either extreme of 
temperature, — and thus the muscle would seem to contract because 
the heat or cold extinguishes that polar action of the muscle which 
antagonizes contraction. 

(/.) That light cannot cause contraction, (1) because it exercises 
a directly opposite influence upon the irritable cushions of the sensi- 
tive plant; and (2) because it is as easy to agree with BichAt, and 
suppose that light expands the curtain of the iris, as that it causes 
contraction in sphincter-fibres surrounding the pupil, which fibres 
have no existence. 

{g.) That chemical and mechanical agencies do not stimulate con- 
traction, because contraction does not happen until the cogent has de- 
stroyed that polar action of the muscle which antagonizes contrac- 
tion (Eckardt), 

It is argaed> also, that the action of the will upon muscle is not 
necessarily that of a siimulm, for the will moy act by withdrawing 
something from the muscle as well as by communicating something 
to the muscle, and, if so, then the previous considerations enhance 
the probability that it acts by withdrawing something. 

In the course of the argument it is further shown that this con- 



186 


lesion U borneout by the history of the muscular movements which 
are manifested in th^ coats of vessels and in the heart, while at the 
same time this view is found to give the clue to the physical inter- 
pretation of “ capillary action," and of rhythm, whether this be in 
the heart or elsewhere. 

It is shown, also, that the same conclusion is borne out by the 
pathology of tremor, convulsion, and spasm, — of those diseases, that 
is to say, in which muscular contraction is in excess. Thus, (to 
mention one argument out of many,) the state of circulation which 
is invariably associated with tremor, convulsion, and spasm, is one 
which necessarily implies the diminution of all accustomed stimu- 
lation in the muscle, for it is a state which borders closely upon 
syncope or asphyxia. 

And, lastly, it is shown that there is nothing in the phenomenon 
of muscular contraction which need prevent it from being referred to 
the operation of that common principle of attraction which belongs 
to muscle tn common with (HI matter » and thus the general conclusion 
is that another barrier between the organic and inorganic world is 
broken down, and that muscular contractiou is an effect of the 
universal law of gravitation. 

There are, however, sundry grave objections to this theory, and 
one main object of the paper under consideration is to remove them. 
Thus, for example, if muscle contracts when nervous induence is 
withdrawn, how is it that it relaxes when the nerve is divided or 
otherwise paralysed } and if a muscle contracts for want of blood, 
how is it that it relaxes in syncope, asphyxia, and death ? These 
objections are grave, but not unsurmouiitable, as the following hints 
at explanation will serve to show. 

It must be understood, then, that that state of polar action which 
is present in a muscle during rest and absent during contraction, is 
rs^estahlished immediately after contraction ; it must also be under** 
stood that this state of polar action in the muscle is suspended 
dunng ordinary muscular contraction by certain ohsmges which take 
place in the nervous centre, and that it has died out when oontrao- 
tioa happens after death, as in rigor mortise and the rest is sud^- 
ciently simple. 

It is quite in accordance with the theory, then, that a muscle 
should contract when nervous induence is withdrawn, and that it 



187 


should relax after the nerve ia divided or otherwise paralysed* At 
the moment when the continuity of the nerve is brdken the muscle 
contracts, because the influence of the nervoiM centre is cut off; 
but this contraction cannot continue, because that state of polar 
action which antagonizes contraction is immediately re-established 
in the muscle, and in the portion of nerve connected with it. This 
relaxation, moreover, must continue, if the paralysed muscle be left 
to itself, so long as the muscle continues to be the seat of this polar 
action. And, on the other hand, this contraction must return when 
this action ia suspended, or diminished, or extinguished, as indeed 
it does ; thus the muscle contracts when the polar action is sud- 
denly suspended by galvanism or by the touch of a needle; thus it 
contracts after the paralysis has continued for some time, and when 
the failure in the nutrition of the muscle has entailed a correspond- 
ing failure in its polar action ; and thus it contracts in rigor mortis, 
when all polar action is finally extinguished. 

It is also in accordance with theory that tremor, convulsion, and 
spasm should be caused by want of blood, and that they should 
cease when the circulation fails, as it fails in syncope, asphyxia, or 
death. During tremor, convulsion, or spasm, the muscles are insulK- 
ciently supplied with nervous influence, because the deficient supply 
of blood to the nervous centres involves a corresponding deficiency in 
the degree of innervation ; but once let the circulation fail below a 
certain point, and the whole case is alt^d. During tremor, con- 
vulsion, and spasm, the supply of blood to the nervous centres is in- 
auflSicient to keep up the normal degree of innervation, but it is 
cimt to prevent the nerves from being paralysed, and hence the con- 
tractions in the muscles, for the nerves being conductors, the failure 
in the action of the nervous centres ia propagated along them to the 
muscles, and of this failure the contractions are the consequence. 
But if the circulation fails below a certain point, the nerves are 
paralysed for want of biood, and being paralysed, tlie faOure of in- 
nervation in the nervous centres, even thoug^i this be now complete, 
does not entail a corresponding failure in the polar action of the 
muscle, because the nerves are no longer conductors; and not 
doing this, the polar action of the muscle, which ia much more 
vigorous than that of the nervous centre and nerve, and far less 
d<|»endent upon the supply of blood, is immediately re-established. 



188 


and bi^ibg m^establiahed* the musdks relaxes (just as it does in 
^e case where paralysis is caused by division of the nerve) « and 
trexpori convulsion and spasm are at an end. Nor is there any doubt 
that the nerves are paralysed when the circulation fails to the point 
which is here supposed. Thus, if the circulation in the hand be 
depressed by immersion in cold water, the sense of touch and the 
power of movement are partially or wholly destroyed; or if the 
principal vessel of a limb be tied, the nerves arc similarly paralysed 
until the coUater^ circulation be established ; and in each case, also, 
the power of provoking “reflex movements” is diminished or de- 
stroyed. In either case the nerves are more or less paralysed for 
want of blood, and, if so, it surely follows that the nerves must be 
paralysed, and still more eflectually, when the circulation fails as it 
fails in syncope, aBph3nda, or death, and when the movement of the 
blood is almost or altogether at an end. Hence it is quite intelli- 
gible that tremor, convulsion or spasm should be caused by want of 
blood, as is stated in th* argument, and that they should cease in 
syncope, asphyxia, and death ; and thus this objection falls to the 
ground, and witt^ it all objections of the same kind. 

Such is an imperfect sketch of the evidence upon which the phy- 
sical theory of muscular contraction is founded. 


11. " On the Structure of some limestone Nodulea enclosed in 
Seams of Bituminous Coal, with a Bescription of some 
Trigonocarpons contained in them.^^ By J. D. Hookbh, 
M.D.^ P.K.S., and E, Binney, Esq. Received November 
23 , 1854 . 

The authors first describe the occurrence of the limestone nodules, 
whieh form a continuous in the centre of W thin seam of bitumi- 
nous coal in the lower part of the La^icashire coal-field. The no- 
dules were of various sizes, some weighing many pounds, and caused 
the coal to bulge out both above and below thj^, and they were 
fbund to be entirely compose^ of vegetable tissues converted into 
caibonate of lime and magnesia. Their formation is supposed by 
the authors to be due to infiltration of water through the sUperin- 



189 


cumbcnt shales, which wore Aill of fossil shells supposed to be of 
marine origin, and the aggregation of the mineral matter round 
centres of vegetable remains. The chemical constituents of the 
nodules were found to be carbonates of lime and magnesia, sesqui- 
oxide and sulphate of iron, with a little carbon^eous matter. 

The probability of these nodules representing an average sample 
of the vegetable constituents of the surrounding cool is then dis- 
cussed, and attention is drawn to the very great interest and import- 
ance that would attach to them were such a view substantiated, as 
showing the exact nature of the association of plants which is 
capable of conversion into bituminous coal. 

All the plants contained in the nodules were common in other 
parts of the coal formation, viz. Calamodendron, Halonia, Sigillaria, 
Lepidodendrorit StigmariOt TVigonocarpon, Anabothray and others ; of 
these the first-named genus occurred in the greatest abundance and 
as large fragments of fossil wood. Very many of the specimens 
were sliced, and being reduced to very thin transparent sections, 
were examined with the view of determining the botanical character 
of their contents* and the intimate structure of the masses of more or 
less homogeneous aspect to which they were reduced by decompo- 
sition, previous to or during the operation of calcification. The re- 
stilts were very satisfactory, and seemed to indicate that all traces of 
vegetable structure may be completely obliterated in the substance 
of highly bituminized coal, which may nevertheless also contain frag- 
ments of wood with their tissues preserved. 

An account is then given of the examination of the details of 
structure of IVigonocarpony and this, as well as the comparison of 
IVigonocarpm with the modem genus Salisburia, is illustrated by 
drawings and analyses. 

The authors are stiU engaged with the study of these nodules, 
with the view of showiug the relationship between Calamodendrony 
CalamiteSy Sigillaria and Andhothruy and the details are preparing for 
publication. 


TOL, vn* 


V 




191 


December 21 , 1854 . 


The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Cbwr. 

James Allman, M.D., was admitted into the Society. 

The following communications were read : — 

1, “ Remarks on the Anatomy of the Mac^illiwayia p^lagica 
and Cheletropis Huxleyi (Forbes); suggesting the esta- 
blishment of u new genus of Gasteropoda." By John J). 
Macdonald, R.N., Assistant-Surgeon H.M.S. Herald* 
Cominunicuted by Sir W. Burnett, K.C.B. &c. Re- 
ceived November 23, 1864. 

Having examined the anatomy of the Macgillivrayia pelagica and 
several smaller species of pelagic Gasteropoda, not exhibiting the 
least similarity in the character of their shells, the author found that 
they all presented a very close relationship to each other in the type 
of their respiratory organs, and la other points of structure of less 
importance. 

The gills in every instance seemed to be fixed to the body of the" 
animal immediately behind the head, and did not appear to be ap- 
pended to the mantle, as in the Pectinibranchiata properly so called, 
lliey were also invariably four in number, and arranged in a cruci- 
form manner round a central point. They were free in the rest of their 
extent, elongated and Sath^e^ in formi with a pointed extremity, 
and fringed with long Bowing cilia,, set in a frilled border. They 
were, moreover, furnished with muscular fibres, both transverse and 
longitudinal, and exhibited great mobility when protruded, but lay 
side by side in the last whorl of the shell when retracted. 

The auditory capsules, each containing a spherical otolithe. were 
VOL. Vli, X 



192 


cloself applied to the inner and posterior part of the larger or ante- 
rior ganglion of the suboesophageal mass. 

There were two tentacula* each bearing at the outer side of 
its base an eye consisting of a globular lens with optic nerve and 
retinal expansion. The foot was large and very mobile, but a vesi- 
cular float has been observed only in Mai^gillwrayxa, 

The respiratory siphon was either a simple fokl of the mtintle 
forming a temporary tube {Cheletropu) ^ or a fold whose borders 
were united through their whole length, leaving an aperture at the 
end, as in MacgilUvrayta, 

A lingual ribbon with well-marked rachis and pleurae occurs in 
all the species. Very perfect labial plates with closely- set dental 
points arm the mouth in some instances, and probably in all. 

7"he little animals possessing in common the characters here de- 
scribed, nevertheless fabricate shells so very different as to admit of 
their division into well-marked genera. 

The author conceives ihat the obvious difference between the 
pectinibranchiate type of respiratory organs and that observed in 
the group of Gasteropoda now under consideration, affords sufficient 
grounds for placing the latter in a distinct order by themselves ; and 
as illustrations of it he proceeds to give some details of the structure 
of tlic two species mentioned in the title of the paper, whose shells 
have been already described by the late Prof. E. Forbes, and figured 
in Mr, Macgillivray's ‘Narrative of the Voyage of H.M.S. Rattle- 
snake.' 

In Macgillivrayia the disc of the foot is broad and connected by a 
narrow attachment to the body just beneath the neck ; it carries an 
operculum behind, and is cleft by a notch in front, A raphe ob- 
servable in the median line, as well indeed as the whole character of 
this part of the organ, seems to shadow forth the transformation of 
the single foot of the Gasteropod into the wing-like expansion of 
the Pteropod. 

After describing the labial plates and lingual strap,, the eyes and 
the branchiie, the author observes that the tubular siphon protrudes 
from the shell on the left side and seems to indicate the coexistence 
of a respiratory chamber with naked branchias. 

The vesicular float, like that of Jmthina, noticed by Mr- Macgil- 
livray, consists of an aggregation of vesicles varying both in number 



193 


and size in different cases. It ta exceedingly delicate, and could not 
be found in the specimens Hrst obtained, having probably been de* 
stroyed or detached from the foot by the force of the water running 
through the meshes of the net with which they were captured. Its 
coexistence with on operculum shows timt it is not a modification 
of the latter. 

Of the Cheletropia Huxlcyi^ numerous specimens were found in 
Hass’s Straits and in the South Pacific, between Sydney and Lord 
Howe’s Island. 

After giving some details respecting the shell and the foot, the 
author observes that the latter organ was destitute of float, at least 
in tlie specimens he obtained, but was furnished with an operculum, 
which, probably from its extreme thinness and smallness, had 
escaped the notice of Professor P'orbes, He then points out the 
peculiarities of the respiratory apparatus. 

The portion of the mantle which forms the respiratory siphon, is 
short, and its opposite edges ore merely in apposition, without 
organic union. The branchieo are of two kinds, covered and naked, 
llie covered gill is single but of considerable length. It is beautifully 
pectinated, and fringed with long cilia, and, doubtless, represents 
the respiratory organ of the pectinibranchiate Gasteropoda, The 
basis of this part is a long and narrow strip of a tough and fibrous 
material, folded upon itself into a series of loops invested with a 
coating of epithelium, and richly ciliated along the free border. 
The naked gills are four in number, similar both in situation and 
character to those of Macgillivrayia, Each gill is of an oval or 
elongated form, presenting a thin, frilled and corrugated border, 
beset with long whip- like cilia. In the central parts muscular fibres 
are distinctly discernible, some disposed lengthwise and others 
transversely. 

The lingual strap is next described, os well as two file-Uke tri- 
turating plates with which the mouth is furnished. 

The two tentacula of each side appear as it were enclosed in one 
envelope, i^o as to form a single tactile instrument, which bears n 
large dark eye on its outer side near the base. To this latter organ 
the tegumentary covering forms a kind of cornea, beneath which is 
a spherical lens resting on a mass of black pigment, both being m- 
closed in a little sac ; and the optic nerve, emerging from the sub- 

X % 



194 


cesophageal ganglion, joins the miniature globe and expands into a 
retina. The author was unable to trace an opening through the 
pigment for the passage of light, but thinks it probable that, as in 
the ocelli of insects, such an aperture exists in the central part. The 
auditory capsules ore situated at some distance behind the eyes, and 
may be distinctly seen with the microscope when the surrounding 
parts are carefully removed with fine needles. They are of a rounded 
or oval form, and each contains a beautifully transparent and highly 
refracting otolithe, much larger than the lens of the eye. 

The paper was accompanied with drawings illustrating the prin- 
cipal points mentioned in the description. 

II. A paper was in part read, entitled, On the Devcloptnent of 
Striated Muscular Fibre in Mammalia.'^ By William S. 
Savory, M.D., F.R.C.S., Tutor of St. Bartholomew's Ho- 
spital Medical College. Communicated by James Paget, 
Esq. Received December 9, 1854. 

The Society then adjourned over the Christmas recess, to meet 
again on the 11th of January next. 


January 11, 1855. 

THOMAS BELL, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 

I. The reading of Mr, Savory^s paper On the Development 
of Muscular Fibre in Mammalia, was resumed and con- 
cluded. 

The author’s observations were made chiefly upon foetal pigs, but 
they have been confirmed by repeated examinations of the embryos 
of many other animals, and of the human foetus. 

If a portion of tissue immediately beneath the surface from the 
dorsal region of a foetal pig, from one to two inches in length, be 



195 


examined microscopically, there will be seen, besides blood* corpuscles 
in various stages of development, nucleated cells and free nuclei or 
cytoblasts scattered through a clear and structureless blastema in 
great abundance. These cytoblasts vary in shape and size ; the 
smaller ones, which are by far the most numerous, being generally 
round, and the larger ones more or less oval. Their outline is di- 
stinct and well defined, and one or tw'o nucleoli may be seen in their 
interior us small, bright, highly refracting spots. Tlie rest of their 
substance is either uniformly nebulous or faintly granular. 

The first stage in the development of striated muscular fibre con- 
sists in the aggregation and adhesion of the cytoblasts, and their in- 
vestment by blastema so as to farm elongated masses. In these clusters 
the nuclei have, at first, no regular arrangement. Almost, if not quite 
as soon as the cytoblasts are thus aggregated, they become invested 
by the blastema, and this substance at the same time appears to be 
much condensed, so that many of the nuclei become obscured. 

These nuclei, thus aggregated and invested, next assume a much 
more regular position. They fall into a single row with remarkable 
uniformity, and the surrounding subetance at the same time grows 
clear and more transparent, and is arranged in the form of two bands 
bordering the fibre and bounding the extremities of the nuclei, so 
that now they become distinctly visible. They are oval, and form a 
single row in the centre of the fibre, closely packed together side by 
side, their long axes lying transversely, and their extremities bounded 
on either aide by a thin clear pellucid' border of apparently homoge- 
neous substance. 

It is to be observed how closely the muscular fibres of mammalia 
at this period of their development resemble their permanent form in 
many insects. 

The fibres next increase in length and the nuclei separate. Small 
intervals appear between them. The spaces rapidly widen, until at 
last the nuclei lie at a very considerable distance apart. At the same 
time the fibre strikingly decreases in diameter ; for as the nuclei se- 
parate, the lateral I>ands fall in and ultimately coalesce. 

This lengthening of the fibre and consequent separation of the 
nuclei is due to an increase of material, and not to a stretching of 
the fibre. 

Soon after the nuclei have separated some of them begin to decay. 



196 


They increase in size ; their outline becomes indistinct ; a bright 
border appears immediately within their margin ; their contents be- 
come decidedly granular ; their outline is broken and interrupted ; 
and presently an irregular cluster of granules is all that remains, and 
these soon disappear. 

It sometimes happens that the nuclei perish while in contact, be- 
fore the fibre elongates ; but the subsequent changes are the same. 

The striae generally first become visible at this period, imme- 
diately within the mar^n of the fibre. 

The fibre is subsequently increased in size, and its development is 
continued by means of the surrounding cytoblasts. These attach 
themselves to its exterior, and then become invested by a layer of the 
surrounding blastema. Thus, as it were, nodes are formed at inter- 
vals on the surface of the fibre. These invested nuclei are at first 
readily detached, but they soon become intimately connected and in- 
definitely blended with the exterior of the fibre. All its characters 
are soon acquired, the nuclei at the same time gradually sink into 
its substance, and an ill-defined elevation, which soon disappears, is all 
that remains. 

Lastly, the substance of the fibre becomes contracted and con- 
densed. The diameter of a fibre towards, or at the close of intra- 
uterine life, is considerably less than at a much earlier period. 

At the period of birth muscular fibres vary much in size. 

The several stages in the development of muscular fibre, above 
mentioned, do not succeed each other as a simple consecutive series ; 
on the contrary, two, or more, are generally progressing at the same 
time. Nor does each commence at the same period in all cases. 


IL ** On the General Integrals of the Equations of the Internal 
Equilibrium of an Elastic Solid.^^ By William John 
Macquoen Bankine^ Civil Engineer, P.B.SS. Lond. & 
Edinb., &c. Beceived December 7 , 1864 . 

The First SscHm of this paper is introductory, containing a sum- 
mary of principles already known respeotmg the elasticity of solids, 
lliose principles are treated as the consequences of the following 



197 


DaFtNiTTOK OF Elastioxty, without introducing any hypothesis os 
to the molecular structure of bodies* 

Elasticity is the property which bodies possess of preserving deter- 
minate volumes and figures under given pressures and temperatures^ and 
which in a homogeneous body manifests itself equally m every part of 
appreciable magnitude** 

The investigations are limited by the following conditions 

1. The temperature of the elastic body is supposed to be con- 
stant and uniform. 

2. The variations of the volumes and figures of its particles are 
supposed to be so small, that the elastic j)res8ure8 may be considered 
as sensibly linear functions of those variations. 

3. It is assumed, that the only force, besides elastic pressures, 
acting on the particles of the body, is that of terrestrial gravitation. 

All possible small variations of volume and figure of an originally 
rectangular molecule, when referred to three orthogonal axes, may 
be resolved into six, viz. tliree linear dilatations or compressions, 
and three distortions. 

In like manner the elastic pressures exerted on and by such a 
molecule may be resolved into six, viz. three normal pressures, and 
three tangential pressures. 

Those six pressures are connected with each other and with the 
attractive force acting on the molecule, by three well-known differ- 
ential equations of the first order. 

They are also connected at every element of the surface of the 
body, by three well-known linear equations, with the components of 
the external force acting on that element. 

The general problem to be solved is, to find the integrals of the 
first three equations, subject to conditions fixed by the last three. 

The six variations of volume and figure of a rectangular molecule 
ore expressed by six small fractions called coefficients of displace- 
ment/' 

If the differential of each of these fractions be multiplied by the 
pressure which directly tends to vary it, the sum of the products is 
the complete differential of a function called the Potential Energy 
qf Elastic Forces for the molecule in question, which is sensibly a 
homogeneous quadratic function of the six fractions. It has twenty- 
one terms, and twenty-one constant coefficients, which constitute 



198 


the Coefficients of Elasticity of the body, for the ayetem of orthogonal 
axes chosen. 

Twenty-one equations express the relations between the systems 
of coefficients of elasticity in a given body for any two different sy- 
stems of orthogonal axes. 

When a body possesses a system of orthogonal wees of elasticity ,, 
its coefficients of elasticity, when referred to these axes, are reduced 
to nine. 

A body isotropic with respect to elasticity has but three coefficients 
of elasticity, which are the same for all sets of orthogonal axes, and 
are connected with each other by an equation. 

If the Potential Energy of Elastic Forces be expressed as a homo- 
geneous quadratic function of the six elastic pressures^ its coefficients 
constitute the coefficients of compressihility and extensibility, and of 
pliability. They have relations to the coefficients of elasticity which 
are consequences of the properties of determinants. 

Tlie Second Section of the ^laper relates to the problem of the ge- 
neral integration of the equations of the internal equilibrium of an 
Elastic Solid, especially when it is not isotropic. The method of so- 
lution consists of the following eight processes : — 

I. The centre of gravity of the body being (in general) taken for 
the origin of co-ordinates, the forces apidied to the surface v>f the 
body are subdivided into nine systems of ** Rkduckd ExTKBNAn 
PaBssTTHES, ** which are of such a nature, that for any integration of 
the external forces as originally expressed over a portion of the sur- 
face of the body, may be substituted the sum of three integrations of 
certain of the reduced external pressures over the three projections 
of that portion of the surface upon the co-ordinate planes. 

By such integrations, extended to the whole of the body, axe 
found the mean values of tlie nine reduced external pressures, which 
are connected by simple equations with the mean values, or constant 
terms, of the six internal elastic pressures. 

The deviations of the reduced external pressures above and below 
their mean values, constitute nine systems of variable parts of those 
pressures. 

II. The eighteen cot&dentB of the three co-ordinates in the linear 
terms of the six internal elastic pressures are determined by means 
of eighteen equations ; viz. three equations of internal equilibrium 



199 


between certain of these coefEcients and the force of ^vity» and 
fifteen equations formed by means of the conditions of equilibrium 
of portions of the body cut off by the co-ordinate planes, and planes 
parallel to them. 

IIL The six constant terms, and the eighteen linear terms, of the 
three dilatations or compressions and the three distortions, are com- 
puted from the corresponding terms of the internal pressures by 
elimination, or by means of the coefficients of extensibility and com- 
pressibility, and of pliability. The coefficients of the co-ordinates in 
those twenty-four terms bear linear relations to the coefficients in 
the linear and quadratic terms of the three projections of the mole- 
cular displacement. 

IV. The parts of the nine reduced external pressures correspond- 
ing to tlie constant *and linear terms of the internal pressures having 
been determined for each element of the body's surface and sub- 
tracted from the nine actual reduced external pressures, there re- 
main nine residual reduced external pressures for each such element, 
which form three systems, each suitable for development in scries 
of trigonometrical functions of a different pair of independent co- 
ordinates. 

V. The ports of the three j)rojection8 of the molecular displacement^ 
which correspond to each system of residues of the reduced external 
pressures, are to be expressed by infinite series in terms of the sines 
and cosines of linear functions of the proper pair of independent co- 
ordinates, each order of terms containing (except in some special 
cases) four kinds of trigonometric functions, multiplied by six expo- 
nential functions of the third co-ordinate, whose parameters are the 
roots of an equation of the sixth order, and by twenty-four arbi- 
trary constants. 

From the expressions thus formed are to be computed symbolical 
expressions for the values of the system of residues or transcendental 
parti of the reduced external pressures, for each pwr of independent 
co-ordinates, which, by the aid of the equation of the form of the 
surf^ of the body, are to be transformed into series containing 
terms in trigonometric functions of the independent co-ordinates 
only, multiplied by linear functions of the arbitrary constants, which 
are (in general) twenty-four times as numerous as the orders of 
terms. 



200 


VI. By equating the eonatant factor of each term of the symbo- 
lical developments thus formed, to the constant factor of the corre* 
sp<Miding term of the arithmetical developments found by the pro- 
cess IV., there are formed as many linear equations between the 
arbitrary constants and known quantities os there are constants to 
be determined, from which equations those constants are found. 

VI L Cases in which one ordinate intersects the surface of the 
body in two or more pairs of points are to be treated by a special 
method. 

VIII. The results of the previous processes are to be combined, 
and the solution of the problem completed by determining and adding 
to them the displacements and rotations of the body as a whole. 

The Third Section relates to the internal equilibrium of a rectan- 
gular prismatic body. 

Processes 1., II. and III. The determination of the constant and 
linear terms of the internal pressures, and the corresponding terms 
of the molecular displacements, consists in the special application of 
the methods of the preceding section. The axes of figure are taken 
for axes of co-ordinates. 

IV. The means and differences of the transcendental residues of 
the reduced external pressures on each pair of faces of the prism are 
developed in series of trigonometric functions of the pairs of inde- 
pendent co-ordinates of the respective faces to which they are ap- 
plied ; the series employed being of such a nature, that for the 
edges of the body all their terms vanish. 

V. and VI. An order having been fixed for the consideration of 
the forces acting on the three pairs of faces, let yz^ zx, xy be that 
order. 

Series of functions trigonometric in y an^ z, exponential in and 
satisfying the equations of internal equilibrium, with arbitrary con- 
stant coefficients^ are taken to represent the molecular displacements 
produced by the residual pressures on the faces normal to x* From 
those series are computed series representing symbolically those re- 
sidual pressures, which series being equated to the series numerioolly 
representing those pressures, the arbitrary constants axe found by 
eliminatioxi. 

The formulse thus obtained are employed to compute ideal systems 
of external pressures on the ffices normal to y and s, called "jprovi- 



201 


Btonal presmteSi* which are developed in trigonometric function* of 
the independent co-ordinates of the faces to which they are conceived 
to be applied. Should the provisional pressures agree with the 
actual residual pressures on those faces, the process is complete ; 
should they not so agree, the provisional pressures are to be sub- 
tracted from the actual residual pressures, leaving systems of re- 
mainders called " secondary pressures** 

llie series representing the molecular displacements corresponding 
to the Secondary Pressures on tlie faces normal to y are to be found 
in the manner already referred to. The formulae thus obtedned are 
to be employed to compute an ideal system of “ Provisional Secondary 
Pressures** on the faces normal to z, which are to be developed in 
trigonometric functions of x and y. 

Should the provisional secondary pressures thus found agree with 
the actual secondary pressures on the faces normal to the process 
is complete. Should they not so agree, the provisional are to be sub- 
tracted from the actual secondary pressures, leaving a system of re- 
mainders called Tertiary Pressures** on the faces normal to z, whose 
effects are to be computed in the usual manner. 

Process VII. is not required. 

Process Vlll. consists in combining the terms of the molecular 
displacements due to the constant and linear terms of the internal 
pressures, the residual pressures on the faces normal to the se- 
condary pressures on the faces normal to y, and the tertiary press- 
ures on the faces normal to jr, and finally determining and adding 
to the other terms, those depending on the displacements and ro- 
tations of the prism as a whole. 

The Fourth Section relates to the integrals of the equations of the 
internal equilibrium of op. isotropic elastic solid. 

I'he constant and linear terms of the internal pressures are to be 
determined by the methods described in the previous sections, for all 
solids, whether isotropic or not. 

The transcendental terms of the internal pressures and molecular 
displacements in an isotropic elastic solid, require a special method 
for t^eir determination. 

The three projections of the molecular displacement, with ail their 
functions, in an isotropic solid, are deducible from one primitive 
function or scries of primitive functions of the co-ordinates, by cer- 



202 


tain processes of derivation, distributive, but not necessarily commu* 
tutive* 

Each primitive function must satisfy the condition 




+->= 


■ 0 . 


and may belong to one or other of classes, according as it is 
even or odd with respect to x, y and x. 

The processes of derivation applicable to the primitive functions 
contain tAree arbitrary constants for each primitive function. Hence 
when there is a series of primitive functions of different orders, there 
are twenty our arbitrary constants for each order of terms. 

In the developments of the residual external pressures, there are 
also twenty-four constant coefficients for each order of terms, of 
which the arbitrary constants are linear functions. 

The notation of M. Lamp’s work on the Mathematical Theory of 
the Elasticity of Solid Bodies, so far as it relates to isotropic sub* 
stances, is compared with thbt of this paper. 

Keference being made to the known method of representing the 
elastic pressures at a given particle of a solid, in magnitude and di- 
rection, by the radii of an ellipsoid, and the positions of the surfaces 
to which those pressures are applied by those of the tangent planes 
to an ellipsoid or hyperboloid, the difference (not generally attended 
to) between the cone of tangential presmreBt and the cone of eliding, 
is pointed out. This difference is important in the theory of the 
strength of materials. 



203 


January 18, 1855. 


Sir BENJAMIN BllODIE, Bart., in the Chair. 


The following communications were read : — 

I, “ Note to a paper read before the Royal Society on the llth 
ofMay, 185V^ By J. W. Gkiffith, M.D., iVL.S. Com- 
municated by Arthur Henfrey, Esq. Received Decem- 
ber 13, 1854. 

In the paper referred to above, it was stated that the markings or 
dote upon the valves of the Diatomaccje, are the optical exjjressions 
of depressions existing upon the valves. 

All tliose authors who have paid special attention to the Diato- 
macese, have considered the markings to denote cells ; among these 
we find Ehrenberg*, Kutzing K Ualfst, Smithy, and Quekett||. 

The evidence I adduced in regard to the more coarsely marked 
Diatomaceae, as Isikmia, &c., being furnished with depressions and 
not cells, is, I believe, satishsictory and conclusive ; and this view 
has been admitted in a paper since read before the Royal Society 

A different view has been taken of the nature of the fin^r mark- 
ings, as those upon some species of Gyrosigma, by the author of the 
paper last quoted, as by previous authors ; and the object of this 
note is to direct attention to the support which the extended view 
argued for by me in the paper above referred to, viz. that the finer 
markings also correspond to depressions, derives from analogy. 

The structure of the Diatomaceee, and their modes of reproduc- 

• Die Infueionsthierchen. t Ri'^ Bacillsrien, and Spec. Algarum. 

t AnnaU of Nat. History, 1843, § British Diatomacem. 

II Histological Catalogue of the College of Surgeons j and Lectures delivered 
before the College of Surgeons. 

% Proceedings of the Royal Society, June 16, 1864. 



204 


tion, are, as ie well known, remarkable. So much eo, that these 
organisms have been claimed by botanists as members of the vege- 
table, and by zoologists as belonging to the animal kingdom, llie 
preponderance of evidence is decidedly in favour of their vegetable 
nature ; but, be this as it may, they must all be classed together, — 
they form a perfectly natural family. Hence we have a strong argu- 
ment in favour of the markings upon their valves being identical, 
and as these are evidently depressions in the genera and s{>ecies with 
coarsely marked valves {Isthmia, &c.), we should expect from ana- 
logy that the same would apply to those with finer markings. And 
this view receives further support, from the fact, that under varied 
methods of illumination, corresponding appearances are presented 
by the markings when viewed by the microscope, from those which 
are very large, as in latkmia, through those of moderate and small 
size, as in the species of Coscinodiscus, down to those in which 
they are extremely minute, as in the species of &c. The 

angular (triangular or quadrangular) appearance assumed by the 
markings, arises from the light transmitted through the valves being 
unequally oblique. This may be readily shown in the more coarsely 
marked valves {hthmia, Coscinodiscus), which present the true 
structural appearance when the light is reflected by the mirror in 
its ordinary position, and the spurious angular appearance when the 
light is rendered oblique by moving the mirror to one side. 


IL "Researches on the Theory of Invariants.” By William 
Spottiswoodic, M.A., F.R.S. Received December 20, 
1854 . 

Invariants may be regarded from two points of view, the permu- 
tational and the functional. According to the former they are con- 
sidered as arising from a process of permutation, according to the 
latter as derivatives from other functions. In this paper the latter 
course is adopted ; and the following is an outline of the method : — 

Let 

be any homogeneous function of the degree a of the variables 
X, y, in which •• multiplied by their respective mul- 



205 


tinomial coefl^cienta are tiie coefHcients of a:'* * , » , . Let 

undergo any linear transformation, and let /, 
be the coefHcients of transformation ; also let 


A = 


I m . . 
t m! . . 


dl dm 

dl dm 


let . be the new values of , i also let 

dx dy 

v'=^'£+"*'4+- 


then, k une facteur prtis, 
and 

. ditafi,. . 


will be respectively equal to the combinations of m, . . f 

by which the ns are multijdied in a^... Again, let/' represent a 
function similar to/, excepting that in the former the multinomial 
coeiflicicuts are dropped ; then if, 


Uno.. 






“TXr(B-«yTra77I^. 

Now the fundamental condition of invariance is expressed by the 
following equation: — 

mn 

A « F(a^. . , ) =F(a«,. . , a,*. . . • 

®'F(0(|,., naj3,.i fl«A" » 'OU. 
where U=sF(««,,,, b#^, ), 



206 


and the problem consists in determining the coefficients of U. Tliis 
gives 

mn 

A" ..)= nU. "U. 

the quantity within brackets being the coefficient of 

mn 

Then if the term be selected in which = and if A ^ he 

so transformed that it shall appear as a function linear in each of 
the systems 

duxfi. . rfa«A. . 


and if ^ n=o,^..^^+a.^,..^^+.. 


then «p., a .. ^a^.. .. = 1 

and U will be at once given by the equation 

mn 

This method has been applied in the case of two variables to the 
calculation of quadratic and cubic invariants. 

But in the case of two variables the coefficient a may be expressed 
by a series of symbols with a single suffix, thus ; 

®o' •• a^.-, t^o, Qi, .* (^0,^0,,* 

Now since A is of the same degree in I, m, and in I*, the coeffi- 
cients of all powers and products of a©, in which the degree of 
/, m is above or below that of i\ m\ will vanish in the invariant. And 
fn)m this and some other considerations it is shown » that not only 

mn 

a"U=o, >0*0=0, >v'' n*u=o, 

but that the coefficients of the invariant may be calculated from the 
equations arising hrom equating to zero each term of the lost equa- 



»07 

tion above written, operated upon by the symbol This always 
gives a system of linear equations for finally determining the coefH- 
cients. It does not appear possible fully to explain this method 
without entering into more details than can be given in an abstract. 

From the general equations for so determining the coefficients, the 
number and degrees of the distinct invariants belonging to any given 
function may theoretically be determined ; and this has been done 
for the simplest cose, viz. quadratic functions. But the expressions 
for higher degrees appear so complicated that an answer to this im- 
portant question can hardly be expected from this method, in any 
case not already known. 

llie view of invariants here taken has suggested a aeries of other 
functions of which invariants form the last term. These functions, 
which I propose to call Variants, may be thus expressed. If 
functions of the degrees r, a, . . (r, s. . . being less than n) have in- 
variants of the degree m, then writing 

A“ iy~‘c),no. .. b|^ao^=F»,,„-r 

nut . -t Y 

A* F^9*ao. •. B,aoj«sFm,»_, 

A'x'F^rao. iB"-‘9ao, .. S>o)=F»,o 
of which the last is a simple invariant, since, omitting the factor 

«(i»— 

9”ao=ao, ao=a^, .. 9’‘ao=an. 

With the exact relation between these functions and covariants I 
am not at present acquainted. 


VOL. VII. 


Y 



208 


HI. A paper was in part read, entitled ** Ocular Spectres and 
Structures as Mutual Exponents ” By Jamks Jago, A.B. 
Cantab., M.B. Oxon., Physician to the Royal Cornwall 
Infirmary. Communicated by W, J. Hbnwoob, Esq, 
Received December 26, 1854. 

The paper opens by stating that for want of a methodical elimi- 
nation of ocular spectres from one another — a want which its aim is 
to meet — physiological optics remain to this day without any real 
foundation ; and even when we have followed the rays of light 
through all the refracting media of the eye, wc cannot safely assert 
what sensations belong to them until we have detected everything 
connected with the percipient membrane which may obstruct the 
action of light on it, or which may originate sensations as of light 
through other sorts of impulses. Our eyes in many important re- 
spects provide us with an* opportunity for microscopical research 
that no optical instrument employed on the dead eye can rival. We 
may thus gather a variety of information, physical and physiological, 
solve points of ocular structure that escape other means of investi- 
gation, and bring a profusion of ingenious speculations to a termina- 
tion, by showing that the phenomena (and this is especially true of 
the retinal phenomena) which have occasioned them are simply 
exponential of anatomical facts ; and important physiological laws 
may be arrived at by like means. 

The first step in the author’s task is to determine the conditions 
which render objects existing upon or within the eye visible by their 
shadows, and to obtain optical principles by which we may examine 
the interior of our own eye with facility, so as to recognize in what 
lenticular structure, and what part of it, the cause of any shadow or 
** diffractive image ” resides. He shows that we may make every 
measurement of interest, may decide all the points just alluded to, at 
the instant, os it were, by mere inspection ; and he illustrates his 
optied principles by appropriate experiments. 

The paper then commences its actual elimination of ocular spectres 
from one another, Btartingfrom the appendages of the eye and going 
on through the ocular tissues in succession to the retina, under 
several l^^ads, as— 



209 


Optical Effects of the Eye4aahest Eyelids, and Conjunctival Fluids. 

'fheae produce phenomena of reflexion, refraction, and inflection. 
They may multiply the images of objects >vhich ore without or which 
are within the eye, and occasion us to see the latter. The conjunc- 
tival fluids render apt illustrations of “recondite*' diffractive sha- 
dows. 

Optical Structure of the Crystalline Lens. 

It is shown that the stelliform figure of our crystalline lens is 
distinctly visible in divergent light. The lens contains numerous 
bodies displaying a series of diffractive fringes. The fringes of the 
border of the iris are likewise conspicuous. Whenever light radiates 
into the eye from a near point, all these things happen. Hence when 
a line of radiants (an edge of any body) is before the eye, a mosaic 
fringe of these coloured shadows will be formed ; and there is an 
ocular fringe, as well as the fringe on the edge of a body by light 
inflected at the body. The ocular colours mentioned seem to have 
been the cause of the belief that it con be proved experimentally that 
the eye contains no provision for the correction of chromatic disper- 
sion ; whereas the colours spoken of should only be compared with 
those that are produced by Jlaws in the glasses of optical instru- 
ments. 

The Structure of the Vitreous Body derived from Optical Phenomena. 

On this head the author arrives at the following conclusions. 

In the vitreous body are innumerable vesicular globules, ranging 
in size from 0*0008 to 0*005 of a line, which ore arranged in un.. 
broken series, in tubes more or less transparent. These tubes pre- 
cisely resemble veins and arteries in their mode of ramification ; they 
frequently anastomose and are united to one another by capillary 
plexuses, and they are of less specific gravity than the vitreous fluid. 
The trunks of this peculiar system of vessels probably arise in the 
region of, or at the base of the optic nerve, and ramify in the vitreous 
humour; the larger branches passing circumferentially within a 
limited distance of the hyaloid membrane, and yielding again many 
branches, which, after repeated subdivisions, end in a capillary net- 
work exceedingly subtle and close. Many of the terminal loops of 
the capillaries arc attached to the hyaloid membrane, so as to con- 

v2 



210 


fine the majority of the branches in a lax manner to its vicinity. A true 
idea of this system may be gained by conceiving that the veins and 
arteries here existing in the foetal eye have in after life been deve- 
loped according to the growth of the body, but also metamorphosed 
into these light, peculiar, globule-holding, transparent vessels, and 
deprived of all foreign support except at their roots and a part of 
their capillary loops. The intricate ramifications of these vessels 
have the mechanical effect of in a great degree restraining the rela- 
tive motion of the humour which fills the hyaloid capsule, and com- 
pelling it to concur in the various movements of the eye-ball, so as 
to obviate the risk of concussion from eddies of the fluid in rapid 
movements of the eye, and consequent disturbing effects on the lens, 
the retina and its vessels. 

The paper goes on to take this subject up in detail ; supplies the 
dynamical laws which must be kept in view in the application of 
previously obtained optical methods to the required examination ; 
shows that it is the system of ramifications described which has 
given rise to the peculiar appearances simulating concentric lamellss 
in the vitreous humour previously subjected to chromic acid, so dif- 
ferently interpreted by microscopists. Here too the hitherto vagrant 
musem voUtantes are, for the first time, invested with form, disposi- 
tion and office. They are now shown to be the essential element in 
the structure of the vitreous body; and certain radical misconcep- 
tions, as to the nature of these appearances and the constitution of 
the vitreous body, are pointed out. 

The Optical Anatomy of the Retina, 

The existence of the vasa centralia retinee in the substance of the 
retina, and the movements of the blood therein, occasion diversified 
phenomena. We may examine these vessels in our own eyes, in 
their minutest distributions, by means of a pin-hole, lens, in 
movement across the eye's aids, in virtue of a physiological law here- 
after determined. Currents of blood in these vessels, by pressure 
upon the nervous matter at their sides, produce remarkable pheno- 
mena, differing for the superficial and deep vessels (that is, according 
to the place of the vessel in the five layers of the retina lately disco- 
vered by microscopists). These phenomena may all be distinguished 
from one another, and assigned with precision each to its cause. 



211 


The phenomena of this kind are always before iib by daylight and 
night. In every use of the organs of sight these effects may be 
observed. In twilight, and into night, the pressure of tlie blood- 
currents on the retina first equals and then ea^ceh the impression 
made by the failing external light; and the whole circulatory 
system may be seen, with proper attention, definitely figuring itself 
in white or golden colour. A great concentration of light appears at 
the middle of the retina, which requires a bountiful supjdy of blood, 
and owing to the pointing of vessels towards the foramen centrales 
there is an apparent gyration of light currents round a darker pivot. 
The whole conduct of the retinal circulation may be traced by the 
blood^iighf. And the manner in which the blood flows through the 
retina may be equable, or irregular and fitful ; it may be very slow, 
and it may roll with great rapidity. A rhythmical or recufrent 
circulation of the retinal blood is very frequent, and produces very 
singular phenomena. We may produce the uncommon states of the 
retinal circulation at pleasure, by artifices described ; and it is shown 
that it is the retinal circulation which is the cause of all the pheno- 
mena which have been taken to prove spontaneous, vibratory, &c. 
sensations of light. 

From these elementary facts being overlooked, fundamental errors 
as to the conduct of the retina proper haye prevailed on all hands. 
When external light is so faint that the retinal light from blood- 
pressure exceeds it, the middle of the retina is so occupied with retinal 
light as to be, comparatively with other parts of the retina, unavail- 
able for the usual purposes, and we do not see anything with direct 
nearly so well as with oblique vision ; and this inefficiency of the 
centre of the retina is not limited to the case of “ stars of the last 
degree of faintness ” (Herschel and South), but all small objects 
that are quite visible by ^‘lateral'* inspection appear to be “suddenly 
blotted out** by the eyes being turned directly upon them. 

The rhythmical waves of light, or rhythmical progression of the 
retinal blood (and the mode of movement of the retinal blood as 
rendered by optical phenomena can be observed by otlicr means), 
may occur, in a certain sense, spontaneously, or may be produced at 
will. The retinal circulation may be excited to show astonishing 
Ivuninpus effects. 

Among other ways of causing a rhythmical or recurrent movement 



212 


of thiB blood, is that by simple fatigue of the retina by overtraining 
the eight, when the retina, more or lees suddenly (or after a few 
oscillations), becomes flooded with blood, and complete obliteration 
of all objects having less than a certain luminosity ensues. This 
circumstance has misled Brewster and Purkinje, separately, into the 
belief that they had discovered that a sensation excited in one por- 
tion of a retina may be ** extended” or ** irradiated” to an adjacent 
portion. Other cases which are imagined by J. Miiller and Brew- 
ster to support this view are subjected to examination ; the real 
cause of each of the phenomena mentioned being pointed out. 
Some peculiar effects ofretinal light are given ; and it is determined 
that the rigid correspondence of the limits of sensation with those of 
the painted image, is a physiological law literally absolute. 

Unsuspected difficulties of a solitary eye, and certain well-known 
phenomena are explained upon the foregoing principles. 

May sensation be excited in the trunk of the optic nerve, or centric 
fugally ? * 

The arguments which have been presumed to prove the affirma- 
tive are shown, one by one, to be fallacious, while there is pre- 
sumption of a negative sort. Observations are offered as to the cor- 
rect explanation of various physiological points which have been 
otherwise interpreted, and reputed physiological contrasts of colour 
are considered. 

Images of external objects are painted on the limitary membrane, 
and perceived by the radial fibres. 

This head commences with the quotation of a passage from Sir 
David Brewster’s 'Optics’ which he offered towards an explanation 
of the difficulty of seeing a very faint star by direct vision ; and it is 
shown that the retina is not liable, as Brewster imagines, to be 
thrown into a state of undulatory” perception by our looking 
through the teeth of a “fine comb” or through a single “ narrow 
aperture,” The paper points out that the effect observed in these 
circumstances is produced by our looking near the edge of any body 
whatever, provided, and only then, that the object tmve, be it never 
so little, across the eye*s axis. It shows that the same effect is pro- 
duced by light radiating from a point, by a flame, by lenses, curved 
refledtors, whilst they are m the act of moving across the eye's axis ; 
or by the movement of the eye itself, merely in relation to the light 



213 


entering it,-— even the naked eye along the eky. The effect pro- 
duced is shown to be simply owing to this ; that the retina, under 
such action, ceases to perceive in the spaces corresponding to its 
blood-vessels and capillaries, so that they completely display them- 
selves in the semblance of black bodies (or lines) ; end the law is 
arrived at, that the images of external points which are painted on 
the vessels and capillaries are not perceived when the retina loses 
light from one point of space and receives light from another point of 
space within a certain interval of time^ or that the percipient points 
lying in front of the vessels require a certain time to perceive, A 
physiological hypothesis is suggested to account for this pheno- 
menon, on the j)rcsumption that the ** radial fibres/* which project 
from the layer of rods and cones and end in the limitary membrane, 
are the ultimate percipients of light. 

It is pointed out how wonderfully close we may find the corre- 
spondence between the microscopical and optical anatomy of the 
retina. Each pair of identical fibres of the two optic nerves must 
be regarded as one nerve. Another supposed anomaly to the sim- 
plicity of nervous action being explained on anatomical principles, a 
statement of ordinary optical nervous action is made, and a summary 
evinces how the anomalies in visual experience ore due to the com- 
plex additions to a simple organ of sight. 



tu 


January 26, 1855, 


The Right Hon. LORD WROTTESLEY, President, 
in the Chair. 


The Right Hon. The Bari of Harrowby wk» admitted into the 
Society. 

The Bakeeian Lecture was then delivered by John Tyndall, 
Ph.D., F.R.S.; being an oral exposition, illustrated by expe- 
riments, of the substance of a paper by him, entitled ** On 
the Nature of the Force by which Bodies are repelled from 
the Poles of a Magnet; preceded by an Account of some 
Experiments on Molecular Influences/^ 

The paper commences with an introduction, in which the present 
aspect of the portions of science to which it refers is briefly sketched. 
A section is devoted to the examination of the magnetic properties 
of wood, which substance, the author finds, except where extraneous 
impurities are present, to be always diamagnetic, and to set in the 
magnetic field with its fibre equatorial. The influence of the shape 
of pointed and flat poles is studied, and those curious phenomena of 
rotation, first observed by M. Plucker, and attributed by him to the 
action of two conflicting forces, are referred to molecular structure 
as a cause. Between flat poles, it is proved that the line joining the 
centres of the two poles is the line of minimum force ; that is to say, 
the force increases more quickly from the central point of the mag- 
netic field in an equatorial direction than in an axial one. Reflect- 
ing on the great diversity of opinion at present existing with regard 
to the real nature of the diamagnetic force, the author deemed it 
necessary to coma^ence at the foondation of the inquiry. A funda- 
mental question in the present case is the following: — Are dia- 



215 


magnetic bodiee repelled by a magnet in virtue of any constant- pro- 
perty poBseseed by the masa ? la the force in question a mere repul- 
sion of ordinary Tuatter, or is the repulsion exercised in virtue of a 
state of magnetization into which the body is first tlirown ? This 
question is answered in a maxmer which admits of no doubt. 

It is proved that the repulsion of diamagnetic bodies increases in 
a quicker ratio than the strength of the magnet which produces the 
repulsion. Within wide limits, indeed, the repulsion, instead of 
being simply proportional to the strength of the magnet, is pro^Mxr- 
tional to the square of the strength, which leads inevitably to the 
conclusion that the body thus repelled contributes to the effect pro- 
duced; that its repulsion is due to an excited condition into which 
it is thrown by the induencing magnet, the intensity of this excite- 
ment varying within the limits already referred to, as the strength 
of the magnet which produces it. This conclusion is further arrived 
at by a close comparison of the repulsions of diamagnetic bodies 
with the attraction of paramagnetic ones : both are found subservient 
to one and the same law. 

It is next proved that the diamagnetic excitement produced by 
one pole of a magnet is not the state which enables a pole of an op- 
posite quality to repel, the substance : — that each pole induces a con- 
dition peculiar to itself, or, in other words, that the excitement of 
diamagnetic bodies in the magnetic field is of a dual character. 

These points being established, a searching comparison is insti- 
tuted between the phenomena exhibited by paramagnetic and dia- 
magnetic bodies in three distinct cases :««-first, when operated on 
by the magnet alone ; secondly, when operated on by the current 
alone ; and, thirdly, when operated on by the magnet and current 
combined. A bar of iron was, in some of these cases, compared with 
a bar of bismuth, but it was soon found necessary, in order to avoid 
the proved errors of reasoning, to take strict account of the mole- 
cular structure of the bismuth. A bar of tiiis substance, cut in a 
certain manner frmn the crystallized mass, exhibits between the 
poles of a magnet precisely the some visible deportment as a bar of 
iron, while it is well known that the normal deportment of hbmuth 
is opposed to that of iron. The author, in his examination of the 
points before us, divided paramagnetic bars into two distinct classes, 
and obwsifiad diamagnetic bars in the same manner ; one blase he 



216 


called normal^ and the other class ahnormah A normal paramagnetic 
bar is one which sets its length from pole to pole in the magnetic 
fields and a normal diamagnetic bar is one which sets its length at 
right angles to the line joining the poles. An abnormal magnetic bar, 
on the contrary, is one which sets its length equatorial ly ; while an 
abnormal diamagnetic bar is one which sets its length axially. 

In all cases, whether operated on by the magnet alone, the cur- 
rent alone, or the magnet and current combined, the deportment of 
the normal paramagnetic bar is precisely antithetical to that of the 
normal diamagnetic one. In the magnetic field the former sets 
axially, the latter equatorially. Operated on by a voltaic current, the 
former sets its length at right angles to the current, the latter sets 
its length parallel to it. When magnet and current act together on 
the bars, it is found that the disposition of forces which produces a 
defiection from right to left of the paramagnetic bar produces a de- 
fiection from left to right of the diamagnetic bar. If the position 
of equilibrium of the formSr be from N.E. to S.W., the position of 
equilibrium of the latter is from N.W. to S.B. In short, the posi- 
tion of rest for the normal magnetic bar is always at right angles to 
the position of the diamagnetic bar. A precisely similar antithesis is 
observed when we compare the abnormal paramagnetic bar with the 
abnormal diamagnetic one. The former, in thq magnetic field, sets 
equatorially, the latter axially. The former sets parallel to an elec- 
tric current, the latter perpendicular to the same. If the deflection 
of the former be from right to left, the deflection of the latter, under 
like conditions, is from left to right. Finally, the position of equi- 
librium of the former is always at right angles to that of the latter. 

But if the deportment of the normal paramagnetic bar be com- 
pared with that of the abnormal diamagnetic one, it will be found 
that they are in all cases identical ; and the same identity of deport- 
ment is exhibited when the abnormal paramagnetic bar is compared 
with the normal diamagnetic one. The necessity of paying atten- 
tion to structure in experiments of this nature could not, it is ima- 
gined, be more strikingly exhibited. 

It is proved by these experiments that the simple substitution of 
an attractive force for a repulsive one would completely convert the 
phenomena exhibited by paramagnetic bodies into those exhibited 
by diamagnetic ones. That if that which Gauss has called the ideal 



217 


distribution of magnetism in an iron bar be reversed, we have a 
distribution which would produce the phenomena of a bismuth bar 
of the same dimensions. All the phenomena of diamagnetic bodies 
become equally intelligible with those of paramagnetic ones, when 
we assume that the former class possess a polarity the same in kind, 
but the opposite in direction to that of the latter. 

It is well known that a bar of iron surrounded by a helix in which 
a voltaic current circulates is converted into a magnet, and exhibits 
that twoness of action, — those phenomena of attraction and repulsion 
at its two ends — to which wc give the name of polarity, llie 
present paper contains an account of experiments made with the 
view of ascertaining whether similar phenomena were exhibited by 
a bar of pure bismuth. A cylinder of the latter substance, 6^ inches 
long and 0*4 of an inch in diameter, was suspended by a suitable 
device within a helix of covered copper wire, so that it could vibrate 
freely from side to side. The ends of two electro- magnetic cores 
were brought to bear upon the two ends of the bismuth bar, and it 
was so arranged that the two magnetic poles acting upon the bar 
might be of the same or of opposite qualities. The helix being first 
excited by a strong current, a current of considerably less power was 
sent round the electro- magnetic cores, and their action upon tlie 
bismuth bar was observed : by means of a gyrotrope the current in 
the helix was reversed, and the effect of the reversion noted ; per- 
mitting the current through the helix to flow in its last direction, 
by means of a second gyrotrope, the current which excited the cores 
was reversed ; and finally, while the last ma^etic polaxity remained 
unaltered, the direction of the current in the helix was once more 
changed, and the consequent deportment of the bismuth bar was 
noted. 

In makmg these experiments and exercising some judgment in 
the choice of the relation between the strength of the magnets and 
the strength of the current in the helix, the most complete mastery 
was attained over the motions of the bar. With one disposition of 
the forces the ends of the bar of bismuth were promptly repelled, with 
another arrangement they were just as promptly attracted. If, when 
moving towards the cores, the direction of the current in the helix 
' was reversed, the motion of the bar was at once arrested, and attrac- 
tion was converted into repulsion. If, while receding from the bar, 



218 


the direction of the current in the helix was changed, the recession 
was stopped and the ends of the bar were attracted. The some 
results were obtained when, instead of changing the direction of the 
current in the helix, the polarity of the electro-magnetic cores was 
reversed. When the latter were so excited that poles of the same 
quality were presented to the ends of the bismuth bar, the repul- 
sion of the one pole was balanced by the attraction of the other, and 
under the influence of these opposing forces the bar stood still. 

Pursuing the argument further, a south pole and a north pole 
were caused to act simultaneously upon each end of the bismuth 
bar ; supposing one end of the latter to be repelled by a south pole, 
then, on the assumption of diamagnetic polarity, the same end 
would be attracted by a north pole ; and permitting both poles to 
act npon it simultaneously from opposite sides, we may anticipate 
that the force tending to turn the bar will be greater than if only a 
single pole were used. To test this conclusion, four electro-mag- 
netic cores were made use of; the two poles to the right of the bis- 
muth bar were of the same name, while tlie two to the left of the 
bismuth bar were of an opposite quality ; with this arrangement the 
mechanical action upon the bar was greatly augmented, and the fore- 
going anticipation completely verified. 

The bar employed in these experiments is unusually large, but it 
does not mark the practical limit of success. All the results obtained 
with this bar were obtained with another solid cylinder of bismuth 
14 inches long and 1 inch in diameter. The corresponding experi- 
ments were made with bars of iron, and it was always found that the 
arrangement of forces which caused the attraction of the ends of the 
paramagnetic bar caused the repulsion of the ends of the diamagnetic 
one ; while the disposition which caused the repulsion of the aads 
of the paramagnetic bar produced, in the most manifest manner, 
the attraction of the ends of the diamagnetic one. As regards the 
abstract question of polarity, the only difference between iron and 
bismuth is the comparatively intense action of the former. In the 
cose of a magnetic body, whose capacity for magnetiaation does not 
exceed that of bismuth, and in which coercive force is equally ab- 
sent, no proof can be adduced in favour of the polarity of the former 
body that cannot be matched by proofs of equal value in every re- 
spect of the polarity of the latter. 



219 


'fhe objectiona that have been and possibly may be used against 
diamagnetic polarity, are next considered, and some observations are 
made on the constitution of the magnetic field. The relation of 
our present knowledge of diamagnetic action to the theory of Weber, 
and to Ampere's hypothesis of molecular currents is stated ; and in 
conclusion, the author dwells briefiy upon those points of diamag- 
netic action wherein the views of M. Matteucci differ from his own. 


The following paper was read : — 

Differential Transformation and the Eeversion of Seriesca/^ 
By J. J. Sylvester, Esq., F.R.S, Received January 26, 
1865. 

With a view to its publication in the Proceedings of the Society, I 
take occasion to communicate the result of my investigations, as for as 
they have yet extended, into the general theory of differential trans- 
formations, containing a complete and general solution of the import- 
ant problem of expanding a given partial differential coefficient of a 
function in respect of one system of independent variables in terms 
of the partial differential coefficients thereof, in respect to a second 
system of independent variables, each respectively given as explicit 
functions of the first set. 

Tins quastion may be shown to be exactly coincident with that 
of the reversion of simultaneous serieses proposed by Jacobi, which 
may be thus stated: given (n+l) quantities, each expressed by 
rational infinite serieses as functions of n others ; required to express 
any one of the first set in a rational infinite series in terms of the 
other n of the same set. This question has only been resolved by 
Jacobi for a particular case ; the result hereunder given for the trans- 
formation of differential coefficients contains the solution of the gene- 
ral question. My method of investigatioa is entirely different from 
that adopted by the great Jacobi, and I hope in a short time to be 
able to lay it in a complete form before the Society, and probably to 
add a solution of the still more general question comprising the re- 
version of serieses as a particular case, vis. the question of express- 



220 


ing any one of n quantities connected by m equations in terms of 
any («—»») others of the same. 

Let there be any number of variables, say v, w, of which 
^ are given functions, it is required to expand 

(ir nr ap 

in terms of the partial differential coefficients of x, y, ;r in respect 
of «, V, w. 

Form the determinant 

dz dx dx 
du dv* dw* 
dy ^ dy 
du dv dvo* 
dz dz dz 
du dv dw* 

which call J. 

The required expansion will contain in each term an integer nume- 
rical coefficient, a power of one factor of the form 

(£)'(»)* 

and other factors of the form 

(I)' ar (0' 

(—Y • 

Vdw/ \dv) \dw) ^ 

(i.Y (iY* (JLY- 

\du) \dv) \dw) 

Let the latter class of factors be distinguished into twj sets, those 
■where /-hm-f 


Yi.i^sxO 

11 

o 

«=:0' 

or faO 

3 

II 

Q 

!l 

or 1^0 

m=0 

n=:l 


which I shall call uni-diffierential factors, and those in which 
f-l-w-h »7 1, which I shall coll plari-diiferential factors. 

First, then, as to the form of the general term abstracting from 



221 


^ the numerical coefHctent and the uni- differential factors (except of 
course so far as they enter into J). This will be as follows : — 


(rfj (dj {dwj * W (dj (W * '"(dj (dv) (dw) 

/ d d d / d V“<i / d X**"*/ d X**"* 

njJ (d-J Id^J ^(du) Uj UJ y 

fd\'‘^fd \'’'hf d\'<h / d ( d X* 

^(rfj \dv) (dujj ^(dj (dJ 


^ V y*"’- 


fd\Pfd\'>( dV^^ 1 




dwJ 


J“ 


subject to the limitations about to be expressed. 
CaJl =:L, 

. .. 


and form the analogous quantities Mj, M^, Mg; N^, Ng, Tlien 
we must have 

Li + f'a4'b'a + A^i4‘ Mj-j-Mj + Nj -j-Nj + Ng 

=/+yH-^+^i"h^8+^8 » 

and as the sum of any group of indices /, m, n must be not less than 
2, we have 

/4-y-f A + ei + Cs-hea-fp + g + n not less than 2e, + 2 e 3 + 2 e 3 . 
so that Ci + e^-hfa must not exceed /“hy-i- A+;j + fi' + r; furthermore, 
p + y + r must not exceed and finally, 

W A + Cl -f e, + ^3- 

1. We may first take + giving to E in succession all 

integer values from /+^-hAto 5^+2y4-2A, and find all possible so- 
lutions of this equation with permutations between the values of 

Pji 

2. We may then take p-f rccss, giving s in succession all in- 
teger values from 1 to /+^*f A, and find all possible solutions of this 
equation with permutations between /, g, A. 

3. We may then take L-f M-f Ns^Z+^ + A-f-E— and find all 
the values of L, M, N, with permutations allowable between the 
values of L, M, N. 



222 


4. We may then take 

L, 4*1^ 41*8 

Mi4M,4M8=M 

N,4N3 4N3=N, 

and solve these several equations in every way possible* with per- 
mutations os before. 

6. We must take 

4*A "b •- “^-*1 *jWj4*Wi4**4^‘*Wj— M j ‘n,4^^i4**4*‘^i^N| 
.... %=L3 *»t3 4®m5 .... ‘^mj=-M3 *n5 4®n* 

*/34«/j) .... >ms4®»*3 .... *«34®«3 *’=*»3=N, 

and solve in every possible manner these equations, but without ad- 
mitting permutations between the values of or between 

the values of the members of the other of the third sets token each per 
se, and subject to the condition that every such sum as 7j4’')Wj4’^Wi 
must be greater than unity. Every possible system of values of 
these nine sets will furnish a corresponding pluri-diflFerential part 
to the general term. 

Next, as to the uni-diflFerential part, we may form the quantity 

( dy dz dy dz^^\(dy dz dy dz^^'^fdy dz dy dz'y\ 

dv* dw dw do) \dw* du du dwj \dt/ do do dwj 

fdz dx dz dx'^^fdz dxy^/^ dx^9 

Vrfu tifio dw do) \dw du du dw) \du do do dw) 

fdx dy dx rfy\^/d!a? (?y dx dy 'y^/dx ^ dx dyVs 

Vdv dw^ dw do) du dw) \du do do dw) 

where \i 4Xa4\3==L4p 

Pi+Pa4*i«3=M4y 
v^ 4 i^fi4rs=N4r. 

These equations are to be solved in every possible manner with 
permutations between the members of the X set, the p set, and the 
p set. Finally, we have to consider the numerical coefficient. To 
give a perfect representation of this, we must ascsetain what identi- 
ties exist in the factors of the pluri-differential part. Let os sup- 
pose that one set of operators upon x is repeated Oi times, another 



223 


e, times, and so on. giving rise to the powers 6„ 0,, 6^ in the x 

line. Similarly, form V 'Pu V'l • ■ ■ ’('v 

from the z line. Then the numerical part of the general term will 
be 

n(\i+pi4-y') n(\ g+p^+i»,) n (x,4-P54-»'») 

IM, Up, iiv'iix,Qp,ni/,nI,np,n«', 

X n(L+p)n(M -bg )n(N-i-r) 
rn'/,n'w,n‘B,n«/,ii*w,n«a, i 

i n>/jn'm,n'n,n'/jn»m,n«ii, >• 

[n'/snimjn‘«,tp/,n«m,n»Bs J 

D 

^ ne , ne, . . . iie„n^,n^, . . . . . Ui/^y 

where in general ETw means 1 .2.3. : as regards D, it is the fol- 
lowing determinant, viz. 


y y 

fh 

y^ y^ 


I' L3 M3 N3 

y 4 M, N, 

^3 ^ J ^ I 

Xg Lj + Lj Lg+P J' V 

PS V Mi+Mg + Mg 

Vg V y Nj + Nj-fN^-fr 


The result, for greater brevity, has been set out in the above pages 
for the case of a function of three variables, but the reader can 
have no diiBIculty in extending the statement to any number. In 
the case of a single variable, the formula can easily be identified 
with that given by Burman'e law. It is noticeable that the deter- 
minant above written is of the form 

“t* -j- Elpe-f- Fj -h Gr, 

the part independent of j3, q, r being ewily seen to vanish. More- 
over, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H ore all essentially positive^ so that D 
can only vanish (except for jp=bO, r=:0, yscO) by virtue of one con- 
dition at least more than the number of the variables. 


VOL. VII. 


Z 




225 


February 1, 1865, 

Colonel SABINE, Trcas, and V,P., in the Chair. 


The following communications were read : — 

I. The reading of Dr. Jago's paper, ‘^On Ocular Spectres and 

Structures as Mutual Exponents,” was resumed and con- 
cluded*. 

II. Micro-chemical Researches on the Digestion of Starch and 
Amylaceous Foods.” By Philip Burnarh Ayrks, M.D. 
Lond. Communicated by John Bishop, Esq., F.ll.S. Re- 
ceived January 11, 1856. 

After some general historical remarks on the methods hitherto 
employed in the investigation of the complicated phenomena of tlie 
process of digestion, the comparatively small results obtained by 
chemical analysis of the contents of the stomach, intestinal canal, and 
of the evacuations, by Tiedemann and Gmelin, Bcr 2 eliu 8 , and others, 
the author proceeded to demonstrate the necessity of a minute ex- 
amination of the contents of the alimentary canal by the microscope, 
and such chemical tests as we possess for the determination of the 
"changes of such articles of food as exhibit definite structure. 

In order that we may ultimately arrive at a complete exposition 
of the phenomena of digestion, he is of opinion that it will be neces- 
soiy to examine,— first, the structure of particular kinds of food, 
then the changes produced in them by cooking, and lastly to trace 
the changes they undergo at short intervals, through the alimentary 
canal from the stomach to the rectum . The results of a series of 
researches of this character on the changes in starch, and starch- 
containing foods, are presented in this memoir. 

^ An abstract is given at p. 208. 

2 A 


VOL. vn. 



226 


The method adopted for the examination of the changes in starch 
and starch-foods was as follows: — An animal was kept fasting 
twenty-four hours, and afterwards confined to a diet consisting of 
the starch or amylaceous food, with water, for five or six days, until 
the debris of all other kinds of food previously taken were cleared 
from the alimentary canal. At a determinate time, after a meal, 
the animal was killed, the abdomen laid open as quickly os possible, 
and ligatures placed at short intervals on the intestinal canal, from 
the pylorus to the rectum. The contents of the stomach and each 
portion of the intestinal canal included between the ligatures was 
then carefully examined. This mode of examination sufficed to 
determine the changes which occur in the food during normal diges** 
tion but other questions as to the particular secretion or secretions 
by which the changes observed were effected. 

The fluids poured into the alimentary canal ore five in number, — 
the saliva, gastric juice, bile, pancreatic juice, and finally, the intes- 
tinal mucus. ^ 

The influence of the saliva is easily determined, by chewing the 
particular food subjected to experiment, and keeping the mixture at 
about 98^^ Fahr. The combined action of the saliva and gastric 
juice is seen in the contents of the stomach. To determine the 
action of the bile, the common bile-duct was tied, and to ascertain 
the action of the intestinal mucus, it was necessary to ligature the 
bile and pancreatic ducts. If the digestion of the substance is not 
effected in the stomach, it is evident that it cannot be attributed to 
the saliva or gastric juice ; if digestion is still eflfectod in the 
intestinal canal after ligature of the bile-duct, it cannot be attributed 
to the action of the saliva, gastric juice or bile ; if it still go on 
after ligature of the bile and pancreatic ducts, the digestive pow^ 
must of necessity be referred to the action of the intestinal mucus, 
provided no change has previously taken place in the stomach ; but 
if the food passes unchanged after cutting oflf the supply of bile and 
pancreatic juice, but proceeds after ligature of the bile-duct alone, 
the act of digestion must be referred to the pancreatic juice. 

The author first briefly describes the structure of the starches and 
starch-^obntaining vegetables employed in his experiments ; then the 
changes produced by cooking, and finally enters on a minute descrip- 
tion of the changes observed in the experiments he performed on 



227 


normal digestion, and after cutting ofif the supply of bile and pan- 
creatic juice. 

The correct appreciation of the structure of the starch- granule is 
of considerable importance in relation to these investigations^ and 
the author believes that he has been able to afford a satisfactory 
solution of this vexed question. The changes observed during the 
digestion of starch favour the original opinion of Leuwenhoeck, that 
the starch- granule consists essentialiy of an investing membrane or 
cell-wall, enclosing an amorphous matter, the true starch, which 
strikes an intense blue colour with iodine ; and these changes also 
support the opinion of Professor Quekett, that the concentric circles 
seen on the starch-granules of many plants are simple foldings of 
the investing membrane, leaving it still doubtful, however, whether 
these concentric circles are not in the starches of some plants com- 
posed of linear series of dotted elevations or depressions of the in- 
vesting membrane. 

By these experiments it was determined that the concentric circles 
remain after the whole of the starch matter, colourable by iodine, 
was removed, and that even then the characteristic cross and colours 
were still seen when the granules were viewed by polarized light, 
although more feebly than before ; this result being probably due 
to the lessened power of refracting light, after the removal of the 
starch matter. 

After describing the structure of the wheat-grain and flour, the 
changes occurring in the wheat-starch during the manufacture of 
bread are given in detail ; but the most interesting of the changes 
produced by cooking are those seen in the boiled or roasted potato 
and in the boiled pea. 

In each of t^ese the act of cooking effects two purposes: — it 
causes great enlargement and physical change of the starch-granules, 
and dissolves the intimate adhesion of the starch-cells, which after- 
wards appear as ovoid or globular, slightly adherent bodies distended 
by the swollen starch^granulesi the outlines of which are indicated 
by more or less irregular gyrate lines, produced by the mutual com- 
pression of the starch-granules within an inelastic cell-membrane. 

The staroh<»granule8 of the pea possess a much thicker investing 
tnembratie than those of the potato, which causes their outlines to 
remain more distinct i^er the removal of the true starch sub- 

2 a2 



22S 


stance during the process of digestion. The other structures seen 
in the pea are carefully described ; the most curious among them 
being the cells composing the external layer of the testa, which 
bear so strong a resemblance to columnar epithelium of the intes- 
tine, that they might be mistaken for the latter by an inattentive 
observer, 

» The substances submitted to experiment were. — 1, boiled wheat- 
starch ; 2, wheaten bread ; 3, uncooked tous les mois ; 4, boiled 
tous les mois ; 5, boiled potato ; 6, uncooked peas ; 7, boiled peas ; 
8, boiled peas after ligature of the bile-duct ; 9, boiled potatoes 
after ligature of the bile and pancreatic ducts. Several subsidiary 
experiments were made to determine the action of the intestinal 
mucus, the saliva, and the substance of the pancreas, on starch. 

The conclusions at which the author arrives from the experiments 
are, — 

1 . That the starch-granule is composed of two parts, chemically 
and histologically distinct, — a ceU-membranc and homogeneous 
contents. The markings seen on many varieties of starch are re- 
ferred to folds or markings of the investing membrane. 

2. No perceptible change occurs in the starch, whether raw or 
cooked, during its sojourn in the stomach of quadrupeds or the 
ventriculus succenturiatus and gizzard of birds; all the granules 
preserve their perfect reaction with iodine and their pristine ap- 
pearance. 

3. The conversion of boiled starch into dextrine and glucose is 
chiefl> effected in the first few inches of the small intestine, but it 
continues to take place in a less degree throughout the entire intes- 
tinal canal. 

4. In the digestion of boiled wheat or other starch, or of wheaten 
bread, the bulk of the mass rapidly diminishes in its passage through 
the small and large intestines, so that it ultimately yields only a 
small quantity of fsecal matter. After being deprived of their con- 
tents, the membranes of the granules shrink and shrivel up into a 
minute granular matter, which constitutes the chief bulk of the 
faecal evacuations after an exclusive diet of starch food, 

5. I'he digestion of raw starch food (peas) in the pigeon or other 
granivorous birds goes on much more slowly, and progresses pi^tty 
equally throughout the entire intestinal canal. 'The starch- granules. 



229 


whether free or included in cells, become intersected by radiating or 
irregular lines or fissures, more or less opaque or granular ; they 
also gradually lose their characteristic reaction with iodine ; and 
this important change, commencing at the surface, progresses 
towards the centre, until the whole of the starch matter is removed, 
leaving the starch -membranes often apparently whole, retaining 
their characteristic markings. The fissured and granular condition 
of the starch-granules is not due to their trituration in the gizzard, 
but to the action of the intestinal fluids, since it was often seen in 
granules enclosed in and protected by jierfect starcb-cells. In the 
digestion of raw starch food, a considerable quantity always escapes 
change, for many starch-cells and granules in the faeces perfectly 
retain the characteristic reaction with iodine. 

6. As the starch remains unchanged in the stomach, its conver- 
sion into glucose cannot be attributed to the saliva or gastric juice, 
unless we suppose these fluids to remain inactive in the stomach, 
and suddenly to regain their activity in the first port of the small 
intestine. The author found that the saliva was capable of efifecting 
the conversion of starch into glucose, but that the mixture of saliva 
and gastric juice in the stomach did not possess that property even 
after being rendered alkaline by carbonate of soda. It is probable 
that the converting power of the saliva, as it flows from the mouth, 
depends not on the true saliva, but on the buccal mucus ; for Ma- 
gendie found that saliva taken from the parotid duct was wholly 
inactive, while the mixed saliva from the mouth effected the conver- 
sion with great facility. Unless, then, the sublingual and submax- 
illary glands secrete a different fluid from the parotids, it is evident 
that the activity of the saliva must be attributed to the buccal 
mucus. 

7. The difference between the digestion of boiled and raw starch 
in dogs is seen in the experiments on the digestion of boiled wheat- 
starch, boiled tous les mois, and bread. In all these, some starch- 
granules escape the action of heat and water, and remain in nearly 
their pristine condition. These uncooked slarch-granulea undergo 
slow and imperfect changes, being fissured, broken, and more or less 
altered, but in general retaining their characteristic reaction with 
Iodine. 

The conversion of starch into glucose is not effected by the 



280 


bile, since after ligature of the common bile-duct, the changes occur 
to as great an extent as when the bile passes freely into the intes- 
tinal canal. 

9. It is not due to the pancreatic juice, inasmuch as after ligature 
of the bile and pancreatic ducts in the same animal, the digestion of 
starch is still effected. 

10. The only remaining secretion is the intestinal mucus, which 
is especially abundant at the upper part of the intestinal canal ; and 
a further proof is afforded of the activity of the intestinal mucus 
token from the upper part of the duodenum above the entrance of 
the pancreatic duct after ligature of this duct and the common bile- 
duct, by its capability of converting a large quantity of fresh boiled 
starch into glucose out of the body. 

1 1 . In the cooking of starch-containing vegetables, such as pota- 
toes and peas, the adhesion of the starch-cells is dissolved or weak- 
ened so as to render them easily separable and amenable to the 
action of the intestinal fluids. At the same time the starch-granules 
undergo a large increase in bulk, distend the cells, and by their 
mutual compression, their outlines present the appearance of gyrate 
lines beneath the cell-wall. The cells seldom burst so as to emit 
their contents, or present any appreciable opening through which 
the intestinal fluids can directly penetrate. The author cannot 
positively aflirm so much of the starch-membranes, because ^ese 
are so extremely delicate that Assures might be invisible, but he 
believes that in a great number the membranes remain entire. 

12. If this be the case, the conversion of starch matter into 
glucose must be effected by the permeation or endosmose of the 
intestinal fluids through the invisible pores of two membranes, 
in the digestion of the pea, the potato, and other similar foods, 
and the glucose must escape through the same membraxLes by 
exosmose. 

13. Before the conversion of starch into glucose, the amylaceous 
matter contained in the starch is more dense than the intestinal 
mucus in immediate contact with the cells, and an inward current 
or endosmose is established, but after that conversion the syrupy 
fluid is less dense them the mucus, and then an outward current or 
exosmose occurs, by which the glucose escapes from the cells into 
the intestine and is absorbed. If this be the case, as the details of 



281 


the experimentB tend Rtrozigly to prove, a new and important func- 
tion is assigned to the intestinal mucus. 

14. In normal digestion, chyme escapes very slowly from the 
stomach into the duodenum, in small quantities, as it is detached 
from the alimentary mass by the muscular movements of the stomacli, 
and this gradual propulsion often occupies several hours after a meal. 
This slow propulsion is evidently intended to expose the commi- 
nuted food fully to the action of the intestinal juices, and produce 
an intimate mixture with them. The comparatively empty condi- 
tion of the upper part of the small intestine, even during active 
digestion, is thus fully explained. 

15. If the food be too finely divided or incapable of a second 
solidification in the stomach, it passes too rapidly into the first part 
of the small intestine, is insufficiently mixed with the intestinal 
fiuids, and a considerable part escapes digestion. On the other 
hand, if it enters the small intestine in masses incapable of reduction 
by the muscular action of the parts or solution in the fluid, it tra- 
verses tlie intestinal canal unchanged, except at the surface, which 
is then alone exposed to the action of the intestinal fiuids. 

16. It is not necessary for the conversion of starch into glucose 
that the fiuids in the duodenum or other parts of the intestinal 
canal should be alkaline, or even neutral, for in several of the expe- 
riments the contents of every part of the alimentary canal had an 
acid reaction. 

17. The greater part of the intestinal mucus is not excremcn- 
titious, for little, if any, mucus is perceptible in the fseces in normal 
digestion, except at their surface, whereas the greater proportion of 
the contents of the small intestine consists of mucus. A consider- 
able quantity of mucus is seen in the csecum, but it rapidly dimi- 
nishes in the colon, and is scarcely detectible in the faces, except 
that on the surface, which is probably derived from the mucous 
membrane of the rectum. The author raises the question, whetlier 
one of the chief functions of the cacum is not to effect the conver- 
sion of the intestinal mucus into some other substance capable of 
re-entering the blood, and performing some ulterior purpose in the 
animal economy. 

18. In normsd digestion^ the separation of the epithelium of the 
mucous membrane of the intestine is the exception instead of the rule, 



282 


as stated by some physiologists* The author questions the theory of 
the detachment of the epithelium of the villi in each act of absorp- 
tion, on the grounds that the presence of detached epithelium was 
unfrequent in the whole course of his experiments ; that epithelium 
is readily detached by manipulation ; that the continual reproduc- 
tion of such a vast amount of cell-tissue must necessarily be accom- 
panied by a vast expenditure of vital force ; and finally, that it is 
not necessary, because fluids readily penetrate epithelial membranes. 

19. The passage of a given food through the whole length of the 
intestinal canal may occupy a comparatively short time, especially 
when the animal is fasting. In one experiment, where a pigeon 
refused food until the faeces contained no visible debris of previous 
food, starch -granules were detected in the fseces within two hours 
after a meal, and this although the intestine of this animal is ex- 
tremely narrow and about a yard in length. 

20. A remarkable circumstance in the digestion of starch or 
starch foods is the constant presence of myriads of vibriones in the 
lower part of the intestinal canal. They are generally Erst observed 
in the lower part of the small intestine, as minute brilliant points, 
just visible with a power of 600 diameters, in active move- 
ment. They increase in numbers towards the csecum, in which a 
large number of fully- developed vibriones are constantly seen. 
These minute organisms increase in size and length in the oolon 
and rectum, and their fis8i])arou6 mode of propagation, first described 
by the author in the * Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science,* 
may be distinctly traced by examining the contents of these por- 
tions of the intestine. 



February 8, 1855, 


The LORD WROTTESLEY, President^ in the Chair. 

A paper was in part read, entitled An Account of some recent 
Researches near Cairo, undertaken with the view of throw- 
ing light upon the Geological History of the Alluvial Land 
of Egypt/^ — Part First. By Leonakd Hokneb, Esq., 
F.R.SS. L. & E., F.G.8. 


February 15, 1855. 

THOMAS BELL, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 

Edward John Littleton, Baron Hatherton, was balloted for and 
duly elected a Fellow of the Society. 

The following communications were read 

I. The reading of Mr. Horner's paper was resumed and con- 
cluded. 

The author commences by observing, that although it be highly 
improbable that we can ever form an appropriate estimate in years 
of the age even of the most modern strata, we are not cut off 
from all hope of being able to assign an amount in years to the 
duration of some of the great geological changes which, in past 
ages, the present surface of the earth has undergone, by causes 
that are still in operation; especially by a careful study of the 
formation of the deltas of great rivers, and of the action of the 
latter on the rocks and soils they traverse in their course. If in 
a country in which a certain alteration in the land has occurred, we 
know that such alteration has taken place in part within historical 
time, and if the entire change under consideration presents through » 



234 


out a tolerable uniformity of character, we may be juatified in 
holding the portion that has taken place within the historical period 
to afford a measure of the time occupied in the production of the 
antecedent part of the same change. 

Egypt supplies us with the earliest evidence of the existence of 
the human race recorded in works of art ; in its monuments we find 
the dawn of the historical period and of civilization ; and that land 
alone, of all parts of the world as yet known to us, offers an instance 
of a great geological change that has been in progress throughout 
the whole of the historical period, in its annual inundations and the 
sediment these deposit to form the alluvial land in the valley of the 
Nile ; and there is good reason for believing that the change had 
been going on with the same uniformity for ages prior to that period 
when our reckoning of historical time begins. To investigate the 
formation of the alluvial land in the valley of the Nile in Upper and 
Lower Egypt is therefore an object of the highest interest to the 
geologist and the historian. ^ 

The author being impressed with the conviction that this geolo* 
gical problem could only be solved by having shafts and borings 
made in tlie alluvial soil to the greatest practicable depths, deter- 
mined to have some such experiments made ; as the results might 
lead the way to other researches on a greater scale. The ground on 
which he hoped to be able to form a chronometric scale by which 
the total depth of sediment reached might be measured, was the 
same as that on which the French engineers in 1800 had proceeded, 
viz. the accumulation of Nile sediment around monuments of a 
known age. If that depth of sediment be divided by the number of 
centuries that have elapsed since the date of the erection of the mo- 
nument, we obtain a scale of the secular increase of wluch the base 
of the monument is zero, assuming that the average increase from 
century to century has been uniform within an area of some extent, 
'fhen if the excavation be continued below the base stone, and the 
sediment passed through exhibits similar characters as to composi- 
tion with that above the base line of the monument, it would be fair 
to apply the same graduation below the zerx>-point of the scale as 
above it, and, if we reached so far, we should be able to esrimate the 
time that has elapsed since the first layer of sediment was deposited 
on the rook forming the obmnnel over which the water spread when 
it first fiowed northward fi'om its sources in the interior of Africa, 



285 


aubjeot however to correction for cauaea that might make a differ- 
ence in the rate of increase between the earlier and later periods. 

The author submitted his scheme to the President and Council of 
the Royal Society, who encouraged his proceeding by acceding to 
his request of a grant from tlie Donation Fund at their disposal, to- 
wards the expenses of the researches. 

The author introduces his subject by a sketch of the physical 
geography and geology of Egypt, a description of the annual inun- 
dations, and of the sediment deposited from the water of the Nile. 

Egypt is separated from Nubia by a low billy region, about fifty 
miles broad from north to south, chiefiy composed of granitic rocks, 
but associated with two kinds of sandstone, the one belonging to 
the cretaceous series, the other of the newer tertiary age. The 
valley of Upper Egypt is bounded by two ranges of hills running 
northward, the Arabian range on the right, the Libyan on the left 
of the river, both alike composed of sandstones and limestone, llie 
cretaceous sandstone extends from the granitic rocks forming the 
first cataract at Assouan for about eighty-five miles, where it is 
covered by a limestone which has the characters of the upper chalk 
of Europe. This chalk continues on both sides of the valley for 
about 130 miles, when it is covered in its turn by a tertiary num- 
mulite limestone, end of which the further prolongation northward 
of both ranges is composed ; this nummulite limestone can be well 
studied in the extensive quanies of Gebel Mokattam above Cairo, 

The author briefly describes the operations of the private assooia. 
tion of English, French, and Austrian Engineers in 1846--47, com- 
monly called the French Brigade, for the purpose of determining the 
disputed question of the relative levels of the Red Sea and Medi- 
terranean, The French engineers, at the beginning of the present 
oentury, had come to the conclusion that the Red Sea was about 30 
feet above the Mediterranean, but the observations of Mr. Robert 
Stephenson, the English engineer, at Suex, of M. Negretti, the 
Austrian, at Tineh near the andent Pelusium, and the levellings of 
Messrs, Talabot, Bourdaloue and their assistants, between the two 
seas, have proved that the low- water mark of ordinary tides at Suez 
and Tineh is very nearly on the same level, the difference being, 
that at Suez it is rather more than one inch lower. 

At the island of Phil», about five miles above Assouan, may pro- 
perly be placed the first entrance of the Nile into Egypt, it is here 



286 


about two miles broad, but U soon after divided into several branches 
by the rocks that rise up in its bed to form the rapids, commonly 
called the First Cataract, which have a descent of about 85 feet in a 
distance of hvc miles. Here the river is contracted to about a third 
of a mile, Assouan is about 300 feet above Cairo, and the distance 
between the two places being 556 miles, the average fall of the 
river is little more than half a foot in a mile, 0*54, and Assouan 
being 365 feet above the Mediterranean, and 696 miles distant from 
it, the average fall of the Nile from the foot of the First Cataract to 
the sea is 0*525 in a mile. Low Nile at Cairo is 43 feet 6| inches 
(os measured by the French Brigade in 1847) above low- water mark 
in the Mediterranean, and the distance being 149 miles, the average 
fall is little more than 3^ inches in a mile. The author cites a re- 
port of Mr, Rennie to the British Association in 1834, showing that 
the fall of the Thames, between Chertsey and Teddington Lock, is 
nearly 17i inches in a mile,|| 

The commencement of the annual inundation is about the sum- 
mer solstice. The rise is scarcely perceptible for six or eight days, 
it tlien becomes more rapid, and about the middle of August has 
usually reached one-half of the greatest amount ; it attains its maxi- 
mum towards the end of September, remains pretty stationary for 
about fourteen days, and then begins to fall, at first at a more 
rapid rate than that with which it rose, but after it has fallen one- 
half the decrease is very gradual, and it goes on sinking until the 
end of May. The rise continues about 90 days, the foiling lasts 
250, In 1846, Mougel Bey, the French engineer of the Barrage 
near Cairo, found the maximum rise 7*20 metres, or 80 feet 10 
inches. 

When the inundations commence, the Nile is of a reddish colour, 
and is loaded with sand and mud. From the fall between the Se- 
cond Cataract at Wadi Haifa and the First, a distance of 214 miles, 
being not more on an average than 9 inches in a mile, very little 
coarse gravel can be transported by the river into Egypt. The 
greater portion of the heavier detritus falls down in the higher parts 
of Upper Egypt, and from the very gentle slope of the Delta, only a 
small amount of the solid matter suspended in the water can reach 
the sea; still, however, the sea has been observed to be turbid at a 
distance of forty miles from the mouths of the Nile. 

The author then proceeds to describe the recent researches. His 



287 


first and indispensable step was to procure the aid of a competent 
person to conduct his projected operations, and he was fortunate in 
obtaining the active and intelligent aid of an Armenian gentleman, 
educated and long resident in England, Hekekyan Bey, a civil engi* 
neer, who had occupied some important positions in the service of 
the Viceroy Mehemet Ali, especially as chief of the Polytechnic 
School in Cairo. But nothing could be done without the consent 
of the then Viceroy Abbas Pacha, more especially as the spot the 
author had selected for his first operations was in a garden of the 
Pacha. By the active intervention of Her Majesty’s Consul-General 
in Egypt, the Honourable Charles Augustus Murray, not only was 
the Viceroy’s consent obtained, but his Highness was pleased to 
direct his ministers to place at the disposal of Hekekyan Bey what- 
ever was necessary to conduct the operations in the most complete 
manner ; and, with truly royal munificence, ordered that the whole 
expense of them should be defrayed by his IVcasury. The author 
never contem])lated having the means of making these researches on 
more than a very limited scale, but he had now the prospect, and it 
has since been realized, of their being conducted on a very enlarged 
plan . 

It has been often a subject of regret that experiments of this na- 
ture, of which the French had set an example half a century ago, 
had not been followed up. On this subject the author remarks, that 
the operations are of a nature that scarcely any individual traveller 
could undertake ; for they require a large body of men, some prac- 
tised in the art of surveying, and as they can only be carried on con- 
tinuously after the inundation waters have subsided for some time, 
and therefore at a season of the year when the heat is excessive, 
those only inured to the climate could stand the work. 

llie place selected for commencing the operations was at the 
Obelisk of Heliopolis, about six miles below Cairo, the oldest known ; 
erected, according to Lepsius, 2300 years before Christ. The au- 
thor having given Hekekyan Bey full and minute directions as to 
the manner in which the researches were to be carried on, the ob- 
servations to be made, the plana and reports to be drawn up, and 
the specimens of soils sunk through to be selected, the operations 
commenced in June 1851. Sixty men were employed under the 
direction of Hekekyan Bey, assisted by an officer of Artillery, and 
some young engineers from the Polytechnic School in Cairo. 



238 


Nine pits or excavations were sunk at different distances around 
the obelisk, each down to the level of the filtration water from the 
Nile at that season, and as much under the surface of that water as 
was practicable. The most important of these was one close to the 
obelisk. The upper surface of the pedestal on which the obelisk 
rests, was reached at the depth of 5 feet 6 inches below the surface 
of the ground, Nile mud being accumulated to that height; the 
pedestal was 6 feet 1 0 inches in height, and it was found resting on 
two limestone flags, the upper 16 inches, the lower 15 inches in 
thickness, and this foundation was laid upon pure quartxose sand. 
This last was penetrated to the depth of 3 feet inches below the 
lower layer of limestone. 

The author gives a section and description of each of the nine 
excavations. But before doing so, he states that he obtained twenty * 
eight specimens of soils sunk through in different parts of the Nile 
Valley, eleven of which wery carefully analysed at the Royal College 
of Chemistry, under the superintendence of Dr, Hofmann. A col- 
lection of specimens, duplicates of which are in the possession of 
Hekekyan Bey, serve as a standard for the description in his reports 
of the soils passed through, to avoid the necessity of sending specU 
mens of identical alluvia. These samples were carefully compared 
with the i^ecimens analysed, and were found to resemble them 
closely in external characters. 

The results of the analyses are given by the author, and the 
average of eight specimens of Nile mud gives the following com- 


position in 100 parts : — 

Silica 54*585 

Sesquioxide of iron 20*216 

Sesquioxide of alumina 6*418 

Alumina 5*237 

Carbonate of lime 3*717 

Sulphate of lime 0*245 

Lime...., 1*912 

Magnesia 0*762 

Potassa 0*473 

Soda 0*553 

Organic matter 5*701 


99*818 



289 


In order to ascertain the amount of solid matter held in suspension 
in the water of .the Nile near Cairo, the author described to Dr. Ab- 
bott, a resident in that city, the method he had followed in 1832 to 
determine the amount of solid matter suspended in the water of the 
Rhine at Bonn, and requested him to undertake the experiment on 
the same plan, which he did, and the result gave 110*6 grains in an 
imperial gallon. The residuum sent was analysed at the Royal Col- 
lege of Chemistry, and yielded very nearly the same result as to com- 
position as the above average analysis of the Nile sediment. 

On examining the descriptions of the soils sunk through in the 
nine excavations at Heliopolis, it appears that they consist of two 
principal kinds, viz. earths and sands. Tlie earths vary in colour, but 
are so nearly allied, passing by such insensible shades into each 
other, and having so great a resemblance to the modem Nile sedi- 
ment, that they may all be classed as Nile mud. The sands are 
almost entirely pure quartz, similar to those of the adjoining deserts. 

In the same horizontal plane, even in this limited space of half a 
square mile, there is a very considerable difference in the nature of 
the soil, and in none of the excavations was there an instance of 
lamination in the deposit. 

When it is considered how small is the amount of sediment left 
annually by the inundations in any one place, it is very dliEcult to 
conceive, in the author’s opinion, how there should be in any one 
spot so great a thickness as 12^ feet of one kind of sediment, as is 
the case in one of the excavations, without any lamination or other 
sign of successive deposition, and still more inconceivable that in 
pits within a very short distance of each other different kinds of soil 
should be found at the scune levels. Other causes than the tran- 
quil deposit from inundation water must have been at work in th^t 
formation of this portion of the alluvial land. The layeiulof sand 
were most likely blown across the valley from the desert. 

The author deems it advisable to abstain from general remarks, 
and from all inferences as to the secular increase of the alluvial de- 
posits, until he has had an opportunity of laying before the Society 
on account of the far more extensive researches made in the district 
of Memphis in 1852, and during the last year in a series of pits 
sunk in a line across the valley of the Nile, extending from the 
Libyan to the Arabian Chain, in the parallel of Heliopolis. 



240 


In the various excavations that have been made in the prosecu^ 
tion of this inquiry, many objects of art of historical interest have 
been discovered ; but as these do not come within the province of 
the Royal Society, the author proposes to give an account of them 
in a memoir to be laid before another learned body. 


The following communications were read : — 

II. “On the Computation of the Eifect of the Atoaction of 
Mountain -masses, as disturbing the apparent astronomical 
latitude of stations in Geodetic Survey By Geokok 
B. Airy, Esq., F.R.S., Astronomer Boyah Received 
January 25, 1855. 

The author commences irtlth remarking that his surprise had been 
excited by the result obtained by Archdeacon Pratt*, namely, that 
the computed attraction of the elevated country north-east of India 
considerably exceeds the disturbance which it was sought to explain. 
But on consideration the author perceived that this result might have 
been anticipated, on the extensively received supposition that the 
interior of the earth is a dense fluid or semi-fluid (which for conve- 
nience he calls lava), and that the exterior crust floats upon it. For, 
he remarks, this crust cannot be supposed at any port to be very high 
upwards (as in mountains), at least to any great horizontal extent, 
unless there is a corresponding projection downwards into the lava. 
Upon making a numerical calculation, even with the crust 1 00 miles 
thick, it was shpwn that there would be such a tendency of the 
,ilfcbl%lapj| to crack and sink in the middle as no cohesion of rocks 
can He conceives that the state of the ground may be pro- 

perl/ illustrated by' a raft of timber floatmg on water : if one piece 
of timber projects higher into air tlian the others, we are certain 
that it also projects lower into water than the others. Assuming 
this as established, then it is evident that the horizontal Attraction 
of a mountain-mass on a point at a considerable distance is nearly 
evanescent, because the increase of attraction of the part which is 


• Proooedittffi of the Royal Society, December 7, 1864, 



U1 


above the generid level hi sensibly neutralized by the deficiency of 
attraction below it where the lighter crust displaces the heavier lava. 
In like manner, the horizontal attraction of a ship or other floating 
body is nothing, fiut the horizontal attraction upon a near point 
on the earth's surface will not vanish, because the mountain which 
produces the positive attraction is nearer than the lava-displacement 
which produces the negative attraction : even here, however, the 
e^ciont disturbing attraction will be much less than that computed 
by considering the dimensions of the mountain only. 


III. Note to a paper entitled Contiibutions to the Anatomy of 
the Brachiopoda/^ read June 16, 1854, By Thomas 
H. Huxley, Esq., F.U.S, Received February 12, 1865. 

My attention having been called within the last two or three days, 
o an error in my paper on the Anatomy of the Brachiopoda, 
published in No. 5 of the Royal Society's Proceedings, I beg to be 
allowed to take the earliest opportunity of correcting it. At p. 1 1 1 
of that paper the following paragraph will be found ; — 

In 1843, however, M. Vogt's elaborate Memoir on Lingula ap- 
peared. in which the true complex structure of the ' heart' in this 
genus was first explained and the plaited * auricle' discriminated 
from the * ventricle;' and in 1845, Professor Owen, having appa- 
rently been thus led to re-examine the circulatory organs of the Bra- 
chiopoda," Ac. Ac. 

Now, in point of fact, though M. Vogt does describe and accu- 
rately figure the structures colled ‘ auricle' and ' ventricle ’ in Lin* 
gula^, yet he has not only entirely omitted to perceive th^i^Sn- 
nexion, or to indicate the 'auricular' nature of the former, liul^he 
expressly states that the so-called * hearts’ are simple, delicate, pyri- 
form Buca” (p. 18). 

I presume that my recollection of M. Vogt's figures was more 
vivid than that of his text ; for having been unable, notwithstanding 
repeated endeavours, to re-obtain the memoir when writing my paper, 

♦ Neue Deakschriften dcr abgemeinen Scbwdzerutchen UesoUscbalt fur die 
gensmintsti NsturwiMensebaften. Band Vll. 

VOL. VII, 2 B 



242 


1 felt justified in trusting to what seemed my very distinct recoUeotion 
of its sense. I had the less hesitation in doing this, as in M. Vogt’s 
subsequently published ‘ Zoologiscbe Briefe*/ he gives the received 
interi)relation to the parts of the so-called ‘hearts’ without any in- 
dication of a change of opinion. 

I make this statement in explanation of what might otherwise 
seem to be great carelessness on my part, and for the purpose of 
further pointing out that M. Vogt not having made the supposed 
discovery, it is quite impossible that Professor Owen’s researches 
should have been suggested by it. 


February 22, 1856. 

t 

The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 


Henry John Reynolds Moreton, Earl of Ducie, was balloted for 
and duly elected a Fellow of the Society. 

The following communications were read : — 

I. '' On the Temperature and Density of the Seas between South- 
ampton and Bombay via the Mediterranean and Red 
By MM. Adolfhb, Heemann, and Robbbt Schlagint- 
WEiT. Communicated by the Court of Directors of the 
, Honourable East India Company. Presented by Professor 
Stokes, Sec. R.S. Received January 11, 1865. 

In this communication the authors give the results of the observa- 
tions they had made during their voyage, relative to the temperature 
and specific gravity of the sea-water, both near the surface and at 
depths ranging from about 18 to 80 metres, the latter being nearly 


* Krstikfbrt, 1853, voi. i. p. 88^. 



248 


the greateBt depth which the motion of the veseel permitted them 
to reach, They refterve for a future report their observations on the 
temperature and moisture of the air* as well as the results of two 
experiments on the quantity of carbonic acid contained in the air on 
the Mediterranean and Red Seas, 

The instruments employed in the observations here described 
were as follows : — 

(1.) Four thermometers which had been carefully compared at 
the Kew Observatory previous to the authors' departure. At Bom- 
bay they repeated the determination of the zero-point and of an- 
other standard point, and found that the thermometers had not 
varied. 

(2.) A dipping apparatus constructed by Mr. Adie. This appa- 
ratus, which held 5 or 6 litres, was furnished with two valves, so 
arranged that as it descended the water passed freely through, Sut 
as soon as a commencement was made of drawing it up the valves 
closed and rendered it water-tight. The authors assured themselves 
that the temperature of the enclosed water did not sensibly change 
during the process of drawing it up. 

(a.) An areometer from Mr. T. G. Ghreiner at Berlin. This in- 
strument permitted the specific gravity to be read off directly to 
three places of decimals, and the fourth could be supplied by estima- 
tion. 

To render the observations of specific gravity comparable with one, 
another, it was necessary to reduce them to a common temperature, 
which occasioned some difficulty, as the exact expansion of sea- 
water between the limits 20^^ and 25° C. was not accurately known. 
By means of a delicate voluminometer, constructed for the purpose 
by M, Geissler of Berlin, the authors determined the expansion to he 
0’000271 for 1° C. For distilled water Halstrom had found 0*000219. 
Another set of more direct experiments, made at Bombay, gave for 
the expansion of sea- water 0*000337. The difference between this 
value and the preceding the authors refer to a change of volume of 
the voluminometer itself, and they prefer the latter, which accord- 
ingly they use in thmr reductions.* 

The authors then give tables of the results of their observations, 
whieffi are followed by some general remarks. 


2 B 2 



244 


temperature of the Atlantic was found to be — 

From lat. 46® to 41® N 17®-5 to 18®-5 C. 

From lat. 39® to 37® 20® to 21® C. 

Mean specific gravity reduced to 17°’5 C.=: 1*0277. 

The temperature and specific gravity showed very little variation 
in the open sea, so long as no currents were met with, but in the 
vicinity of land, disturbances of various kinds were noticed. In 
harbours and in small bays the temperature of the water was found 
to diminish sensibly at a depth of from 15 to 20 metres, but in the 
open sea the temperature at the very surface was generally found 
somewhat lower than at a depth of 30 metres, which no doubt was 
due«to evaporation. 

Straits of Gihraltar.^K current with a mean velocity of from 
^fee to six miles an hour usually flows through the Straits from the 
Atlantic into the Mediterranean. A counter current is supposed to 
exist underneath, but the great depth of the Straits prevented the 
authors from reaching any such current with their dipping appa- 
ratus. 

East of the Straits the water of the Atlantic was met with in 
several places, in close proximity with water of the Mediterranean, 
from which it was distinguished by its temperature and colour. The 
stream from the Atlantic on passing the Straits seems to divide itself 
.into several branches. 

In connexion with the variability of the currents in the Straits, it 
is worthy of remark that the unreduced specific gravity of the water 
of the Mediterranean and of the Atlantic is nearly the saine. 

Mediterranean ; — 

From the Straits of Gibraltar to Malta — 

Temperature of the water * 2l®*7 to 22® C. 

Specific gravity reduced to 17®*6 G,. . 1*0287. 

From Malta to Alexandria — 

Temperature * 28° to 24® C, 

Reduced specific gravity 1 *0298. 

Red Sea . — The maximtum of specific gravity found during the 



245 


voyage was in the northern end of the Chilf of Suer., 1-0399 (re- 
duced). 

From lat. 27° to 23° N.» temperature 24° to 28° C. ; reduced ip, gr. 1-U315. 
From lat 22° to 14° temperature 30° to 31°’5 C. : reduced tp. gr. 1*0306. 

Straits of Bab-el- Mandeb . — ^The water of the Gulf of Aden being 
leas denae, though colder, than that of the Red Sea, Hows into the 
latter on both sides of the Island of Perim. This colder water could 
be detected half a degree north of the Straits. After some further 
remarks about this current, the authors pass on to the 

Arabian Sea — in which they found 

From long. 44° to 50° East from Greenwich, temp. 28°*8, reduced sp. gr. 1-0275. 
From the merid. of Cape Guardafui to Bombay, temp. 27° to 28°, red. ip. gr. V0278. 


II. A paper was in part read, entitled On the Structure, Fuiife- . 
tions, and Homology of the Manducatory Organs in the 
Class Ilotifcra.^^ By P. H. Gosse, Esq. Communicated 
by Thomas Bell, Esq., V.P.R.S. Received January 6, 
1855. 




November 80, 1854. 


ANNITKBSAEY MEETIKO. 


The EARL of ROSSE, President, in the Chair. 


Mr. Paget, on the part of the Auditors of the Treasurer's Ac- 
counts, announced that the total receipts during the past year, 
including a balance o/ £1006 17a. carried from the account of 
the preceding year, amounted to £4252 I2fi. Od., and that the total 
expenditure, including an investment of £800 in the Funds, was 
£3208 12a. 3d., leaving a balance in the hands of the Treasurer of 
£1043 19tf, 9d. 

The thanks of the Society were voted to tht Treasurer and 
Auditors. 

List of Fellows deceased since the last Anniversary. 

On the Home List, 


His Majesty, Frederick, King of Saxony. 


James Andrew, LL.D. 

Golding Bird, M.D. 

William Blake, Esq. 

William Brockedon, Esq. 
Captain Orozier, R.N. 

William, Earl of Dartmouth. 
Hart Davis, Esq. 

Thomas, Lord Denman. 

General Sir Benjamin D’Urban. 
Edward Forbes, Esq, 

Admiraf Sir John Franklin. 
John Davies Gilbert, Esq. 

Eev. Samuel Gardiner. 

Henry Harvey, Esq. 

VOt, VII. 


John Harwood, M.D. 
Charles Hoare, Esq. 

Everard Home, Bart. 
Robert Jameson, Esq. 

Sir Bdchard Jenkins. 

^Jphn Augustus Lloyd, Esq, 
Lieut.-Col. Mudge. 

George Newport, Esq, 
George Roupell, M.D. 
Charles Stokes, Esq. 
George Townley, Esq. 
Charles Baring Wall, Esq. 
Nathaniel Wallich, M.D. 
Alexander Wollaston, Esq, 
2 c 



248 


On the Foreign Liet. 

Baron Von Lindenau. 1 Charles Francois BrisBeauMirbeL 

Mac6donie Mellon!. ! 


Withdrawn. 

Captain Chapman, R.A. 


Defaulters. 

E, B. Beaumont. | E. W. Tuson. 

List of Fellows elected since the lost Anniversary. 


George James Allman, M.D. 
William Bingham Baring, Lord 
Ashburton. 

Edward William Brayley, Esq. 
Alexander Bryson, M.D.^ 

J. Lockhart Clafke, Esq. 

Joseph Dickinson, M.D. 

Ronald Campbell Ghinn, Esq. 
Robert Hunt, Esq. 


John Bennet Lawes, Esq. 
Robert Mallet, Esq. 

Charles May, Esq. 

Capt. Thomas E. L. Moore, R.N. 
Captain Richard Strachey. 
Robert Dundas Thomson, M.D. 
Samuel Charles Whitbread, Esq. 
Wm. Crawford Williamson, Esq. 


The President then addressed the Society as follows 
OaNTX.£ICEN, 

Whbk we me! last November, I ventured to remark that the objects 
of science were better understood than they had been formerly, and 
that accurate notions on scientific subjects were becoming more 
prevalent: the progress hi that direction has still continued, and 
during the last year it has even more decided than before. 

With the spread of knowledge, the great body of the community 
are now better enabled to appreciate the importance of science in 
promoting the moral and physical improvement of mankind ; there 
is consequently a growing desire that science should be advaiiced, 
aend as that object been best effected by scientific societies, they 
are regarded with more interest. Public opinion having token that 
direction decidedly, it was not unreasonable to expect that Govern- 
ment would fed anxious to meet the wishes of the scientific bodies, 
and provide them with a building where they would be enabled to 



249 


employ to the beat advantage the machinery of association, which 
had already effected bo much. It is probable, therefore, that before 
very long you will have the important question to decide, — whether 
to retain your present apartments, or to accept a suitable place in 
a new building. Throughout all the communications with the 
Government, your officers have taken especial care to be perfectly 
explicit on two points : one, that till the plans were prepared, any 
final decision on your part was impossible ; the other, that you had 
a free option to retain your present apartments should you think 
fit, having received them as a grant, to endure so long as the 
Society should exist. There can now, I think, be little doubt but 
that the leading Scientific Societies will be suitably provided for, 
and that you will have the opjxirtunity of taking your proper place 
at the head of science, with the other Societies by your side. 

The pursuit of science will thus be greatly facilitated ; it will be 
rendered more convenient« and therefore more attractive ; and many 
will devote themselves to it who perhaps otherwise would not have 
entered upon it at all. 

While, however, the Government is wisely anxious to encourage 
the active pursuit of science by meeting the wishes of the great 
body of scientific men, we perhaps may have it in our power to 
efifeot something in the same direction. 

From various observations of my late lamented predecessor in his 
Addresses, it was evidently his opinion that we should act wisely in 
shaping our rules so as to adapt them to the varying usages of 
society, rather than to preserve everything unchanged, relying on 
the sanction of a long prescription. In former times, November was 
the height of the London season, and the Anniversary, with all its 
preliminary business, was naturally held then, because the largest 
number of Fellows were in town. Whether for the better or not, 
the season has been changed, and it is now six mouths later; we, 
however, remain where we were. The Council meets the latter 
end of October, and continues its meetings through November; the 
principal business being to award tlie medics, and to select the 
Officers and Council to be recommended to the Society at large 
for election. The November business is wound up by the Anniver- 
sary, the most important meeting of the Society. The Fellows who 
are not permanent residents in London are naturally absent in the 

2c2 



260 


country : the great businefls of the year, with all its responsibilities, 
devolves therefore upon a section of the Society. A country gentle- 
naan, if named upon the Council, cannot conveniently attend in 
November, and but few country gentlemen attend the anniversary*. 
Our proceedings are therefore not of as much interest to the Fellows 
taken as a whole as they might be made to be, and they are not 
calculated to attract the men who, having attained high scienti£c 
distinction at the Universities, reside in the country, unharassed by 
.professional calls, and who have therefore both training and leisure, 
importsint elements of success in all scientific pursuits. 

The award of the medals at a time when so many Fellows are 
absent is also attended with inconvenience ; for although an attempt 
is made to secure for each science a kind of representation in the 
Council, still so wide is the range .of science now, that special de- 
partments are often necessarily unrepresented. In disposing of 
papers, the imperfect representation of individual sciences is un- 
attended with inconvenience, because each paper is referred to two 
Fellows to report upon ; the Council thus calls the whole Society 
to its aid, and the result, I believe, is perfectly satisfactory. With 
the medsds it is otherwise ; no official reference is made to Fellows 
not on the Council. There is a further difficulty. The questions 
which usually arise are of this nature. Discoveries have been made 
by different individuals in varioils sciences. Who has added moat 
to the general stock of knowledge by a positive contribution ? Who 
has t}ie merits of having effected discoveries of most promise ? Re- 
coils^, that in answering these questions some estimate must be 
made of the weight du^ to eadh science, for they cannot be consi- 
dered all alike ; ^ very^far froa^ it* Some sciences require great 
mental labour, guided 4?y faculties of a very high order, — a rare 
gift; while other sciences can be cultivated successfully by com- 
mon-place men, with only a moderate amount of perseverance. 
That such an estimate can be made, and which carries with it a 
kind of general assent, is evidenced by the fact that it is annually 
made, to some extent, at the examination for the Fellowship in the 
University of Dublin, which i}ears a certain loose bat not uninsthio- 

♦ At the last Annlysrutry tJie Fellows who voted ataouoted to 63, while there 
are about 700 Fellows. I am informed, however, that usually several who are 
actually present do not vote. 



251 


tive analogy to the process by which your Council awards the 
medals. That examination is the most difficult which exists ; the 
prize is large, and the competition is iree. There is a course of 
mathematics, comprehending, 1 may say, everything ; a course of 
physics equally large ; a very large course of moral philosophy ; 
a course of metaphysics, of logic, classics, history, chronology, and 
Hebrew. The examination is, of course, public ; and a person of 
experience, acquainted with the course, can usually at the close 
of the examination point out the successful candidate. Some 
have answered better in one science, some in another, but acting 
under the guidance of a mature judgment, a kind of equitable ad- 
justment has been made by the bystander, which has led him to the 
same conclusion as the examiners. Now, let us see for a moment 
how this has been brought about. The examiners, who are Fellows, 
are conversant to a certain extent with all the sciences; and in 
measuring the value of each answer, they are governed by a well- 
marked public opinion in the University, precisely as is the case 
with the enlightened audience ; and they come to the same con- 
clusion. But with your Council the case is necessarily very dif- 
ferent, However chosen, they cannot have within themselves the 
same means of discharging their very difficult duties in a way 
which will carry with it the full concurrence of the Society. Take 
as an example the simplest case iwhidi can arise: two persons 
have been proposed for the medal, a chemist and a mathematician. 
Upon the Council we will presume there is a first-rate chemist 
and a first-rate mathematician. Now, in chemistry and in.tnathe- 
matics, and indeed in all the sciences, little discoveries are^ very 
abundant. By what poMible means can th^ cl^^mist bring his 
mind to bear upon the little disobveries of mcitheinatician, so as 
to weigh them, even in the roughest manner^ against the discoveries 
in his own science ? Or will the mathematician be more fortunate 
in healing with the discoveries of the chemist ? But how is it with 
respect to the other members of the Council ? There will probably 
be gentlemen representing the different branches of the natural 
sciences, also perhaps a geologist, an astronomer, an engineer. Why, 
even in the very simple case I have supposed, the elements for the 
roughest approximation to a true conclusion are not within the 
Council, and it cannot be otherwise. The Council must therefore 



travel beyond its limits for the necessary information. Individual 
members will naturally therefore, in an unofficial way, consiilt such 
Fellows not on the Council as are known to be conversant with the 
particular question at issue ; and, practically, if time permitted and 
opportunity offered, a large proportion of the ablest Fellows would 
exercise a guiding influence on the Council, leading them to correct 
conclusions. Information would even be sought without the So- 
ciety ; the prevalent opinions at the Universities would be looked 
for, and the state of public opinion abroad in scientific circles 
would in many cases have great weight. I need hardly say, that 
as things are at present, this inquiry is impossible except to a very 
limited extent, and public opinion, even in our own body, can afford 
but little of that aid to the Council which it would do under more 
favourable circumstances. 

If the medals were awarded in June, after discussion in several 
successive Councils at cdnsiderable intervals, while the great body 
of Fellows, the leading members of the Universities, and the fo- 
reigners who visit London, were in town, each member of the 
Council would have immediate access to the best sources of infor- 
mation. Recently the experiment has been tried of proposing 
candidates for the medals before the recess, but without, I think, 
any practical advantage. Whei^ the candidates are numerous, 
inquiries would be endless j and it is only when the number has 
been reduced, when the doubtful questions have been put promi- 
nently forward by discussion, and a decision is imminent, that in- 
quiries will be prosecuted with energy, and can be made with 
effect. 

Finally, exfipience has shown that even in the transaction of the 
business of nadhn, there is so much inconvenience in running 
counter to the habits and usages of society, that it is only in a case 
of necessity that^arliament is assembled in November. 

With these or similar views, the subject was brought before four 
Council in 1 845 ; and, as was announced by Lord Northampton, it 
was resolved to change the day of the anniversary to a season more 
generaUy eonveniemt. In his Address the year after he states that 
doubts had arisen as to the legality of the change without a new 
charter, and no sisHotts effort appears to have been subsequently 
made to surmount |he dijfficulty. 



253 


I believe it U well known that Sir Humphry Davy's opinions on 
this subject were very similar to Lord Northampton'si and 1 have 
heard that he had deliberately committed them to pi^er, setting out 
fully his views as to the prospects of science in this country, and 
the position the Royal Society should hold. Such a document 
would be of great value, and I have anxiously inquired for it, but 
in vain. 

This was the state of things at the time of my election as Presi- 
dent, and after full consideration I took the first opportunity, at the 
anniversary in 1849, of expressing my entire concurrence in the views 
of Lord Northampton. It appeared to me, however, to be quite 
evident that there was not a strong and universal desire to change 
the day of the anniversary ; and that was to be expected. There 
are certain associations, hallowed by time, to which wc all recur with 
pleasure i when we meet on the 80th of November, our thoughts 
are led back to the auspicious day when the Royal Society was 
founded ; we are reminded of Boyle, Wren, Hooke and Wallis, the 
first Fellows, and feel a just pride that we enjoy the high honour of 
being their successors. Few, perhaps, would assent without some 
degree of reluctance to a change which vi^ould sever these ancient 
associations. Feeling assured, therefore, that there were various 
shades of opinion, and having stated my views distinctly in my first 
address, 1 did not conceive it to be my duty to proceed further. 
The next step would have been, to have directed the attention of the 
Council to its former decision as to the expediency of changing the 
anniversary, and to have obtained the best advice as to the means 
to be taken to effect that object. 1 thought it better to let the 
matter rest for a time. Had 1 thought otherwise, th^ was certainly 
no one by whom such a question could have Jbeen br^ugjht forward 
with less propriety, or less advantage, than y<mr Pi-esident. He 
could not have recommended his arguments as springing hom an 
unbiassed mind, when he was in the position, not a very agreeable 
one* of being necessarily absent during the autumn and winter, 
when there was so much business of importance. Now the case is 
different. There is no longer any reason for reserve, and in express- 
ing in my last address the same opinions as in my first address, 1 
have ventured to express them more strongly, because experience 
has more confirmed them. If we are to distribute medals, it is 



254 


surely important that the award of the medals, like the award of the 
Fellowships in the University of Dublin, should carry with it the 
full approbation of the whole Society. If we are to have meetings to 
transact business, it is of the highest importance to make them 
easily accessible to all Fellows by the choice of a suitable season, 
80 that every person, whether on the Council or not, might have the 
opportunity of exercising his privileges with the least amount of 
personal inconvenience. It is in this way we shall render the Royal 
Society even more popular than it is, and hasten its growth in 
strength and influence, so that it will become, not the Royal Society 
of London merely, but the Royal Society of the whole kingdom. 

I have thus ventured to suggest certain changes as to the time 
and manner of transacting the business of the Royal Society : the 
objects we have in view would, I think, be much promoted by 
another innovation, which it requires some courage to propose. 1 
mean a large increase in tlie number of the Council. From what I 
have observed, I am convinced that to enable the Council to exercise 
an eflFectual supervision over all the sciences, it is necessary to make 
ample room, so that each science should be fiiUy represented. There 
is another object .perhaps of even greater importance to be attained 
by the same means, an effectual repreaentation of all classes upon the 
Council, so that men of general attainments should have their place, 
and the government of the: Society should not be exclusively 
entrusted to men, who, however eminent in especial branches of 
sci^ce, may not be always the most conversant with worldly affaiis, 
or the most competent to transact that common^place business, upon 
which, in the main, the prosperity of Societies depends : nothing 
' would do more than such a change, to promote harmony and good 
feeling within our walla ; nothing would contribute more to increase 
the influence of the Royal Society in advancing the general interests 
of science. 

1 have already ventured to say, that I had little doubt but that the 
memorial with its two hundred signatures in favour of juxtaposition, 
backed up by public opinion, would produce the desired result, and 
that before long we should see the leading scientiflc Societies under 
the same roof. I think I cannot now err in expressing a confident 
belief, that whatever changes may be required in our Society to 
meet the just wis)>es of scientific men, will be carried out with 



255 


readiness. The progre&s of science will thus be promoted, and this 
country will gradually attain even a higher place in European science 
than that which it at present holds. There is a new quarter, however, 
to which science my I think look hopefully, and that is the Univer- 
sity of Oxford. Last session an act was passed for effecting certain 
improvements in the University of Oxford. Under that act a com- 
mission was appointed, consisting of men of learning and high 
station, to advise and cooperate with the governing body, and so 
effect such changes as might be useful. At present it can scarcely 
* be said that science at Oxford receives any substantial encourage- 
ment. The fellowships are for the most part close, and therefore 
are not necessarily the rewards of learning; and where they are open, 
the success of the candidate depends upon his proficiency in the an- 
cient languages and literature. Honours are indeed awarded to the 
mathematical and physical sciences, but they carry with them no 
emoluments ; and without any knowledge of the mathematical 
sciences except the elements of plane geometry, and without any 
knowledge whatever of the physical sciences, the highest University 
honours may be obtained. A man therefore, after having very cre- 
ditably passed a public school, and having taken his degree with a 
first class w Uteris humanioribus, may find that he knows no more 
than woB known 1 800 years ago. He may be ignorant of physics 
in its most elementary form, and may therefore be incapable of com- 
prehending the first principles of machinery and manufactures, or of 
forming a just and enlarged conception of the resources of tliis g^eat 
country. That the legislation of last session should long continue 
unfruitful, 1 think, is improbable, and the time seems to be at band 
when the cultivation of the physical sciences will receive a new im- 
pulse at our universities, and when the great resoui:ce8 of Oxford 
will, in part, be applied as the rewards of scientific eminence. 

You are all, Gentlemen, no doubt aware, that in 1823 your 
Council, at the request of the Lords of the Treasury, appointed a 
Committee to report upon Mr. Babbage's plan for the construction 
of a Calculating Machine, which he called a Difference Engine. The 
Committee, 1 need hardly say, was composed of men eminent for 
their theoretical and practical acquaintance with such subjects : that 
Committee recommended the Lords of the Treasury to assist 
Mr. Babbage in carrying out his undertaking. The Lords of the 



256 


IVeaBuryacquiesoed, and the work was proceeded with; Mr. Babbage 
exercising a constant and vigilant superintendence, furnishing the 
designs^ making the computations^ in fact supplying all the theo- 
retical requirements, while the Government supplied the manual 
labour and raw materials. In the then backward state of mechanical 
engineering, great difficulties were encountered; at length in 1828 
the Royal Society was again consulted by Government, and the 
result was a report from a Committee, to the effect that satisfactory 
progress had been made, considering the difficulties, and that the 
engine was likely to answer the expectations of its inventor. The 
Council adopted the report, and communicated it to Government, 
with a strong recommendation in favour of the undertaking. The 
Government acting under that recommendation supplied further 
fuuds, on the condition that the engine was to be public property, 
and the work proceeded. In 1830 tlie Royal Society was again 
consulted by Government, and the Council acting as on former 
occasions appointed a Committee. The report which was drawn up 
in a detailed form was satisfactory to the Treasury, and the Council 
were informed that funds would be supplied from time to time till 
the engine was completed. Very soon a new difficulty occurred ; it 
became necessary to change the engineer, and it was then found 
that by the rules of the trade, the tools, which had been constructed 
at the public expense, were the private property of the engineer : 
there was no choice, therefore, but to sacrifice the tools, or to 
endeavour to effect a compromise for a large sum. The progress of 
the work was suspended : there was a change of government. 
Boience was weighed against gold by a new standard, and it was 
resolved to proceed no further. No enterprise could have had its 
beginning under more auspicious circumstances: the Government 
had taken the initiative, they had called for advice, and the adviser 
was the highest scientific authority in this country -your Council, 
guided by such men as Davy, Wollaston and Herschel. By your 
CounoU the undertaking was inaugurated, by your Council it was 
vratched ov^ in its progress. That the first great effort to employ the 
powers of calculating mechanism, in aid of the human intellect, should 
have been suffered in this great country to expire fruitless, because 
there was no tangible evidence of immediate profit , as a British subject 1 
deeply regret, and as a Fellow my regret is accompanied with feelings 



287 


of bitter diaappointment. Where a question has once been disposed 
of, succeeding Governments rarely reopen it ; still I thought 1 should 
not be doing my duty if I did not take some opportunity of bring- 
ing the facts once more before Government. Circumstances had 
changed, mechanical engineering had made much progress, the tools 
required and trained workmen were to be found in the workshops 
of the leading mechanists, the founder's art was so advanced that 
casting had been substituted for cutting in making the change 
wheels even of screw-cutting engines, and therefore it was very 
probable that persons would be found willing to undertake to com- 
plete the Difference Engine for a specific sum. 

That finished, the question would then have arisen, how far it 
was advisable to endeavour, by the same means, to turn to account 
the great labour which had been expended under the guidance of 
inventive powers the most original, controlled by mathematics of a 
very high order ; and which had been wholly devoted for so many 
years to the great task of carrying the powers of calculating machi- 
nery to its utmost limits. Before I took any step, I wrote to several 
very eminent men of science, inquiring whether in their opinion any 
great scientific object would be gained, if Mr. Babbage's views, as 
explained in M^nabr^a's little essay, were completely realized. The 
answers I received were strongly in the affirmative. As it was 
necessary the subject should be laid before Government in a form 
as practical as possible, I wrote to one of our most eminent 
mechanical engineers to inquire whether 1 should be safe in stating 
to Government that the expense of the Calculating Engine had 
been more than repaid in the improvements in mechanism directly 
referable to it: he replied, unquestionably. Fortified by these 
opinions 1 submitted this proposition to Government ; — that they 
should call upon the President of the Society of Civil Engineers to 
report whether it would be practicable to make a contract for the 
completion of Mri Babbage’s Difference Engine, and if so, for what 
sum. This Was in 1852, during the short administration of Lord 
Derby, and it led to no result. The time was unfortunate, a great 
political contest was impending, and before tliere was a lull in 
politics, so that the voice of Science could be heard, Lord Derby’s 
government was at an end. 



268 


Although » in communicating with Lord Derby, 1 wae not acting 
under the directions of your Council, still, as my object was to induce 
the Government to complete a work in which this Society had t^en 
so great an interest, I conceived it to be my duty to lay the facte 
before you, as a basis to proceed upon, should it hereafter be con • 
sidered expedient to renew the subject. 

I have detailed to you regularly at each anniversary the proceed- 
ings of the Committee of Recommendations ; a Committee, as you 
are all probably aware, appointed to distribute the grant for scientidc 
objects which was made to us by Government the first year of my 
Presidency, and has since been continued annually. On the present 
occasion 1 have only to say, that since the last anniversary nume- 
rous reports have been received, and 1 hope the new Council will 
consider it expedient to collect the facts brought out, and arrange 
them in the form of a paper to be laid before Parliament. 

With respect to the design for the re-examination of the heavens 
in the southern hemisphere, originally suggested by the British As- 
sociation, and subsequently matured by your Council, I have only 
to say, as 1 said the last anniversary, that it is in the bands of 
Government. 

There is no other subject which seems to me to coll for observa- 
tion ; the report of your Treasurer will give all necessary information 
as to financial matters, and it only remains for me to express the 
deep sense 1 feel of the great services which have been rendered to 
Science by your Councils during the six years 1 have been ofiicially 
connected with them. I am sure nothing could have exceeded their 
pains-taking industry, their complete devotion to your service. In 
their hands your interests were watched over with anxious care, 
they were in perfect safe-keeping ; and when 1 was unavoidably ab- 
sent, as was too often the case, I had no misgivings. To your 
Council I return my sincere thanks; to you. Gentlemen, I feci 
equally grateful ; and in retiring from your Presidency permit me to 
assure you, that although the position I am destined henceforth to 
occupy will be less prominent, my exertions for the welfare of your 
Society shall not be less earnest. 



269 


Dk. Sharpey, 

1 am happ 7 to have the honour of handing to you the Copley 
Medal, in charge for Profesaor MUUer. 

The Copley Medal has been awarded to our distinguished Foreign 
Member, Professor Johannes Muller of Berlin, for his important 
contributions to different branches of Physiology and Comparative 
Anatomy, and particularly for his researches on the Embryology and 
Structure of the Echinodermata, contained in a series of memoirs 
published in the IVansactions of the Hoyai Academy of Berlin. 

No one has borne a more conspicuous part in the advancement of 
physiological science for the last quarter of a century than Johannes 
Muller, and there is none whose services in that department of na- 
tural knowledge are more deserving of honourable recognition. 

So great, indeed, has been his scientihc activity, that in the brief 
reference to his writings suited to this occasion, I am constrained to 
pass by much that is excellent and confine myself to those which 
most strikingly evince his merit in the several departments in which 
he has laboured. 

At an early period of his career he published his well-known 
treatise on the Secreting Glands. In this work he traces the in- 
timate fitructure of these organs in the varied conditions which it 
presents, from the lowest animals to man; and in particular he 
establishes on a more broad and satisfactory basis the true doctrine 
of the relation of the blood-vessels and ducts, as first correctly con- 
ceived by Malpighi ; indeed, since the time of the great anatomist 
of Bologna, no general work had appeared on the subject to be com- 
pared with that of Professor Muller. 

Among his numerous contributions to Comparative Anatomy, I 
may specially single out his series of memoirs on the Myxinoid 
Fishes. Of the scope and importance of this great work but a faint 
idea is conveyed by the title ; for while the anatomy of a particular 
family of fishes may be said to form its text, there is an ample com- 
mentary, rich in new and original matter, in which the structure is 
compared in other tribes, and the facts sagaciously applied to the 
elucidation of great questions in animal morphology. 

In Physiology, Professor MilUer has proved himself equally a 
master. His Handbook'* has long held a high place in physiolo- 
gical literature, and under this modest designation not only presents 



260 


clear expositions and enlightened discussions of truths already 
known, but is enriched throughout with the fruits of the author*s 
own observation and experimental inquiry. Evidence of this may 
be found in almost every chapter, but it is sufficient to refer to his 
examination of the blood, to his disquisitions on the nervous system, 
and especially to his valuable experimental investigations on the 
voice and on hearing. 

Professor Muller early applied himself to the study of the struc- 
ture and economy of the Echinoderms. After describing, in a 
special memoir, the anatomy of the Pentacrinus, so interesting as a 
living representative of the extinct Crinoidea, and publishing, in 
conjunction with M. Troschel, a systematic arrangement and de- 
scription of the Asterida, he was at length happily led to investigate 
the embryo life of this remarkable class of animals. The field of 
inquiry on which he entered had scarcely been trenched upon be- 
fore, and he has since ma^e it almost wholly his own by persevering 
researches carried on at the proper seasons for the last nine years, 
on the shores of the North Sea, the Mediterranean and the Adriatic. 
In this way he has investigated the larval conditions of four out of 
the five orders of true Echinoderms, and has successfully sought out 
and determined the common plan followed in their development, 
amidst remarkable and unlooked-for deviations in the larval organi- 
xation and habits of genera even of the same order ; and his inqui- 
ries respecting these animals have made us acqumnted with larval 
forms, with relations between the larva and future being, and with 
modes of existence, such as nature has not yet been found to present 
in any other part of the animal kingdom. Finally, with the light thus 
derived from the study of their development, Professor Miiller has 
subjected Uie organization of the entire class of Echinoderms, both 
recent and fossil, to a thorough revision, and has added much that 
is new, as well os cleared up much that was obscure, in regard to 
their economy, structure and homologies. It is to these researches, 
which occupy seven memoirs in the Transactions of the Royal Aca- 
demy of Sciences of Berlin, that more special reference is made in 
the award of the Medal. Besides their other claims to distinction, 
they may be justly regarded as revealing a new order of facts in the 
history of animal development. 



261 


Dr. Hookrr, 

It was fortunate for natural edence that you succeeded in ob- 
taining the appointment of Naturalist to the Antarctic Expedition 
under Sir J. C. Ross, and that you fully availed yourself of the 
opportunities of pursuing your favourite studies which so frequently 
presented themselves during the progress of that arduous voyage. 

The collections made during this Voyage were extremely import- 
ant» and have served as the foundation of n series of works illus- 
trative of the botany of the Southern hemisphere. The ** Flora 
Antarctica," which was commenced immediately after your return, 
at once established for you a high place as a philosophical botanist, 
by the accuracy and completeness with which each subject is treated, 
as well as by the importance of the physiological questions there dis- 
cussed. The value of the details of a systematic work can be best 
appreciated by those who use it as a guide, but the essay on the 
structure and ofEnitiea of the curious parasite Myxodendron, may be 
noticed as perhaps the most striking of the many special topics 
which are there treated of* 

'fhe peculiar configuration of the Southern hemisphere, in which 
the land bears so small a proportion to the sea, seems at an early 
period to have directed your attention to Geographical Botany, and 
to have led you to investigate critically one of the most difficult 
questions of natural science, which is now acquiring that prominence 
to which it is so well entitled, — 1 me|m the question of the origin 
and distribution of species. In your memoirs on the vegetation of 
the Galapagos Islands, you have brought together a great number 
of facts relative to insular floras, which throw much light upon this 
point of abstract science ; and in your Flora of New Zealand (now 
in progress), you have discussed the question in all its hearings, 
in an essay which has atU'acted much attention, from the cautious 
and philosophical manner in which the subject is treated. 

As Botanist to the Geological Survey of Great Britain, your 
attention was directed to the investigation of the extinct Flora ; and 
it is evident firom the essay on the carboniferous vegetation pub- 
lished in their Records, that you devoted yourself to this task with 
the same energy wMoh had characterixed your previous labours. 
In this essay an intimate knowledge of recent structure is applied 
to throw li^t upon the vegetation of remote periods in the history 



262 


of the globe, ftnd there is evinced a just appreciation of facta and a 
cautioua spirit of induction, which make it one of the moat important 
contributions ever made by Botany to Geology. 

In the selection of the Himalaya as the held of further exploration, 
you seem to have been guided by a sagacious perception of the rer 
quirements of natural science ; and in the plain and artless narrative 
of that journey, we know not 'Whether most to admire, the industry 
by which alone so much could have been done, the judicious selec- 
tion of subjects of investigation, or the completeness of the results. 
On that work, geographers, geologists, meteorologists, and bota- 
nists, in fact, cultivators of aU branchesof natural science, have pro- 
nounced a unanimous verdict, which may be best summed up in the 
words of the illustrious Humboldt, the greatest of scientific travellers, 
as ** a perfect treasure of important observations, in which a pro- 
digious extent of previous knowledge is brought to bear upon every 
topic, and which is marked with great sagacity and moderation in 
all the views brought forward.” 

Dk. Hofmann, 

A Royal Medal has been awarded to you, for your Memoirs on 
the molecular constitution of the Organic Bases, contained in the 
Philosophical Transactions, and the Transactions of the Chemical 
Society.” 

The long series of researches which are acknowledged in the 
present award, were commenced by your inquiries, published in 
1844 , on the volatile bases contained in coal-gas naphtha, in which 
you recognized aniline, a base previously obtained from indigo, and 
leucoline, likewise derived from the decomposition of quinine, 
oinolionine, and strychnine. In consequence of its extremely de- 
finite character, aniline was selected by you as the type of volatile 
bases, and investigated in all directions, with singular perseverance 
and success. A. variety of new compounds were thus obtained, 
bearing a fixed relation to the primitive body, such as chloraniline, 
bromaniline, nitraniMne, melaniline, dec. From these researches, 
and the foots supplied by other investigators, you were gradually 
led to a conception of the common constitution of this class of com- 
pounds, and obtained the means of producing substances of a 
sltxdlar constitution to on almost unlimited extent. Oxide of am- 



263 


monium is the general prototype, the hydrogen of that volatile base 
being replaced to the extent of one, two, three, or four equivalents, 
by a multitude of elementary and compound radicals. Your method, 
also, of introducing these radicals into the constitution of ammonia, 
by the agency of the bromides and iodides of the radicals, has been 
found to admit of extensive application, and has very materially 
assisted in the general progress which organic chemistry has made 
since this method was made public. 

Da, Nkil Aekott, 

1 have much pleasure in announcing, that ii Rumford Medal has 
been awarded to you, for your construction of a new Smoke* con- 
suming and Fuel-saving Fire-place, with accessories, ensuring the 
healthful warming and ventilation of houses, lately described in the 
Journal of the Society of Arts (May 12, 1854), and for your various 
contributions to the elucidation of the principles and improvement 
of the practice of heating and ventilation/' 


The President then called upon Dr, Sharpey to read the following 
obituary notices of some of the deceased Fellows 

Edward Forbes, — In the melancholy list of those who have passed 
away from among the Fellows of this Society, there is no name whose 
mention will awaken a more general and profound feeling of regret 
than that of Edward Forbes, Some leave us full of years and 
honours, their work in this world finished, and its rewards enjoyed ; 
the sphere of action of others has been so limited, that their absence 
is felt within only a narrow circle ; but in Edward Forbes we have 
to lament one whose vigorous intellect had but just attained the 
ripeness of the prime of life ; who, after rising with almost unex- 
ampled rapidity to the height of his ambition, sank within sight of 
a future more brilliant than his past; and whose loss to the brethren 
in science who looked up to him, to the University whose hopes 
were centred in him, and to the friends of all classes and pursuits 
who loved him, is truly irreparable, 

A native of the Isle of Man, and bom in the year 1815, Edward 
Forbes exhibited at a very early age that aptness for and attach- 
vox., Vtl, 2 D 



264 


ment to intellectual pursuits^ ao commonly remarked in those who 
attain to scientific eminence. Before his twelfth year, we find the boy 
already collecting and cataloguing the curious and beautiful things 
scattered along the shores of his native island, and even boldly ven- 
turing, without other guidance or encouragement than such as were 
afforded by the vigour and hopefulness of a fresh and youthful 
mind, amidst the mazes and difficulties of a science then in its 
infancy, — that Geology to whose advance it was his destiny in after 
life BO csaentially to contribute. And the fine healthy audacity with 
which, in these childish days, he undertook to compile a Manual of 
British Natural History in all its branches, and carried out his pro- 
ject, according to his means and powers, is worthy of note, and 
might have led a judge of human nature to prophecy well of his 
future. 

The complexion of this future, however, was for a time doubtful. 
The tendencies of Edwardf Forbes's mind were always as strong 
towards art as towards science ; and, in very early life, the former 
appear to have been the stronger, for we find him taking up his 
residence in London as an Art-student, under the guidance of the 
late Mr. Sasse. These labours in the studio were not of very long 
duration ; but, short as they were, the development which they 
gave to a naturally great power of drawing, and the critical eye for 
form which they conferred, proved of essential importance to the 
future Naturalist and Professor. Again, the readiness with which 
Forbes's rich and overflowing humour embodied itself in sketches, 
vignettes, and caricatures, — a facility which lent no small charm to 
many of his published works, and has left many a pleasant memorial 
among his friends — must be regarded as not a little due to this 
early training. 

However, the scientific tendency of Edward Forbes's mind appears 
to have been too strong to allow of any lasting or exclusive attach- 
ment to other pursuits; and in 1830 he left London and Art, to 
commence, as a student of medicine, the cumculum of the University 
of Edinburgh. It is hardly probable that he ever seriously looked 
forward to the juactice of physic as a profesrion; fbr^ although a 
diligent attendant upon the prescribed courses, he never presented 
himself for l&is degree. But even if it were so, his inborn genius, 
fostered by the teachings of a Jameson and a Orabam, soon diverted 



265 


hU attention from the hospital and the operating theatre to the 
museum and the fieldi and led him to the conviction that the pursuit 
of knowledge for its own sake was the only satisfactory sphere for 
his activity, and tliat in devotion to science lay the vocation of his 
life. 

An exploration of Norway, and the publication of a fauna of his 
native shores, were among the first fruits of Edward Forbes's scien- 
tific training. These were succeeded by excursions into Algeria 
end Illyria, and by a stay of some months in Paris, where PriSvost 
was teaching geology, and GeofFroy and De Blainville zoology. In 
1840, Forbes published the first work by which he will be remem- 
bered, ‘ llie History of British Starfishes,’ one of a series of mono- 
graphs upon the natural history of this country which do honovur to 
its zoologists. Although consisting of little more than a description 
of a score species of Echinoderms, this is, in many respects, an im- 
portant and remarkable Essay ; and it must be considered to be by 
no means its least merit, that, with an extent and thoroughness of 
knowledge rarely exceeded, it unites a fljiirit of playful and elegant 
humour, rare in itself, and still more rare in such combination. 
Repudiating that stilted and pretentious solemnity sometimes thought 
essential to the due preservation of the dignity of science, Edward 
Forbes here exemplifies the doctrine upon which his whole life was 
a commentary, — that a true philosopher must first, and before all 
things, be a genial and simple-minded man. 

Mr. Forbes spent the succeeding two years as Naturalist in 
Beacon, then commanded by Capt. Graves, the chief of the 
surveying corps at that time employed in the Mediterranean. At 
this time Capt. Graves was more particularly occupied with the 
jEgean Sea, and for a short period he was engaged in affording 
assistance to Sir Charles Fellowes's expedition in Lycia. Aviiling 
himself of the opportunity thus afforded, Mr. Forbes, in company 
with Lieutenant (now Captain) Spratt and the Eev, Mr. Danieil, 
made many excnrrions inUmd. The terrible fevers of the Levant 
did not spare the travellers ; and while one of his companions fell a 
victim to their virulence, Forbes's own life was at one time despaired 
' of, and he always considered his constitution to have been perma- 
nently injured by the attadc. 

Ihe resides of these combined explorations, by which the forgotten 

2 D 2 



266 


Bites of many ancient cities were determined, were eventually pub- 
lished by Messrs, Spratt and Forbes ; but these ' Lycian Travels/ 
however interesting, must be considered as of very secondary im- 
portance, so far as Edward Forbes is concerned, to the results of bis 
examination of the shores of the ,^gean with the dredge, an instru- 
ment of great simplicity indeed, but with whose value he had early 
acquainted himself. It was upon the data obtained by dredging 
during his cruises that he based that remarkable ' Theory of the 
Bathymetrical Distribution of life’ witli which his name will always 
stand most prominently connected in the annals of science. 

That zones of distinct species of living beings may be shown to 
exist at different depths in the sea — just as corresponding zones are 
demonstrable at different heights on the land, — is a proposition 
which had been clearly enunciated by Audouin and Milne- Edwards 
so long ago as 1832, and subsequently, on independent grounds, by 
Lov^n. But, for the addiliion of new zones, for their accurate enu- 
meration and definition, and above all, for the practical application 
of the * Theory of Distribution in Depth, of Marine Life/ to the solu- 
tion of geological problems, we are entirely indebted to Edward 
Forbes. 

It is impossible to estimate too highly the value of the ' Theory 
of Bathymetrical Distribution ' as a contribution to scientific natural 
history ; and it is greatly to be regretted that the details of the 
^gean researches, jfznm which the theory was constructed, have 
never been published. A sum of money was granted by Govern- 
ment for the purpose, but the pressure of new avocations and other 
practical dilficulties interfered. Nevertheless, Mr. Forbes always 
looked forward to the working up and publication of these bis early 
and favourite investigations ; and doubtless, the hoped-for leisure to 
carryout his pains was one of the many attractions which the Chair 
of Natural History in Edinburgh offered. But these projects were 
destined to have no fulfilment; and Forbes’s views have but an in- 
complete representation in the * Beports of the British Association ’ 
and the * Memoirs of the Geological Survey of Great Biitain.* 

Edward Forbes’s studies at the University were on the widest 
scale ; and Hke the father of Natural History, be attacked witli equal 
ardour Mineralogy, Botany, and Zoology. Good authorities aflirm 
that bis knowledge of mineralogy was of no small extent; as a 



267 


zoologist, all know his merits ; and as a botanist, hts acquirements 
were so well thought of, that during his absence in the East, the 
Chair of Botany at King's College, London, vacated by the death 
of the lamented Professor Don, was, without solicitation on his part, 
conferred upon him. The intelligence of this appointment put an 
end to his meditated project of further travel in Egypt and on the 
shores of the Red Sea, and Professor Forbes returned to enter upon 
the duties of his post in 1843. 

Launched into the great world of London, Forbes's further pro- 
gress was not more due to his intellectual than to his moral cha- 
racteristics. His singular sociality and geniality, the gentleness 
of his manner, and his ready sympathy with and comprehension of 
all phases of human character, won for him a prominent place, what- 
ever the society into which he was thrown. Among his fellow- 
students, Edward Forbes was the leader, — whether the thing to be 
done were the editing of a mock * Maga,' the writing and illustrating 
a song, or a downright piece of hard work. He had no quarrels 
himself, soothed them among others, and altogether kept men toge- 
ther as no one else could do. 

It was these rare peculiarities which, together with his high in- 
tellectual qualifications, recommended him to the authorities of the 
Geological Society, when a vacancy occurred in the Curatorship of 
their Museum. 

Professor Forbes accepted this post in 1 842, and availing himself 
of the opportunities for the study of palseontology thus afforded him, 
he soon distinguished himself in the field to which henceforth his 
energies were principally directed. In fact, when in 1844 he re- 
signed his Curatorship, it was to join the Geological Survey of Great 
Britain, under the direction of Sir Henry De la Beche, end to take 
the official position of Poleeontologist to the Survey, a post in dis- 
charging whose duties he spent the next ten years of his life. 

When the Museum of Practical Geology and the Government 
School of Mines were established — grou4ng as they did out of the 
Survey, — Prof. Forbes directed the arrangement of the beautiful 
collection of fossils now displayed in the former, and became Lec- 
turer on Natural History and Palaontology in the latter part of the 
Ins^tution in Jennyn Street. At the same time, many valuable 
contributions to the * Transactions of the Geological Society,* to the 



268 


memoirs published by the officers of the Survey, to the beautifully 
illustrated ' Decades/ in which Prof. Forbes’s artistic skill and judg- 
ment are so manifest ; his Monograph on the British Kaked-eyed 
Meduses, published by the Hay Society ; and the large work on the 
* Natural History of the British Mollusca/ undertaken and finished 
in conjunction with Mr. Hanley — are sufficient evidence that his 
active mind was not one of those which are opprersed and over- 
powered by details. 

Among these many contributions to science there are two so 
marked by originality and genius, so pregnant with results for the 
future, as to deserve more than passing notice. The first of these is 
the * Essay on the Distribution of the Fauna and Flora of the British 
Isles/ in the first volume of the Memoirs of the Survey, which may be 
characterized as one of the happiest applications of the facts of one 
science to the elucidation of the difficulties of another that has ever 
been made. The doctrine ilaid down in this memoir is, that the 
existing distribution of animals and plants can only be regarded, 
not as a primary and independent phenomenon, but as the result of 
previously existing conditions,-— as the product, in fact, of two fac- 
tors ; the one, the successive changes of living beings in time ; the 
other, the successive changes of the position and boundaries of land 
and sea in space. 

The second work here adverted to is that remarkable Essay on 
the Tertiary Beds of the Isle of Wight, the fruit of Prof. Forbes’s 
last labours. 

By an elaborate study of the Purbeck beds in Dorsetshire in 1850, 
Prof. Forbes had come to the unexpected conclusion that they were 
divisible into three formations, each characterized by distinct sets of 
fossil remains ; and that the freshwater mollusca and foramimfera 
of the Purbeck beds, to which he had given his more particular 
attention, did not agree specifically with the fossils of the incumbent 
Hastings Sands. The latter he proposed to class as Lower Creta- 
ceous or Ncocomian, while the Purbeck he henceforth considered 
as an uppermost member of the Oolitic group. His great success 
in these research^ awakened in him $ lively curiosity to examine 
in like minute det^ the great series of tertiary fireshwater strata 
occurring in the northern part of the Isle of Wight. Accordingly, 
he devoted several months in the autumn and winter of 1852 to the 



269 


exploration of that complicated Baccession of freshwater and fluvio- 
marine beds ; and when we reflect how many able geologists had 
gone before him in thU field, we may well marvel at the ricliness of 
the haziest which he reaped. Among other novel conclusioas, he 
showed that certain strata called the Headou beds in Alum Bay had 
hitherto been incorrectly identified in age with the Bembridge lime- 
stone of WhiteclifiF Bay at the opposite or eastern end of the island. 
These Bembridge beds, which belong to the same division as the 
well-known calcareous building-stone of Binstead, were recognixed 
as the true equivalents in age of the celebrated gypseous series of 
Montmartre near Paris, containing similar remains of Paleotheria and 
other extinct quadrupeds, which Cuvier had long before described. 
It followed from the correction here alluded to, that the mam- 
miferous fauna of Binstead held a much higher place in the Eocene 
series than the Headon beds, and, consequently, than the con- 
temporaneous Hordwell strata of Hampshire, in which other qua- 
drupeds than those of Binstead, including amongst them the Palo- 
plotherium of Owen, had been detected. Between these two divi- 
sions, called by Forbes the Bembridge and the Headon, he found 
another, which he called the Osborne or St. Helen’s series, also of 
fresh and brackish-water origin, and distinguished by peculiar 8|>e- 
cies of molluBca. * 

In addition to all these results, Prof. Forbes brought to light an 
entirely new member of the British tertiary series, hitherto over- 
looked. Near Yarmouth, in the Isle of Wight, the most elevated 
ground formed by tertiary deposits is called Hempstead Hill, in 
which strata corresponding in their fossils with the Limburg beds of 
Belgium or the Gr^ de Fontainebleau in France, were recog* 
nized. These would be classed by many geologists of the conti- 
nent as Lower Miocene ; but Prof. Forbes inferred, from the gradual 
passage which he traced between them and Idie subjacent Bembridge 
series, that the whole should rather be regarded as Upper Eocene. 
In a word, he declared it to be impossible, without drawing an arbi- 
trary line of demarcation, to denominate the Bembridge beds 
Eocene, according to received usage, and to distinguish the Hemp- 
stead strata os Miocene. 

Always an active and influential member of the Geological Society, 
Prof. Forbes became its President in 1858. His lumivcrsary address 



270 


for that year contains a sketch of a remarkable theory with regard 
to the relation of the post and present faunas of the world to one 
another, — the Theory of the Polar Development of Life in Time. 

Prof, Forbes's occupation of the Presidential Chair in the Geolo- 
gical Society, however, was but short; for in the spring of 1854, 
the death of Prof. Jameson placed within his reach the ambition of 
his life. —the Chair of Natural History in the University which had 
been his alma mater. Appointed and called upon to enter at once 
on the duties of this distinguished office, he commenced with what 
an eminent fellow-worker has well called “ the light-hearted inten- 
sity peculiar to himself," to conceive and to inaugurate plans of a 
magnitude proportioned to his great powers and noble aspirations. 
But a slow, though mortal disease — suspected least of all by him- 
self — had long been undermining his constitution ; and its sudden 
outbreak, accelerated by over-fatigue and cold, carried him off, after 
a very short illness, on th^ 20th of November, 1854. He was 
buried at Edinburgh, with such great public demonstrations of 
respect as have been rarely shown, but which after all but faintly 
represented the profound and universal sorrow. 

Rear-Admirai, Sir John Frakki,in, K.C.H., D.C.L. etc. — Al- 
thou^ the unauthenticated intelligence brought recently to England 
by Dr. Rae respecting Sir John Franklin and his companions does 
not raise the veil of mystery which shrouds their fate, yet the 
touching relics of that gallant commander and his brother-officers 
are unhappily of a nature, not only to awaken the most gloomy 
thoughts, but to forbid us entertaining any longer the cherished 
hope that they may be restored to their country. 

At an early period of this year, long before the Expeditions which 
were sent to search for the ‘ Erebus ’ and 'Terror * could have returned, 
and of course prior to the receipt of the recent Esquimaux report, 
the Admiralty removed the names of Sir John Franklin, his brother- 
officers and crew from the Navy List. This official act, and the 
recent melancholy tidings bearing upon their fate, have rendered it 
necessary to include in the list of deceased Fellows the names of 
Sir John Franklin and Captain Crozier, both of whom there is too 
much reason to apprehend have perished in their heroic endeavours 
to bring to a successful issue the great enterprise confided to them. 



271 


Sir John Franklin was descended from a respectable Lincolnshire 
family, who occupied a small estate for several years in that county. 
In consequence of the improvidence of his grandfather, Sir John’s 
father was obliged to enter into business, in which he was so 
successful as to have been enabled to give his sons a good education. 
One, Sir Willingham Franklin, rose to the rank of a Chief Justice 
of Madras ; another. Major Franklin^ of the Bengal Cavalry, was 
distinguished for his scientific geographical knowledge, which 
obtained for him the Fellowship of this Society. 

The fourth son, the subject of this notice, who was born at Spilsby 
in Lincolnshire in 1786, was intended for the Church, but while still 
at school, he took advantage of a holiday to run from Louth to the 
coast for the purpose of seeing the ocean, on which it is stated he 
gazed for hours with wonder and delight. His father, who was 
extremely desirous that his son should not follow the profession of 
a sailor, for which he manifested the strongest partiality, conceived 
that by sending the boy in a small merchant-ship to Lisbon, the 
discomforts of the voyage would effectually cure him of his love for 
the sea ; but in the case of young Franklin, as in many others, this 
expedient had a totally different effect, so that being evidently bent 
on a maritime career, he was entered as midshipman on board the 
* Polyphemus' in 1800, and was in that ship at the battle of Copen- 
hagen. On this occasion he escaped without a wound, while a bro- 
ther midshipman was killed at his side. 

He next sailed with his maternal cousin Captain Flinders on his 
celebrated voyage of discovery to Australia, during which he 
acquired most of that skill and knowledge which was of infinite 
value to him in after-life. 

In the course of this survey he had the misfortune to be wrecked 
with his commander on a coral reef in August 1803, and by his 
conduct during seasons of great hardship gained the praise and 
esteem of his superior officers. 

Franklin next acted under Captain Dance in the ' Earl Camden,’ 
and had charge of the signals during the celebrated engagement in 
the Straits of Malacca, with the French Admiral Linois. 

On his return to England he was appointed to the ‘Bellerophon,’ 
Captain Loring, in which ship he had the honour of acting as signal 
midshipman in the memorable battle of Trafalgar ; a post of great 



272 


danger, as the ' Belleropfaon ' was engaged yard*arm t)o yard-arm 
with the * Aigle/ a French seventy-four* and during the action the 
poop where he was stationed was repeatedly swept by the enemy's 
musquetry. Out of forty companions, only six, beside himself* 
escaped without wounds or death. 

During the subsequent two years, Franklin, who was now mate* 
served in the Channel Fleet and the Rochefort Squadron, under 
Admiral Cornwallis, Lord St. Vincent, and Sir Richard Straeban. 

He then joined the ‘ Bedford,' one of the convoy which escorted 
the Emperor of Brazils to South America. Immediately afterwards, 
he sailed in the Expedition against New Orleans, where he distin- 
guished himself particularly in the attack on the American gun-boats* 
on which occasion he was wounded. His heroic conduct in this 
gallant affair was prominently mentioned in the official despatches* 
and led to his being promoted to a Lieutenancy in the * Forth,' which 
ship conveyed the Duchess d'Angoul^me to France on the restoration 
of the Bourbons. 

In 1818 commenced the brilliant series of Arctic Expeditions 
with which Franklin's name is so honourably associated. From the 
moment of their having been projected he evinced the strongest 
desire to be engaged in them, and he was indebted to Sir Joseph 
Banks, at that time President of the Royal Society, for the grati- 
fication of his wishes. 

It has been stated, that, witli the view of proving himself qualified 
for surveying operations, Franklin surveyed a portion of the City of 
London by triangulations taken from church steeples and towers, 
and that he was in a great measure indebted to the successful result 
of this undertaking for Sir Joseph Banks's patronage and support. 

Sir Joseph, who had considerable influence with the Admiralty 
in all matters relating to Arctic exploration, strongly recommended 
his young friend for Arctic service, and he was accordingly appointed 
to the command of the * Trent.’ 'This ship, with the * Dorothea,' 
formed an expedition under the command of Captain Buchan* the ob- 
ject of which was to attain the North Pole* and to enter the Paoifle 
through Behring's Strait. The ship sailed in the early part of 
1618, and reached the latitude of 80^ 84^ North, when the 'Dorothea' 
became disabled by severe pressure from the ice, and was incapable 
of proceeding further. But, although dangers of the most appalling 



278 


nature were around Lieut. Frankliii» yet as bis ship was less damaged 
than that of Captain Buchan, he earnestly requested permission 
to proceed alone in the execution of this discovery. The nature of 
Captain Buchan’s instructions prevented this, and the Expedition 
returned. 

Immediately on his return he was appointed to the command of 
that celebrated Expedition to explore the North American coast, 
which occupied the years 1819, 1820, 1821, and 1822, the history 
of which, as told in his own manly and unaffected language, is 
undoubtedly one of the noblest pictures of heroic exertion and 
patient endurance. 

The results of the labours of Franklin and of his distinguished 
associate Sir John Richardson, in this memorable journey, deserve 
more full and fitting recognition than can be attempted on this oc- 
casion i sufiice it here to observe, that a vast extent of the North 
American Continent, before unknown, was added to our Charts, and 
large acquisitions gained for science by the careful study of the phy- 
sical geography and natural productions of that portion of the globe. 

Undeterred by the appalling sufferings he had already undergone, 
Franklin, although lately united in marriage to Miss Porden, again 
volunteered his services for Arctic exploration. These were ac- 
cepted, and in the course of 1825-27 an additional tract of the 
North American Continent was carefully surveyed. 

For these arduous services, which extended over a period of 
twelve years, and in the executien of which he travelled nearly 
9000 miles, and added a coast-line of upwards of 1200 miles to our 
North American Maps, he was promoted to the rank of Captain, 
knighted by his Sovereign, and had the degree of D.C.L. conferred 
on him by the University of Oxford. He also received the Gold 
Medal from the French Geographical Society, and was elected 
a Fellow of the Royal Society, on whose Council he served in 
1829 and 1830. 

In the formm: year, having hod the misfortune to lose his first wife, 
he married the present Lady Franklm, then Miss Jane Griffin, whose 
persevering devotion in endeavouring to rescue her unfortunate 
husband is well known. 

He now remained at home for two years, when he was appointed 
to the ’ Rmnbow/ and served in that ship in the Mediterranean for 



274 


three years » He wa* chiefly employed in the Greek waters, and 
had the good fortune to be of considerable service in the delicate 
adjustment of complicated diplomatic relations. 

During this period, as indeed on all other occasions, he eagerly 
availed himself of every opportunity, not only to improve his know- 
ledge of geology, to which science he was greatly attached, but 
also used every exertion to add to the museum of the Geological 
Society and to the private collections of scientific men. 

After a brief period of rest, which followed his services in the 
Mediterranean, he applied to Lord Glenelg for employment under 
the Colonial department, and his Lordship, in a very complimentary 
manner, offered him the important post of Governor of Van Diemen’s 
Land, which he held for seven years. 

During this time, that Colony received the convicts sentenced to 
transportation. New South Wales having ceased to be a penal 
settlement, which rendered Isir John Franklin’s position most onerous 
and trying. But he acquitted himself so entirely to the satisfaction 
of the colonists, that in grateful remembrance of his government, 
which was marked by the establishment of a College and a Philoso- 
phical Society, they, unsolicited, subscribed £1600 towards the ex- 
)>ense8,of the recent private expedition fitted out for bis rescue. 

It might be supposed that after so long a period of laborious 
services. Sir John Franklin would have desired repose, particularly 
as he had now attained high renown ; but his wishes still pointed 
towards active employment, and consequently, when the Arctic 
Expedition was contemplated, which in all human probability has 
cost him bis life, he was willing and ready to take the command, 
when the Admiralty were of opinion that he was the officer best 
fitted to act as its chief. 

That Expedition, as will be remembered, was originated by the 
late Sir John Barrdw, who, before resigning his office of Secretary 
to the Admiralty, submitted a plan for the discovery of the North- 
west Passage to that branch of Her Majesty's Government, by whom 
it was referred to the Council of the Royal Society, 

Without concurring in all Sir John Barrow's views, the Council 
gave it as their opinion that such an Expedition was likely mateiially 
to increase our knowledge of geography and terrestrial magnetism, 
and to promote the general interests of science, and that it was at 



276 


that time peculiarly desirable in connexion with the ma^etical 
inquiries then in progress. 

The history and fate of the Expedition, which left our shores in 
May 1845, are still veiled in obscurity; this, however, we know, 
that every thing was done to render it efficient, — that the officers 
under Sir John Franklin were men of experience and zeal, and that 
the last accounts which were received from them represent their 
commander as animated by all the ardour and spirit which charac- 
terized his early Arctic exertions. 

It would have been unjust to have expected less from such a man, 
and as his instrucUons contained the usual discretionary latitude 
given in these documents, there is too much reason to fear that in 
his great anxiety and daring attempts to solve the problem of the 
North-west Passage, his ships became inextricably entangled in the 
thick- ribbed ice of the Arctic regions, and his attempts to reach the 
North American continent were rendered abortive. 

But although the few facts that have reached us point to the 
dreary shores of the Arctic regions as the final resting-place of our 
lamented Fellow and his brave companions, his memory will ever 
be enshrined on British land within British hearts, as an explorer 
as eminent in discovery, as he was patient under trial and privation, 
and kind and good in all the relations of life. 

Captain Fkancxs Rawoon Mooia Ceozier, H.N., the compa- 
nion of Sir John Franklin on his last and fatal voyage, and second 
in the command of the expedition, was eminently qualified for the 
post by long experience in the navigation of the icy seas. 

He accompanied Sir W. E. Parry on his last three voyages to the 
Arctic Regions, and was made Commander for his services as First 
Lieutenant of H.M.S. * Cove,’ under Captain James Clark Ross, and 
despatched in the depth of winter to afford assistance to the missing 
whalers supposed to have been frozen in the pack of Davis Strait. 

Again, as second in command to Captain J« C. Ross, he obtained 
post rank for the first season's successful operations of the expedi- 
tion sent, at the recommendation of the Royal Society and British 
Association, for purposes of scientific research and geographical dis- 
oovtty to the Antarctic Ocean. 

Captain Crozier was distinguished for devotion to his duties as an 



276 


officer, zeid for the advancement of science, and the untiring assiduity 
and exactness of his magnetic and other observations. The Trans- 
actions of the Royal Society, as well as the published results of the 
Antarctic Expedition, bear ample testimony to his diligence and 
ability. 

Robbbt Jambson was born at Leith on the 11th of July 1774. 
Of his early years it is reported that he showed a decided bent 
towards the study of external nature, and although he went through 
the course of apprenticeship and college study then usual for young 
men entering the medical profession, he never engaged in practice, 
but devoted himself to tiie pursuit of ixatural history as the main 
occupation of his life. 

The first fruits of his labours as an original inquirer were given 
to the world in his Outlines of the Mineralogy of the Shetland 
Islands and of the Island Arran,"' published while he was yet a 
very young man ; and this was followed by a more important work 
entitled the " Mineralogy of the Scottish Isles," and containing the 
results of further local investigation. The success of these early 
essays served only as an inducement to extend and deepen the 
foundations of his knowledge, and with this view he spent nearly 
two years in the great school of mining and mineralogy at Frey- 
hurg, under the tuition of the celebrated Werner. Returning 
home from Germany, he was appointed in 1804 to the chair of 
Natural History in the University of Edinburgh, which had be- 
come vacant by the death of his early friend and preceptor. Dr. 
Walker. When thus established as a teacher in t^e chief seat 
of learning in his native country, he seems to have early entertained 
the project of a great work on the Geology of Scotland, in which the 
whole was to be described, county by county, and he made a com- 
mencement with - The Mineralogy of Dumfries." Prom this under- 
taking, however, he was soon called off to prepare variou* elemen*. 
tary and systematic works for the geological student ; and accord- 
ingly a treatise On riie external Characters of Minerals," a 
"System of Mineralogy and Geognosy" soon appeared from his 
pen, and, after ^ longer interval, his " Manual of Mineralogy and of 
Mountain Rocks." He also contributed several arrides on diffistent 
branches of Natural History to the Bdtnburbiii Eneyclopiedia and 



277 


Encyclopaedia Bhtannica, and to the Traneactions of the Wernerian 
Society, of which he waa Che founder. In 1819, in conjunction 
with Dr., now Sir David Brewster, he commenced the Edinburgh 
Philosophical Journal, which was afterwards continued, under his 
sole editorship, under the title of the Edinburgh New Philosophical 
Journal, and this duty he continued steadfastly to perform to the 
end of his life. 

Mr. Jameson's strong point was Mineralogy ; and as he held a 
knowledge of minerals to be valuable chiefly as subservient to prac- 
tical geology and mining, he paid less regard to chemical than to 
external characters in the definition and determination of mineral 
species. His consummate acqumntance with the mineral characters 
of rocks stood him in good stead in the great controversy of which 
Edinburgh became the centre, between the respective supporters of 
the Plutonian and Neptunian theories of the earth. Trained in the 
school of Werner, and deeply reverencing his great master, Mr. 
Jauneson naturally imbibed his views; and though he eventually 
became convinced of their insufficiency, and candidly avowed his 
change of opinion, it is admitted that the doctrine which finally 
triumphed gained much in solidity and precision by the searching 
ordeal to which it had been subjected at the hands of its accom- 
plished opponent. 

His College lectures owed no attraction to language or delivery, 
but the solid instruction imparted sepured the earnest attention of 
his audience. His success as a teacher, however, was greatly due 
to his field lectures and geological excursions with his pupils in the 
country round^dinburgh. so rich in visible illustrations of geolo- 
^cal science. These practical outdoor instructions, conveyed as 
they were in perspicuous and impressive language, and followed 
up by easy and unrestrained colloquial explanation, became the 
means of infusing a love for the study in many of his youthful fol- 
lowers, and of sending forth active and well-prepared geological 
labourers to most parts of the world. 

Mr. Jameson was a member of many learned societies both at 
home and abroad ; he was eleot(Bil« FeUow of the Royal Society in 
1828. In private life he was much esteemed and could reckon 
many attached friends. His death took place an the 19th of April 
1884, 



278 


The Society has lost another distinguished member in GBoaos 
Newport, who died in April last. 

The earlier incidents of Mr. Newport’s personal history, although 
simple in themselves, are well deserving of record, os important 
passages in the life of one who, through inborn love of knowledge; 
just confidence in hts own powers, indomitable energy and rigorous 
self-denial, raised himself to eminence from a humble walk of life, 
in spite of the difficulties he had to encounter from the want of 
early training and other aids which a more advantageous social 
position supplies. 

George Newport was born on the 4th July 1803, in the city of 
Canterbury, where his father was a wheelwright, and at that time 
in comfortable worldly circumstances. The son gave early indica- 
tions of mental activity, showing, as soon as he could read, a great 
fondness for books, and also a taste for. drawing. This latter taste, 
though never aided by extjemal cultivation, abode by him through 
life, and proved of great use to him in his subsequent studies by 
enabling him to represent accurately, and at the moment, the sub- 
jects of his investigation. 

At the usual age he was sent to a day-school in Canterbury, where 
he received the ordinary English education obtainable by boys in his 
station of life. When he had reached his 14th year he was removed 
from school, and, very much, it is said, against his will, was bound 
apprentice to his father. Although he soon became an expert work- 
man in the lighter branches of the trade, he never got the better of 
bis dislike to the occupation, and often avowed his purpose of aban- 
doning it at the expiration of his apprenticeship. 

Before this period arrived, however, his future prospects, humble 
as they were at best, became still more clouded. His father, it is 
said from no fault of his own, but from unavoidable circumstances, 
became involved in pecuniary difficulties, and the whole of his little 
property had to be sacrificed for the benefit of his creditors. 
Under this change of circumstances, the son, instead of seeking, 
as he had hoped to do, for some more intellectual employment, was 
compelled to continue at and by working hard for 

three or four days in the Mtned siffificient to enable bibs to 

4evole the reoudiing days to puimts more congenial to Me mind, 
these wero ohiefiy— reading on general sul^ects both literary and 



279 


seienHfic, the ahidy' of antiquities* for whidi the locidlty e^orded 
great opportunities^ and* most of all* the pursuit of his earliest and 
latest love* the observation and investigation of insect life. He had 
been a collector of insects from his early boyhood* but it was during 
the two years of comparative leisure following the close of his ap- 
prenticeship (from about July 1824 to November 1826)* that his 
entomological studies assumed consistency and form. 

The Canterbury Philosophical and Literary Institution afforded 
means of instruction of which George Newport, at this time, took 
full advantage, having joined it as a member in 1825. Its library, 
its collections, both in natural history and antiquities, and its lec- 
tures, were to him the source of endless recreation and instruction,— 
advantages, which he was soon able to repay, in kind* by contribu- 
tions both to its museum and theatre. In September 1 825 he began 
an elementary course of lectures on mechanics, and gave other lec- 
tures on the same subject, at intervals, both during this and the 
subsequent session of 1 826 ; and in October of the latter year he 
was appointed General Exhibitor of the Museum, with a small 
salary. During this and the following year he gave some general 
lectures on entomology, as well as numerous demonstrations on the 
same subject, from his own collections and the specimens in the 
museum; and his name stands on the books of the Society as a 
large donor of British insects collected and preserved by himself. 

Mr. Newport gave much satisfaction in his management of the 
museum, and made numerous friends among its chief visitors, the 
young men of the city, several of whom, subsequently, gave a 
striking proof how highly they estimated his character and services. 
Among the members, and one of tlie occasional Honorary Lec- 
turers of the Society during the time of Mr. Newport’s curatorship, 
VNti a Surgeon then residing at Sandwich. ITie intimacy arising 
ftota position and from pxirsuits of a kindred character, led to a con- 
nexion which ended in Mr. Newport's leaving Canterbury and going 
to reside at Sandwich ; Mr, Weekes agreeing to i^eeive him as his 
ajiprentice without the payment of any premium, but also without 




280 


contributions ^om his young Mends in Canterbury as their very 
moderate resources could supply. 

This period of Mr. Newport's life was marked by the greatest 
privations, and he often, in after years, expressed some surprise how 
he was able to bear up against tliem. Whatever his expenditure 
was (and it was marvellously small), it was still supplied by the 
same attached friends at Canterbury. It is pleasing to be able to 
add, that all these precious debts were carefully recorded by him, 
and gradually liquidated, in after years, as the means of doing so 
came slowly into his possession. 

At the expiration of his apprenticeship, Mr. Newport went to 
London to prosecute his medical studies. Through the friendly in* 
tervention of a Physician, to whom he had been fortunate enough to 
gain an introduction, ho obtained a nomination to University College 
(then the University of London), at which he was entered on the 
IGth of January, 1832 ; and^on a representation of his peculiar cir- 
cumstances being laid before the Professors, they all most readily 
gave him gratuitous access to their respective lectures. There, be- 
sides attending to the ordinary branches of professional instruction, 
he became a diligent pupil in the class of Comparative Anatomy, 
under Dr. Grant. After the usual course of study, he received hU 
qualification for practice both from the Company of Apothecaries 
and the College of Burgeons; and in April 1835 obtained the ap- 
pointment of House Surgeon to the Chichester Infirmary. This 
appointment, slight as it was, may be said to have terminated his 
struggles for existence, and placed him, for the first time, in a 
position of comparative ease, security, and comfort. He, however, 
did not long retain the office, having resigned it in the beginning of 
1837. 

On leaving Chichester in January 1837, Mr. Newport returned 
to Ijondpn, entering soon afterwards into partnership with a young 
Surgeon who had been for some time established in practice. This 
partnership continued several years, but was not productive of satis- 
factory results, either in a social or pecuniary point of view. On 
its dissolution, Mr. Newport became i^rc and more occupied with 
his scientific pursnits, reUshinfliis avocations less and 

leas, and becoming, in some measnrui unfitted for them, so that for 
a p^odt jrears before bis death, the whole of his professional 



281 


income was almost exclusively derived from a single family, and 
never exceeded thirty pounds per annum. So circumstanced, his 
means were necessarily extremely circumscribed; but his habits 
were, happily, of the most frugal kind, and the most scanty lodging 
served him for all purposes of accommodation and study. But on 
the 1st July, 1847, Her Majesty was graciously pleased to grant 
him a pension of £100 a year, in consideration of his merits as a 
laborious and disinterested cultivator of science ; and from this time, 
feeling his mind more tranquil in his improved worldly circumstances, 
he continued his labours more steadily and vigorously than ever, 
up to the day when he was stricken with his fatal illness. 

That illness may truly be said to have been brought on by Mr. 
Newport’s zeal for science. It had been hie practice for some years 
to devote a day or two in the spring season to a search for frogs 
and other aquatic animals in the marsh lands west of London, in 
order to secure a supply of specimens for his physiological investi- 
gations. In these excursions he commonly contracted a cold, and 
on the last occasion this assumed the form of severe bronchitis, and 
being followed by fever of a typhoid character, terminated his 
valuable life on the 7th of April. 

Mr. Newport was a member of the Entomological Society nearly 
from the time of its foundation, and during the sessions of 1844 and 
1845 served the office of President. In 1847, he became a Fellow 
of the Linnean Society ; the date qf his election into the Royal 
Society is March 2^, 2845. At the time of his death he was a 
Member of the Council. 

The following is a list of Mr. Newport’s writings ; — 

On the Nervous System of the SpMnw lAguatri, Phil. Trans. 1832. 

On the Nervous System of the Sphinx (part ii.) during the latter stages 
of its Pupa and Imago states. Phil. Trans. 1834. 

On the Beiqdration of Insects. Phil. Trans. 1836. 

On the Habits of the Wasp. IViuis. of Entom. Soc* vbl. i. 

On the Tempemture of Insects. Phil. Trans. 1837. 

Observations on the Anatomy^ and Economy of Atkalia eenH- 

fbUm. Essay for Saffion Walden Somety!l Agricultural Prise. 1838. 

The article " Inskcta in the C^jssldpiedia of Anatomy and Fh^sidlogy. 
1839. . ^ 

215 2 



282 


Qu the Organs of ReprpductioQ and the Development of the Myriapoda^ 
fiwt Series. Phil. Trass. 1841. (Bakerian Lecture.) 

On some new Genera of the class Myriapoda. Proc. of Zool. Spc, 1 842. 
On4:he Habits of Gregarious Inseots. Trans, of Entom. Soc. vol. iii. 
On the Habits of Megackile centunmUaris, Trans. Entom. Soc. vol. iv. 
On the Nervous and Circulatory Systems in Myriapoda and Macrourous 
Arachnida. Phil. Trans. 1843. 

On the Existence of Branchin in a perfect Neuropterous Insect {Ptero- 
narcys regalis), Ann. and Mag. Nat. flist, 1843, 

On the Means by which the Honey-bee finds its way back to the Hive. 
Trans, of Entom. Spo. vol. iv. 

Monograph on the class Myriapoda; and a new arrangement of the 
class Articulata. (First and second Memoirs.) Trans, of Linn. Soc. 
Tol. xix. 

On the Reproduction of lost parts in Myriapoda and Insecta. Phil. 
Trans. 1844. 

The Annual Address to the ^Entomological Society from its President. 
1844. 

On the Natural History, Anatomy and Development of the Oil Beetle, 
Meloe, (First and second Memoirs.) Trans, of Linn. Soc, vol. xx. 

A List of the species of Myriapoda (order Ghilopoda) in the British 
Museum, with a synoptic description of forty-seven new i 4 ) 6 oie 8 . Ann. 
and Mag. Nat. Hist. 1845. 

A List of the species of Myriapoda (order Chilognatha) in the British 
Museum, with descriptions of a new genus and thirty-two new species. 
Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist. 1846. 

A second Address to the Entomological Society. 1846, 

On the Aqueous Vapour expelled from Bee-hives. Trans, of Linn. Soc. 
vol. XX. 

Note on the Generation of Aphides. Trans, of Linn. Soc. vol. xx. 

On the Formarion and Use of the Air-sacs and Diluted Trachen in 
Insepts. Trans, of Linn. Soc. vol, xx. 

On the Anatomy and Affinities of PUronarcys regaUs, vrith the habits 
and descriptions of some American Perlidss. Trans, of Linn* Sop. vol. xi^. 

The Anatomy and Developipent of certain CbalpiffidiBB * pd Ichneunip* 
nidsB; withy;de|iori(pMp^ of a new geniM axid species of Bee-Paiaeites. 
Parts 1, 2 & 3. Trans, of Linn, Soc, vol. x^. 

On the Natural History, Anatomy and Development of AftW. (Third 
Memoir.) /l^ans. of Linn. Sop. vol. Axi. 

OK|;#e tdmrrificatipn pf a new gmm (Anthpgfkorghia) of Farwnttff In- 
sects. Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist. 1840. 



268 


Further qbfte^Btiaiu on thegeaut AntkppkorMa. Tnm. of Linn. Soc. 
vol. xsi. 

Further observatipns on the Habits of Mono^tomen^, With spme 
account of a new Acarus^C^^erof^u# oen^cosus). Trans, of Linn, Soc. 
vol. xxi. 

On the OcelM in the genua Jnthophorabia. Trans, of Linn. Soc. 
vol. xxi. 

On the Reciprocal Jlelation of the Titfl and Physical Forces. Ann. 
and Mag. Nat. Hist. IB&O. 

On the Impregnation of the Ovum in the Amphibia. (First Memoir.) 
Phil. Trans. 1861. 

On the Impregnation of the Ovum in the Amphibia. And on the Direct 
Agency of the Spermatozoon. (Second Memoir.) Phil. Trans. 1853. 

On the Impregnation of the Ovum in the Amphibia, and on the early 
stages of Development of the Embryo. (Third Memoir.) Selected and 
arranged from the Author’s MSS. after his death, by O. V, Ellis, Esq. 
Phil. Trans. 1864. 

These publications, numerous as they are, were all produced 
within a period of two* and- twenty years. His more important 
researches were for the most part communicated to the Royal or 
Linnean Society, and on two different occasions they received the 
award of the Royal Medal. 

His earliest inquiries were directed to the structure and economy 
of insectia and other articulated animals, and his name drst became 
generally known in science by his admirable memoirs on the Ana- 
tomy of the Nervous System of the Sphifup Lipwtri, and the 
changes which that system undeigoes during the metamorphosis of 
t^e insect. Continuing to prosecute these researches in the Crus- 
taceans and other allied invertebrate, he arrived at the conclusion, 
that in all the higher Artioulata, the central part of the nervous 
system consists of two pairs of cords, the one gmngliatod, the 
other not, which, in accordance with the views of Sir Charles Bell, 
l^e conceived to minister resjpectiveiy to sensatiap and motion. 

In a subsequent reaearch on the nervous sysfiew df the /alar, he 
observed in tlm central oord*, a. set of dbres which connaot together 
adjacent nerves on the same side of the body, and then extend wit^ 
them to the surhice of the animoL These he regarded as assn^pting 
in funqtiOFn the lafcand nerves of the corresponding side, kid^pen# 
den%< of the brain, in conformity with the views which were at 



284 


that time gaining aeee{>tan<tf on the mechanism of re^ex action. 
In the same communication he related a remarkable set of experi- 
ments* showing the correspondence in function between the central 
part of the nervous system of the invertebrate and that of ver- 
tebrated animals. 

The development of the embryo of the invertebrate largely occu- 
pied Mr. Newport's attention, and among other more or less 
valuable results of his inquiries, he made out the remarkable process 
of growth of^e young Myriapod, by the interpolation of successive 
new segments at one determinate and Umited region of the body. 
The paper in which the^e observations were communicated was 
nomiisated as the fiakerian Lecture for the year 1841. 

In the latter years of Mr. 'Newport's suddenly interrupted life, he 
was led to investigate with his usual zeal and industry the recondite 
process of the impregnation of the ovum. He chose the egg of the 
Frog as the subject of his experiments, and recorded the results in 
three papers communicated to the Society, the lastr of which, partly 
prepared at the time of his death, and afterwards completed from 
his written memoranda by his friend Professor Ellis, is inserted in 
the present volume of the Philosophical Transactions. In his in- 
quiries into this question he endeavoured to determine the several 
conditions which a6Fect fecundation, whether depending on the state 
of the parent animals and their generative products or on the in- 
fluence of extrinsic circumstances ; but the main result at which 
he arrived was the, conflrmation, by his observations on the Frog, 
of the view already adopted by some physiologists on other evidence, 
that in the process of fecundation the spermatbzoids actually reach 
the interior of the ovum. 

In Mr. Newport's studies of insects and other invertebrated 
animals, it was more to his taste to investigate structure, function, 
and habits, than to occupy himself with zoological description and 
ainrangement; but that he could ably deal with the classifiearion 
and natural-hifitoiy rektions of animals is shown in his admirable 
monograph on the Myriapoda, in the Transactions of the linnean 
Society. 

Mr* Newport was endowed with singular aptitude for the pur- 
suit he bad chosen. His wclLknown skill of hand in minute ana- 
tomical research, and his ingenuity in devising and dexterity in 



2B5 


performing experiments, gave him great practical advantages ; and 
these qualities were combined with patience and accuracy in obser- 
vation, and fidelity in recording what he saw, apart firom what he 
thought. "He had. a nervous temperament, which wwb, as usuid, 
associated with meiltal activity, and in Mr. Newport this was ren- 
dered elective hy immoveable stedfastness of purpose and untiring 
power of sustained apjplication* 

Most faithful as an observer of nature, Mr. Newport was np less 
upright as a than. He was deservedly loved by those who knew 
him best, was most kind towards all who did him justice, and full of 
gratitude to those who had aided him in hts early struggles. 

By the death of Dr. WaxiX.xcb tbis Society has lost a liighly 
distinguished Fellow and Vice-President, and the science of Botany 
one of its most zealous cultivators and ardent promoters. 

Dr. Nathaniel Wallich was bom at Copenhagen, on the 28th Janu- 
ary 1786. He was educated for the medical profession and studied 
Botany under Vatel the eminent professor, at that time in the Uni- 
versity of Copenhagen. In 1807 he entered the service of the 
Danish East India Company, and was stationed at Serampore. There 
his love of botany attracted the attention of Dr. Roxburgh, the 
superintendent of the Botanio> Garden at Calcutta. After the 
seizure of Serampore by the British, Dr. Wallich was placed on 
the staff of assistant surgeons in the .Bengal army, and his services 
secured for the Botanic Garden, to the temporary charge of which 
he was nominated in 1815, and finally confirmed in the appointment 
shortly afterwards. Before he had been four years in India, Dr. 
WoHich's ardour in the pursuit of his favourite science led to the 
first of a series of attacks of fever that gradually undermined his 
constitution, and in 1812 he repaired to the Mauritius for the reno- 
vation of his health. There he diligently explored the botany of 
the island, and contributed immense collections of live plants to 
Calcutta, thus early proving his ability to employ to the best in- 
terests of science the munificent aUowanoes which were shortly 
afterwards placed at his disposal. At the head of the noblest bota- 
nical gardens in the world, supplied with a large stafiP of collectors 
and artists, and with provision for travelling expenses on a most 
liberal soale^ Dr. Wallich applied himself with indomitable zeal and 



286 


|o the eEtendbn of the garden*, the inrestigation of the 
Baat IiMlia Company** VE9t and then rapidly increasing dominions, 
and establishment of a correspondence and exchange of living 
and dried plants, upon a scale which for magnitude and eflSciency 
has never been sturpassed by any scientidc establishment whatever. 
During the first ten years of his incux^bency he performed five 
extensive journeys; he visited Nepaul, then a terra Incognita, in 
1620-1822, and on his ^return thfrougE the pestilent Tarai, at the 
foot of the Himalayas, caught a second seVbre few that obliged 
him to go to sea immediately after his andval* at Caldlibi. This 
opportunity he turned to the best account, and as soon as he dould 
rise from his bed and superintend bis stafif, he commenced diligently 
investigating the botany of the Bay of Bengal, Penai^, and the 
Straits of Malacca. 

Within less than another year Dr.Wallich was personally exploring 
the kingdom of Oude end the provinces of Rohilcund and Kamaon, 
reporting on their forests and other vegetable products; and in 
1826-1627, he accompanied the British embassy to Burmah, visited 
Ava, and after that the newly -acquired provinces of Tenasserim and 
Martaban. Throughout this period he employed collectors in eastern 
Bengal, and in other parts of India which he could not himself visit ; 
and he communicated (in the name of the Hon. £.1. Company) the 
products of these labours with a lavish liberality to the botanists of 
Europe, not only in the form of collections, but of voluminous 
observations and drawings. 

Repeated attacks of illness obliged Dr. Wallich to repair to 
England, where he arrived on furlough in 1828, and applied 
himself assiduously for four years to the publication of his great 
work '* Plant« Asiaticae roriores,’* in three volumes folio, and 
the distribution of his enormous collections to the principal public 
and private museums in Europe. This distribution, of which a 
catalogue was lithographed by his own hand, constitutes the most 
.valuable contribution of its kind ever made to botanists, and is of 
itself a sufilment monument of one man's devotion to science. 

Dr. Wallich returned to India in 1832, when it soon became 
apparent that his constltation was completely undermined by inces* 
sent labour of both mind and body. For several years he conducted 
the garden correspondence with his wonted seal and vigour, and 



287 


ftoeorditig to official report*, the wtonishing nuipber Qf 19Q,000 live 
plants ^ere dbtributed in the short ^ace of trt year*, to upwards of 
2000 gardens in India, Europe, }ih»rth and South Amenoa, North 
and South Ah'ica, and Australki. In 1835 he undertook to conduct 
a deputation to inquirn. into the prospects of tea culdratioii in 
Assam, a most unhecdihy qountr^, and csi this occasion superintended 
a botanical eaploradon of ^ whole 'Talley. On bis return to Cal- 
cutta he was i^aia obligell to leave India for his health, and he 
repaired to ^ Cape ol Good Hope, nmeh enfeebled and in a very 
drittcai st!^:{ there hoVever, with a partial restoration to health, 
hit latent zeal revived, and heaccompanied our eminent Fellow, Mr. 
Maclear the Astronomer Royal, npon an extensive journey into the 
inteviot of the colpny, botanizing diligendy as he went, and trans- 
mitting his ooUections to Europe ibr distribution with his wonted 
Uberslity, 

Alter another short sojourn at Calcutta and ineifoctual attempt 
to resist the effects of a climate which five times drove him from 
India, Dr. Wallioh finally returned to England in 1847, relinquished 
with regrets (that he never could banish) bis arduous duties, and 
retired upon the pension of his rank as Surgeon in the Bengal army, 
after forty years of such incessant toil both of mind and body as has 
never been paralleled in the history of botanical science. 

A^r his return to England Dr. Wallich^s health gradually de- 
clined, but his love of botany and earnest desire to promote it never 
forsook him* He took an active part in the meetings of our own 
and other societies, and contributed, chiefiy literary notices, to 
various botanical periodicals. He maintained an extensive corre- 
spondence and became a medium of communication between men of 
science in all its branches, in this country and on the Continent ; 
and up to within a few weeks of his decease, which took place at 
bis residence in Gower Street on the 28th of April; he was actively 
engaged in establishing a correspondence between the museums and 
gardens of hie native and adopted countries. Dr, WaUich pubbshod 
several important works on systematic botany in India, and a mag- 
nificent one in this * country, to which allusion has already been 
made ; he has further the merit of having introduced the art of 
lithography into the East* Hie acquirements as a botanist were 
both varied and sound, and not confined to a faxniliarity with species ; 

VOL. VII. 2 F 



288 


for he po$se«sed great knowledge of the habits, economic and medi« 
dnal properties and uses of plants* drew up many valuable reports 
on the agricultural products and forests of India, and was very 
extensively read in the literature of the science. He was further an 
elegant scholar, a classical writer, and an accomplished European 
and Oriental linguist. His loss has been deeply felt by botanists of 
all classes, for ho was always contributing information and matcriala to 
those engaged in the study of tlie most abstruse as well as the most 
popular branches of the science. It may truly be said that no one ever 
applied to him in vain, nor has a book of any importance been 
published on botany in Europe within the last thirty years, in 
which Dr. Wallich’s name is not prominently introduced. 

Dr. Wallich was a Doctor of. Medicine and of Philosophy, Fellow 
of the Royal Danish Society of Copenhagen, a Correspondent of the 
Academies of Sciences of I^is and Berlin, and a member of most 
of the learned bodies of Europe. He was a Vice-President of the 
Linnean Society of London, and a Knight-Commander of the Danish 
Order of Dannebrog. He was elected a Fellow of this Society in 
March 1829, and nominated a Vice-President in 1852. 


On the motion of the Rev. Baden Powell, seconded by Dr. 
Warren, the best thanks of the Society were given to the President 
for his excellent Address, and his Lordship was requested to permit 
the same to be printed. 

The Statutes relating to the election of Officers and Council 
having been read, and Dr. Roget and Thomas Webster, Esq. having, 
with the consent of the Society, been nominated Scrutators, the 
votes of the Fellows present were collected. 


The following Noblemen and Oentlemcn were reported duly 
elected Officers and Council for the ensuing year : — 

President — The Lord Wrottesley, M.A. 

Treasurer — Colonel Edward Sabine, R.A. 


Secretaries^ 


j William Sharpey, M»D. 

I George Gabriel Stokes, Esq., M.A. 


Foreigin Secretary — Rear-Admiral W. H. Smjrth. 

Other Members qf the Coim«7. — Neil Amott, M.D. ; Rear-Admiral 



289 

F. W. Beeehey ; Thomas Bell, Esq. ; Sir Benjamin Brodie, Bart. ; 
Charles Darwin, Esq., M.A. ; Warren De la Rue, Esq. ; The Earl 
of Hanrowby ; A. W. Hofmann, Ph. D. : Thomas Henry Huxley; 
Esq. ; John Miers, Esq. ; Janies Paget, Esq. ; Rev. Baden Powell. 
M.A. ; The Earl of Rosse, K.P., M.A. ; Robert Stephenson, Esq. ; 
William Tite, Esq. ; Charles Wheatstone, Esq. 

The following table shows the progress and present state of the Society 
with respect to the number of Fellows : — 









statement of the Bee^ and Paym^ of the Bm/dk Society between Decendter 1, 1853, and November 80, 1854 


4©OOO^e<J^ 

^ *0 net M nm WH m4 ^ 



O © «0 QO O 

Qo ^ ^ e 

^ am am 

•«| I S I § ® 



I 





GO 

8 

*3 




zi 85 ^ e gi m»y 



March 1, 1^55. 


CHARLES WHEATSTONE, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 


The Earl of Ducie was admitted into the Society. 

In accordance with the Statutes, the Secretary read the following 
list of Candidates for election into the Society. 


Henry Foster Baxter, Esq. 
George Bowdler Buckton, Esq. 
Edward Chappell, Capt. K.N. 
Arthur Connell, Esq. 

William Coulson, Esq. 

Thomas Russell Crampton, Esq. 
Richard Cull, Esq. 

Hugh Welch Diamond, M.D. 
Solomon Moses Drach, Esq. 
Major George Duckett. 

William Farr, Esq. 

William Lewis Fischer, Esq. 
Isaac Fletcher, Esq. 

Sir Charles Fox. 

Rev. G. R. Gleig. 

William John Hamilton, Esq. 
Arthur Hill Hassall, M.D. 

John Hawkshaw, 

WiUSam 

John jj^pMey, Esq. 


Henry Letheby, B.M. 

Edward Joseph Lowe, Esq. 
James Luke, Esq. 

Robert Lutwidge, Esq. 

George Macilwain, Esq. 

William Marcet, M.D. 

Robert William Mylne, Esq. 
Henry Minchin Noad, Esq. 

A. Follett Osier, Esq. 

Henry Perigal, Esq. 

Henry Hyde Salter, M.D. 
Thomas lliomsoD, M.D. 

Charles B. Vignoles, Esq. 
Charles Vincent Walker, Esq. 
Robert Wight, M.D, 

Thomas Williams, M.D. 
Alexander William Williamson, 
Esq. 

George Ferguseon Wilson, Esq. 



The reading of Mr. Gossb^s papery On the Structure, Func- 
tions, and Homology of the Manducatory Organs in the 
Class Botifera/^ was resumed and concluded. 

In this paper the author institutes an examination of the mandu- 
catory organs in the class Rotifera. in order to show that the vari- 
ous forms which they assume can all be reduced to n common type. 
He further proposes to inquire what are the real homologues of 
these organs in the other classes of animals » and what light we can 
gather, from their structure, on the question of the zoological rank 
of the Rotifera. 

After an investigation of the bibliography of the class from Ehren- 
berg to the present time, in which the vagueness and inexactitude 
of our knowledge of these organs is shown, the author takes up, 
one by one, the various p'kases which they assume throughout the 
whole class ; commencing with Brachhnus, in which they appear in 
the highest dtate of development. Their form in this genus is there- 
fore taken as the standard of comparison. 

'Ilie hemispherical bulb, which is so conspicuous in B. umphkeros, 
lying across the breast, and containing organs which work vigorously 
against each other, has long been recognized as an organ Of mandu- 
cation : it has been called the gizzard ; but the author proposes to 
distinguish it by the term mast as. It is a trilobate muscular sac, 
with walls varying much in thickness, receiving at the anterior ex- 
tremity the funnel, and on the dorsal side giving exit to the 
mophagus. 

Within this sac are placed two geniculate organs (the maiki), 
and a third on which they work (the incus). Each malleus consists 
of two parts (the f7iafmi6rn<m and the uncus), united by a hinge-joint, 
llie mamhrium ts a piece of irregular form, consisting of earinee of 
solid matter, enclosing three areas, which are filled a ^mpire 
membranous substance. The anniir conijisti of siis^tid-^ 
pieces, more or less parallel, arranged like the teeth 
like the fingers of a hand, ' 

Ihe incus consists of two rami, which are articulatel^by a com?j 
mon base to the extremity of a thin rod (the/ulcrum), ih' such 
that they can open and cdose by proper muscles. The^ finders of 



m 


each un<!u$ rest upon the comsponding ramus, to which they axe 
attached by an elastic ligament. The mallei are moved to and fro 
by distinct muscles, which the author describes in detail; and by 
the action of these they approach and recede alternately; the rami 
opening and shutting simultaneously,^ with a movement derived 
partly from the action of the mallei, and psutly from their own 
proper muscles. 

All these organs have great solidity and density ; and, from the 
action of certain menstrua upon them, appear to be of calcareous 
origin. 

The writer proceeds to describe the accessory organs. The 
ciliated disc has an infundibuliform centre, which commonly merges 
into a tube before it enters the mastaa. The particles of food that 
float in the water, or swimming animalcules, are whirled by the 
ciliary vortex into this tube ; and, being carried into the masta», are 
lodged upon the rami, between the two unci* These conjointly work 
upon the food, which passes on towards the tips of the rami, and 
enter the sssophagust which opens immediately beneath them. 

From this normal condition, the author traces the manducatory 
organs through various modifications, in the genera Euchlanis, 
Natommata aurt/a, N* clavulata, Anuraa, N* petromyzon, N, lacinulaia, 
Furoularia, N* gibha, SyncJiecta, Polyarthra, Diylena, Eosphora, Al- 
bertia, F*marina,Asplanckna,Mastigoc€rca, Monocerca, and Scaridium* 
Some of these display peculiarities and aberrations highly curious. 
Notwithstanding the anomalies and variations which occur, however, 
the same t3;rpe of structure is seen in all ; and the modifleations in 
general may be considered as successive degenerations of the mallei, 
and augmentations of the incus* 

Ilie form of the manducatory organs, which occurs in Triarthra, 
Pieroiim^ (Eckies, Limnias, Melicerta, Ct^nochilus, Me- 
galotrocha, Lacinvlaria, and Tuhicolaria, is next examined. The 
Ofg^ shown to be essentially the same as in the former type, 
by the excessive dilatation of the mallei, 
solder^^ of the ana and the rmnt together, into two 
m^ea^ of which approaches in figure to the quadrant of a 

to what has been called (but by a mis- 
appreluirvtskin) the sUrrup^shaped " armature of the genera Rotifer, 

2o2 



PhUodimt ActinuruSt &c. Here, however, the organs are proved to 
have no essential diversity from the common type ; their analogy 
with those last described being abundantly manifest, though they are 
adll further disguised by the obsolescence of the manuhria, 

FloBcuJaria and StephanoceroB, the most elegant, but the most 
aberrant forms of Rotifera, close the series. The maatax, in these 
genera, is wanting; and in the former genus the incuB and the 
manubria are reduced to extreme evanescence, though the two- fin- 
gered uKci show, in their structure, relative position and action, the 
true analogy of these organs. 

Having thus shown that there is but one model of structure, how- 
ever modified or disguised, in the manducatory organa of the Roti- 
fera, the author proceeds to the question of their homology. He 
argues on several grounds that they have no true afiinity with the 
gastric teeth of the Crustacea, though he states his conviction 
that the Rotifera belong to the great Arthropodous division of 
animals. 

It is with the Insecta that the author seeks to ally these minute 
creatures ; and, by a course of argument founded on the peculiarities 
of structure already detailed, he maintains the following identifica- 
tions ; — that the mastax is a true mouth ; that the mallei are mandi- 
blea ; the maaw^ta possibly representing the cheeha, into which they 
are articulated ; that the rami of the incua are maxilla ; and that the 
/ulcrum represents the eardinea soldered together. 

While the author maintains the connexion of Rotifera with 
Insecta, through these organs in their highest development, he 
suggests their afiinity with Polyzoa, by the same organs at the 
opposite extremity of the scale, since the oval muscular bulbs in 
Bowerbanhia, which approach and recede in their action on food, 
seem to represent the quadhglobular masses of Limma» and 
further degenerated. 

If this afilnity be correctly indicated, the interesting foot is appa- 
rent, that the Polyzoa present the point where the two great parallel 
divisions, MoUusca and Ardoulata, unite in their course towards 
the true Polypi. 

Mr. Qosse's paper is illustrated by ninety-six figures of entire 
Rotifera, or of the parts under review, all drawn from the life, and, 
for the moat part, with a power of 560 diameters. 



296 


March 8, 1855« 


Sir BENJAMIN BRODIE, Bart., V.P., in the Chair. 


The following papers were read : — 

I. ‘^On the Perihelia and Nodes of the Planets/^ 

By Ed w Alin J. Coofkk, F.ll.S. Received February 2 , 1855, 

Prefatory to my volume on Cometic Orbits, published in 1852, 1 
invited the attention of astronomers to the several points of resem- 
blance between the planetary orbits and those of periodic comets. 
Among these it was shown, that of the heliocentric longitudes of 
perihelia and ascending nodes of the then known planets and periodic 
comets, two- thirds were situated in the heliocentric semicircle 
between 315® and 135®. The planets stood thus in quadrants — 

L, P/s between 45 and 135 = 

135 and 225=4 1 
225 and 315=3 j” 

315 and 45 = 
ft between 45 and 136 = 

135 and 225=41 
225 and 315=4/ ® 

315 and 45= 

Here the L. P.’s appeared as 16 to 7, and the ascending nodes as 
14 to 8. Two additional asteroids were subsequently discovered 
leaving the L. P.’s as 16 to 9» and the ascending nodes as 15 to 9. 

Again, in 1868, I sent a note upon the same subject to the Ilo)ral 
Astronomical Society of London. At that time a considerable addi- 
tion had been made to the asteroids, and the total number of planets 
bad risen from 25 to 35, Following tlie same distribution of the 




m 


perihelia and ascending nodes ns in my previously published work, 
the result was — 

L,P/s between 45 and 135— 13 

186 and 225=5 
225 and 315 = 6 

315 and 45= 11 

ft between 45 and 135= 19 

135 and 225=9 
225 and 315=4 
315 and 43= 2 

The suspicion of some yet undiscovered law became strengthened 
by this further investigation ; and it occurred to me to ascertain if 
any other heliocentric semicircles would mark the effect of such law 
more clearly. Let me be permitted to extract the concluding pass- 
age from the note as it is prkited in the Royal Astronomical Society’s 
Notices : — 

** But if, instead of the semicircles 315® to 135® and 135® to 315®, 
we adopt those from 45® to 225® and 225® to 45®, we see that of the 
ascending nodes of thirty-four planets, twenty-eight are found in the 
first semicircle and only six in the second. Again, the semicircles 
that contain the greatest number of L. P.’s of planets are between 0® 
and 180®, or 10® and 190®. That which contains the greatest num- 
ber of nodp between 35® and 215®. In the first case there are 
twenty-si:^ and in the latter twenty-nine, l^e quadrant containing 
the largest number of L. P.’s of planets is that between 11® and 101®, 
of which there are sixteen. That containing the largest of nodes is 
from 35^® to 125i°, of which there are twenty.** 

At the present moment (January 1855) we have orbits, more or 
less accurate, of forty-one planets. It cannot be altogether unin- 
teresting to pursue once more the traces of a law still unknown, if 
it have existence. Our position now stands thus — 

L. P.*B between 45 and 135= 16 

135 and 225= 6 1 
225 and 315= 6/^^ 

315 and 45= 13 







Si between 45 and 135^ 19 

133 and 225*111 
225 and 315* 6J 
315 and 45 5 

But, be it remembered, that in 1853 of the then known planets 
the greatest number of L. P/s were found to be situated in the 
heliocentric semicircles 0® to 180° or 10° to 190°. At present we 
shall find the perihelia of thirty out of the forty-one planets in either 
of these semicircles. The greatest number of nodes were then (1853) 
between 35° and 315°*29 ; and 45° and 225°=28. At present, of 
forty planets there are thirty nodes in either of these heliocentric 
semicircles. These facts are at least very singular. I may tabulate 
them — 

Of forty -one planets, L. P.'s between 0 and 180=30 

10 and 190*30 

Of forty planets between 35 and 215*30 

45 and 225*30 
and between 354° to 355° ami 174 to 175*31 

We here perceive that there are thirty L , P.'s situated in the helio- 
centric semicircle between 0° to 10° and 180° to 190°, It is also 
the fact, that there are thirty ascending nodes between 357° to 7° 
and 177° to 187°, which may be called the same semicircle as that 
in which the thirty L. P/s are found. 

The quadrant containing the greatest number of Lu. JP/s of the 
forty-one planets, is thatf between 10° and 100°* 20.* 

Those containing the greatest number of ascending nodes, are 

between 36 to 43 and 12§ to 133*20 
and between 62 to 66 and 152 to 156*20. 

Surely there must be an undiscovered cause determining the 
orbits in this way. ilavmg laid these facts before my first assistant 
Mr. Graham, he computed the degree of probability of such a law, 
arguii^g thus; — *'Were the nodes and perihelia indifferent to all 
heliocentrip longitudes, it would of course be an equal chance in 
^e case pf a planet whose orbit had not been determined, in which 
seinicircle either would be found ; and the d priori probability that, 




of the forty-one known L. P.’s, thirty would be in one semicircle, is 
about yJtt » ascending nodes, thirty-one would 

be in one semicircle, is about probability that there 

is some influence causing a tendency to one semicircle, ascertained 
from the ftwts before us, is very strong: for, for the L. P/s, the odds 
are about 660 to 1, and for the ascending nodes about 4430 to 1 in 
favour of such a supposition.” But after all it may be an accidental 
coincidence; as, consistently with the laws of planetary motion, 
such a congregation of peiihelia or nodes may occur at periods 
exceedingly remote. The further consideration of this subject must 
be left to analysts, of leisure and inclination to pun^ue it. 


II. Circumstances modifying the Action of Chemical 

Affinity.^^ By J. H. Guidstonb, Ph.D., P.B.S, Re- 
ceived February 1, 18fe5. 

The question intended to be solved in this communication is, — 
what takes place when two binary compounds AB and CD are 
brought together under such circumstances that both they them- 
selves and the products of their mutual action remain free to react ? 
Do they, according to a generally received opinion, remain unaltered, 
or, should the aflinities so preponderate, become simply AB and 
CB? Or do A and C, according to Berthollet’s view, divide them- 
aelves in cei^in proportions between B and D, the said proportions 
being determined not solely by the difference of energy in the affini- 
ties, but also by the difference of the quantities of the bodies ? And, 
supposing the latter to be the correct view, do the amounts of AD 
and CB produced by the reaction, increase progressively with the 
relative increase of AB, or do sudden transitions occur, such as 
Bunsen and Debus have recently observed in certain oases where the 
products were removed at once from the field of action ? 

A reply was sought in the colours produced upon mixing different 
salts in aqueous solution. There were not many coloured salts suit- 
able for the purpose, as it generally happens that a base gives the 
same colour with whatever acid it is combined, and vice vend ; but 
the compounds of sesquioxide of iron were peculiarly adapted to 



the requirementa of the experiment, aa some are intenaely coloured 
while others are nearly colourless. 

The circumstancea that attended the formation of the blood- red 
sulphocyonide were first fully examined. On mixing known quan- 
tities of different ferric salts with known quantities of dififerent sul- 
phocyanides, it was found that the whole of the iron was never con- 
verted into the red salt ; that the amount of it so converted depended 
on the nature both of the acid combined with the ferric oxide, and 
of the base combined with the sulphocyanogen ; and that it mattered 
not how the bases and acids had been combined previous to their 
mixture, ao long' as the same quantities were brought together into 
solution. The efEbct of mass was fully tried by mixing equivalent 
proportions of ferric salts and sulphocyanides, and then adding known 
amounts of either one or the other compound. It was found that in 
either cose the amount of red salt was increased ; and that when the 
numbers of equivalents of the salt added were taken as abscissae, 
and the amounts of red sulphocyanide produced, as ordinates, the 
numbers observed in the experiments gave regular curves, though 
not belonging to the second order. The curves representing the 
expetiments in which sulphocyanide of potassium was mixed with 
ferric nitrate, chloride, or sulphate, appeared to be the same, but 
hydrosulphocyanic acid gave a different curve. The deepest colour 
was given when nitrate of iron was mixed with the sulphocyanide, 
but even upon the admixture of one equivalent of the former with 
tliree of the latter, only 0*194 equiv. of the intensely red ferric salt 
was formed, and when 375 equivalents of sulphocyanide of potassiuni 
had been added there was stiU a recognixable amount of nitrate of 
iron undecomposed. It was found that the addition of a colourless 
salt not only reduced the colour of a solution of ferric sulphocyanide, 
but also that the reduction increased in a regularly progressive ratio 
according to the mass of the salt. 

Other ferric salts were likewise examined. The black gallate gave 
results precisely analogous to those obtained by means of the sul- 
phocyanide; the red meconate also confirmed Berthollet's views, 
but the* action of mass was rendered obscure by the formation of 
double or of acid salts ; the red pyromeconate resembled the meco- 
nate ; the red acetate bore similar testimony ; the blue solution of 
the ferric ferrocyauide in oxalic acid gave results fully corroborative 



of the iofiluence both of the nature and of Ibe masi erf every eub- 
etance preeent at the same time in the mixture ; the purple and 
red comenamate afforded similar results; while the red bromide 
(not the oxybromide), though somewhat indistinot in its testimony, 
corroborated to a certain extent the preceding observations. 

Experiments were performed with a view to determine what effect 
the mass of water might have on the salts operated upon ; its influence 
in reducing the colour of the ferric sulphocyanide was found to be 
very great, but the nature of it could not be exactly determined. 
As however it was uniform in its action in whatever manner the 
sulphocyanide had been produced, it could not affect the results of 
the preceding experiments. Water did not appear to act in any 
similar manner upon the other ferric salts. 

From the mass of quantitative observations made during the inves* 
tigation, it was possible to deduce not only the order of affinity of 
the various acids for sesquio^ide of iron as compared with potash, 
but also to assign approximative numbers. Doubt may rest on the 
position of some terms in the series, but hydrosulphocyanic acid 
certainly had the least affinity for ferric oxide in comparison with 
potash ; it was represented by unity : tlie other acids followed in 
the order — nitric, 4 ; hydrocldoric, 6 ; sulphuric, 7 ; gallic, 10 ; 
pyromeconic; meconic; acetic, 20; hydrobromic; comenamic; 
citric, 100; hydroferrocyanic, 170. 

Other coloured salts were submitted to a more cursory investiga- 
tion. The scarlet bromide of gold when treated with an alkaliae 
chloride gave a striking instance of the effect of mass in gradually 
overcoming a strong affinity. The intensely red iodide of platinum 
afforded results which, though somewhat obscure, were not opposed 
in their testimony. So did the blue sulphate of copper when treated 
with different chlorides. The ** manganoso-manganic oxide” dis- 
solves in sulphuric or phosphoric acid of a red, and mother acids of 
a deep brown colour ; and it was found that hydrochloric acid was 
capable of changing the colour of the suljdiate according to its mass, 
while on the other hand sulphuric or phosphoric acid altered in like 
manner the tint of the chlonde. Somewhat similar results were ob- 
tained by means of the green chloride and the purple fluoride of mo- 
lybdenum ; and the blue solution that forms when gallic add is 
brought in contact with both the oxides of iron at once, bore testi- 



mofiy to the same general laws* The peeulkkr optieal character of 
certain salts of quimne was also taken advantage of for deter* 
mining what changes took place among the ocdBspaunds in solu* 
tlon. The amount of fluorescence exhibited by a solution of acid 
sulphate of quinine was found to be affected by the admixture of a 
chloride, bromide* or iodide according to the nature and the mass of 
the salt added* and the addition of sulphuric, phosphoric, nitric and 
other acids was found to produce a fluorescence in solutions either 
of hydrochlorate of quinine, or of sulphate which had been rendered 
non -fluorescent by hydrochloric acid. Similar results were obtained 
with quinldine ; and somewhat analogous ones with the organic bases 
contained in horse-chestnut bark, and in tincture of stramonium. 
An experiment is al^o narrated showing that the same laws hold 
good in respect to compound ethers as to salts having metallic 
bases, alcohol being employed as the solvent. 

Beside the very diversifled substances already mentioned in this 
abstract, several others, such as lead, mercury, zinc, potash, soda, 
baryta, lime, and ammonia, are shown by a more indirect proof to 
enter into compounds which obey the same laws. Hence it is con- 
cluded that what was observed in reference to the ferric salts holds 
good very generally, if not universally. 

I'he bearing of certain other phenomena upon the question at 
issue was also examined. The fact that precipitation* when it oc- 
curs, gives rise to a perfect interchange of bases and acids, is equally 
consistent with either Bergmann'a or Berthollet's theory ; but not 
so is the fact that two soluble salts cannot be mixed without the 
occurrence of precipitation, if one of the products that may be formed 
is an insoluble salt. The only recorded exception to this law, which 
occurs with oxalate of iron in the presence of a salt of yttria, under 
peculiar circumstances* was found on close examination to be in 
perfect accordance with the principles laid down by BerthoUet. 
Besides the argument founded on this universal fact* several expe- 
riments were devised for the purpose of proving that the complete 
precipitarion of an insoluble salt on the mixing of two soluble salts, 
was due to the insoluble compound being removed at once out of the 
field of action on the first distribution of the elements, thus neces- 
sitating a redivision^ md so on until no more of it could possibly be 
formed. The phenomena attending volatilization have the same 



8oa 


bearii^ aft those connected with precipitation* If hy the mutual 
acti(m of two salts a substance be formed* which* though soluble in 
water* requires moie water for its solution than is present* it crystal* 
lizca out : certain experiments were noted where this action occurs* 
and it was found that they gave testimony in favour of the same 
views as have been supported by the preceding observations* The 
bearing of the phenomenon of diffusion of salts upon the point at 
issue was also examined : Malaguti's experiments were discussed i 
and they* as well as some observations on the solution of certain 
bodies by others set at liberty, were found to bear testimony also in 
the same direction* 

During the whole of the experiments on this subject, most of 
which were performed quantitatively, no unequivocal instance oc* 
curred of two substances having so strong an affinity for one another* 
that they combined to the exclusion of other bodies of like kind pre- 
sent in the same solution. | After showing that some reputed excep- 
tions are really not capable of being proved to be so, and after sug- 
gesting some probable limitations of the action of the general law, 
the paper concludes with the following deductions : — 

I. That where two or more binary compounds are mixed under 
such circumstances that all the resulting compounds are free to act 
and react, each electro-positive element enters into combination 
with each electro-negative element in certain constant proportions. 

II. That these proportions are independent of the manner in 
which the different elements were primarily arranged. 

III. That these proportions are not merely the resultant of the 
various strengths of affinity of the several substances for each other, 
but are dependent also on the mass of each of the substances pre- 
sent in the mixture. 

IV. That an alteration in the mass of any one of the binary com- 
pounds present alters the amount of every one of the other binary 
compounds, and that in a regular progressive ratio ; sudden transi- 
tions only occurring where a substance is present which is capable 
of combining with another in more than one proportion* 

V. That this equilibrium of affinities arranges itself in most cases 
in an inappreciably short space of time, but that in certain instances 
the elements do not attain their ffnal state of combination for hours. 

VI. That totally different phenomena present themselves where 



808 

precipitation, volatilizaUon, cryatalliKation, and perhaps other actions 
occur, simply because one of the substances is thus removed from 
the field of action, and the equilibrium that was first established is 
thus destroyed. 

VII. That consequently there is a fundamental error in all 
att€m[)t8 to determine the relative strength of affinity by precipita* 
tion, — in all methods of quantitative analysis founded on the colour 
of a solution in which colourless salts are also present, — a!id in all 
conclusions as to what substances exist in a solution, drawn from 
such empirical rules as, that the strongest acid combines with the 
strongest base.** 


March 16, 1855. 


The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 


The following communications were read : — 

1. ** Researches on Organo-metallic Bodies.^^ By E, Fhank- 
LAND, Ph.D,, F.B.S., Professor of Chemistry in Owens 
College, Manchester. Second Memoir. — Zincethyl. Re- 
ceived February 9, 1866, 

This compound, whose existence was mentioned in a previous 
memoir*, is formed by the action of zinc upon iodide of ethyl, or a 
mixture of iodide of ethyl and anhydrous ether, at a temperature ex- 
ceeding 100® C. The materials are enclosed in a copper digester 
c^ble of resisting great pressure. When purified by rectification 
in an atmosphere of carbonic acid, zincethyl possesses the following 
properties ; — At ordinary temperatures it is a colourless, transparent 
and mobile liquid, refracting light strongly and possessing a peculiar 
odour, rather pleasant than otherwise, and therefore differing greatly 
from that of zincme^yl. Its spedfio gravity is 1’182 at 18® C. 
Exposed to a cold of —22® C. it exhibits no tendency to become 


* Philosophiosl Trsnssedims, p. 436. 



804 


•olid. Zinoethyl boils at 1 IS’* C., and distils unchanged. The spe- 
dde gravity of its vapour is 4*251. Several analyses of zincethyl 
prove its formula to be 

C^HftZn. 

The vapour volume of zincethyl is highly remarkable, and almost 
compels us to conclude that the vapour volume of the double atom 
of zinc is only equal to that of oxygen, instead of corresponding 
with the volume of hydrogen, in accordance with the generally re- 
ceived supposition. Zincethyl, therefore, appears to belong to the 
so-called water type, and to consist of two volumes of ethyl and one 
volume of zinc vapour ; the three volumes being condensed to two : 
for if we were to assume that an equivalent of zinc occupies the 
same vapour volume as an equivalent of hydrogen, we should then * 
have the anomaly of the combination of equal volumes of two radi- 
cals being attended by condensation. 

Although zincethyl is remlarkable for the intense energy of its 
affinities, which place it nearly at the head of the list of electro- 
positive bodies, yet it does not appear to be capable of forming any 
true compounds with electro -negative elements, its reactions being 
all double decompositions in which the constituents of the zincethyl 
separate. Zincethyl is spontaneously inflammable in atmospheric 
air or oxygen ; but when a few drops, diluted with ether to prevent 
indaramation, are passed into a mercurial eudiometer containing dry 
atmospheric air, a rapid absorption of oxygen takes place, with the 
formation of a white amorphous solid composed of zinc, ethyl, and 
oxygen. This reaction, which is also common to zincmetbyl and 
zincamyl, led me to suppose that, like cacodyl, these bodies com- 
bined directly with oxygen ; but the results of a closer study of the 
action of oxygen upon zincethyl prove that no such compound is 
formed ; the white body being ethylate of zinc, and containing no 
organo-metallic compound, in the strict sense of the term. The 
action of oxygen upon zincethyl is expressed in the following equa- 
tion : — 

C^H.Zn 

0,0 

The ethylate of zinc thus produced is decomposed by water into 
hydrated oxide of zinc and alcohol— 

ZnOC^HftOl rC^H^OHO 
2H0/"^L ZnOHO. 


jssC^HjOZuO. 



805 


Zincethyl is acted upon with great energy by iodine ; when the 
violence of the reaction is moderated, by the application of intense 
cold and the intervention of ether, the sole products are iodide of 
zinc and iodide of ethyl — 

I.I J \ Znl. 

Bromine acts with explosive violence on zincethyl, but the action 
may be moderated by adding the bromine in the form of diffused 
vapour and cooling to 0® C. The sole products of the reaction are 
then bromide of ethyl and bromide of zinc — 

C4H,Zu 1 fC^H.Br 

Br.Brj \ ZuBr. 

Zincethyl burns with a lurid flame spontaneously in chlorine gas ; 
the zinc and hydrogen are converted into chlorides, whilst carbon is 
deposited in the form of soot. 1 have not studied the products of a 
more moderate action, as it is difficult to bring the uiaterials toge- 
tlier without too great an elevation Of temperature. There can be 
no doubt, however, that the moderated action of chlorine would be 
analogous to that of bromine or iodine, and that the products would 
be chloride of ethyl and chloride of zinc — 

C4H,Zn1 rC^HjCl 

Cl.CU I .ZnCl. 

Carefully dried flowers of sulphur have only a slight action upon 
an ethereal solution of zincethyl, but the application of a gentle 
heat suffices to produce a brisk reaction ; the sulphur gradually dis* 
appears, a white flocculeut precipitate is formed, and a strong odour 
of sulphide of ethyl developed. The chief product of this reaction 
is the double sulphide of ethyl and zinc (mercaptide of zinc), which 
is produced as follows : — 

^"”*g“}'«C4H,»+ZiiS. 

A little free luiphide of eth^l is also formed — 

C4H,Znl fC4H,S 
S.S j“l ZnS. 



806 


Finally, zincethyl i« decomposed by water into oxide of zinc and 
hydride of ethyl — 

C,H,Znl 

HO /““I ZnO. 

It is also similarly acted upon by the hydrated acids and by the 
hydrogen compounds of chlorine, bromine, iodine, fluorine and 
sulphur. 

The behaviour of zincetbyl in contact with the electro-negative 
elements is highly remarkable, and cannot fail to have an important 
influence upon our views of the condition of bodies at the moment of 
chemical change, — a subject so ably discussed by Brodie*, whose in- 
genious views 1 consider to receive a new support in these reactions 
of zincetbyl, by the singular way in which ethyl, a body low down 
in the electro-positive series, unites with oxygen, chlorine, &c., in 
the presence of a large excess ^if the intensely electro-positive zinc- 
ethyl. This behaviour also strikingly confirms the suggestioins I 
ventured to make in my former memoirf, relative to the moleculo- 
symmetrical form of organo- metallic compounds. In the inorganic 
combinatidns of zinc, this metal unites with one atom only of other 
elements ; a very unstable peroxide, not hitherto isolated, being the 
only exception. The atom of zinc appears, therefore, to have only 
one point of attraction, and hence, notwithstanding the intense 
aflinities of its compound with ethyl, any union with a second body 
is necessarily attended by the expulsion of the ethyl. 


II. "Note on the Magnetic Medium.^^ By Prof, A, W, Wii,- 
LiAMsoK. Communicated by Dr. Sharpet^ Sec. II.S. 
Received March 16, 1865. 

In a letter to Mr. Faraday recently published in the Philosophical 
Magazine. Dr. Tyndall brings forward some important considera- 
tions on the subject of magnetic philosophy. 

It has been known for some time that the phenomena of dia- 
magnedsm may be produced arriflcially in bodies which ore usually 

* PbUosophioia Trsiissctiont, IflSO, p. 789. f Ibid. p. 488. 



807 


considered magnetic* For this purpose it is only necessary to 
plunge tlie magnetic body into a yielding medium more magnetic 
than itself* When thus exposed to the action of a magnet it recedes 
from the poles, because the volume of the medium which it dis- 
places is more powerfully attracted. 

This fact naturally suggested the idea, that all repulsion by the 
magnet might be owing to the attraction exercised on the medium 
being stronger than that on the body repelled ; — just as balloons are 
driven upwards by the superior weight of the displaced volume of 
air. And os phenomena of diamagnetism arc observed in a so-called 
vacuum, it was thought that some ** magnetic medium might be 
present there. 

I do not purpose on this occasion to enter upon the general 
question of the evidence which may be adduced for or against this 
important conclusion ; for it could only be proved satisfactorily by 
considerations including phenomena of the most varied kind, such 
as electricity, light, chemical action, &c., to which it must neces- 
sarily apply. But it might be disproved by any one well -understood 
fact contradictory to it. 

Now it appears to me, that the facts adduced by Dr. Tyndall are 
not inconsistent with the notion of a magnetic medium, but follow 
naturally from it ; and that his argument involves a tacit assumption 
foreign to the theory under consideration. 

The first fact adduced is, that compression increases the attraction 
of magnetic bodies, and the repulsion of diamagnetic bodies by the 
magnet, in the direction of the line of compression. Now it is evident, 
that a variation of pressure on a number of particles surrounded 
by a magnetic medium may alter the attraction of the mass by a 
nmgnet in two ways ; — first, by altering the density of the matter^; 
secondly, by altering the density of the medium. 

In a cubical mass of carbonate of iron the material particles arc 
more magnetic than the medium which they displace, and the force 
with which it is attracted is proportional to this excess. 

If it becomes more magnetic by compression, we must conclude 
that the loss of magnetic medium from its inittrsiices is more than 
supplied by the magnetic matter which takes its place. 

Carbonate of lime is less magnetic than the quantity of medium 

♦ The word matter^' U here used for brevity to dtmte pondsrahie matter. 
VOI*. VU. 2 R 



308 


which it» particles displace, and when these particles are brought 
closer together by pressure, with diminution of the intervening spaces 
occupied by the medium, the mass becomes more diamagnetic, be- 
cause a certain quantity of the magnetic medium is thus replaced by 
the less magnetic matter. 

Dr. Tyndall seems to have assumed, that on the compression 
of an aggregate of particles of a diamagnetic Bubstance» the medium 
is not displaced by the particles in their change of position; — in which 
case bis conclusion, that compression must increase the magnetic 
functions of every substance, wcfuld no doubt follow from the notion 
of a magnetic medium. 

The second fact adduced (Offers chiefly in form from the one just 
considered. Crystals of carbonate of iron are attracted most strongly 
by a magnet acting in the direction of the crystallographic axis. 
Crystals of carbonate of lime, possessing the same form, are most 
strongly repelled in the direcition of the same axis. In this direction 
the functions of the matter predominate more over those of the 
medium than in other directions of the crystal ; so that with car- 
bonate of iron, we have the strongest magnetism ; with carbonate of 
lime, the strongest diamagnetism in this axis. One crystal consists 
of magnetic medium with strongly magnetic matter; the other con- 
sists of the medium with matter of very slight magnetic force. 

The crystallographic axis is in both crystals the direction in 
which the function of matter predominates most strongly over that 
of the medium: so that in the iron salt it is the most magnetic ; in 
the lime salt the feeblest magnetic direction in the crystal. 



809 


March 22, 1855. 


The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 


The following communications were read : — 

1. Further observations on the Anatomy of Macffillivraya, 
CheletropiSy and allied genera of pelagic Gasteropoda.^* By 
John Denis Macdonald, Esq., R.N., Assistant-Surgeon 
H.M.S.V. ‘Torch.* Communicated by Sir W, Burnett, 
K*C.B. Received February 22, 1855. 

The author states, that in a late voyage from Sydney to Moreton 
Bay, specimens of Macgillivraya, Cheletropis and a few other genera 
of minute pelagic Gasteropoda, apparently undescribed, were daily 
taken in the towing-net, and afforded him an opportunity of more 
precisely determining the mode of attachment of the ciliated arms 
which he bad at first presumed to be naked branchiee. 

In his former paper* it was stated, more particularly of Cheletropis 
Huxley i, that the gills were of two kinds, viz. ‘'covered*' and 
*' naked'/* the former, corresponding to those of the pectinibranchi- 
ate Gasteropoda generally, he has never found to be absent in any 
of the genera ; but from further observation of the so-called naked 
gills, while the animals were alive in their native element, he is dis- 
posed to think that they are chiefly employed for prehensiob, and 
probably as auxiliary organs of natation. When these ciliated 
appendages are fully extended, the line of cilia is perfectly straight, 
so that the frilled border, noticed in the previous account, turns out 
to be a character depending simply on the partial contraction of the 
longitudinal muscular fibres, preparatory to complete retraction of 
the organs. They have no connexion with the mantle, but encirdc 

Ptoceedingi, p. 191. 

2 H 2 



810 


the mouth together with the tentaculn and eyes, and coalesce at their 
bases like the segments of a deeply-cleft calyx. In the specimens of 
MacgiUivraya examined the arms were quite transparent, but marked 
at irregular intervals with cross streaks of brownish purple. In the 
extended state they were several times the length of the shell, and, 
like the arms of a polype, they rolled themselves up when touched, 
and started back into the shell with »ur])rising rapidity. They ap- 
peared also to be exquisitely sensitive, exhibiting short twitching 
movements when minute particles suspended in the water came in 
contact with them. 

In the specimens of MacgiUivraya now referred to, the respiratory 
siphon consisted of a process of the mantle converted into a tube by 
the mere a])po8ition of its borders without organic union ; it was 
moreover much shorter than had been usually observed in previous 
examples, and the author thinks that those now under consideration 
may be a variety, if not a dislinct species. 

In bis former examinations of this tribe of Gasteropoda, the 
author had never found more than four arras encircling the head, but 
he has since discovered six in a single genus witli which he had been 
long familiar by external characters. In this case the operculige- 
rous lobe of the foot is quite cylindrical and of some length, bearing 
the peculiar oiKjrculum on its truncated extremity with the clawed 
process pointing to the left side. The sucker- disc is very small, and 
presents an anterior and i)osterior lobe. The two tcntacula bear 
each an ocellus on the outer side near the base, and the ciliated 
arms, in every respect save number, resemble those of MacgiUivraya 
and its congeners. The clawed operculum is developed from a 
spiral nucleus situate near the internal thickened border ; it seems 
to be a weapon of defence, and is wielded with great dexterity by 
the little animal, which makes skips and jerks by means of its com- 
plex foot, after the manner of iVawo or Strombus. 

The author notices another member of this diminutive tribe which 
is very commonly met with in the South Pacific, and has almost an 
indefinite range. As regards both animal and shell, it in many 
points resembles a miniature Natka, The shell is few-whorled, wi^ 
small compressed spire and veutricose mouth ; the operculum paucl- 
spiral and well-marked with the lines of growth. The foot is not 
unlike a broad and square-toed shoe in form, receiving or bearing 



811 


the remainder of the animal and the shell. The shoe- upper, as it 
were, presents two rounded lateral lobes which lie over the anterior 
part of the shell, like the mentum of Natica, The little animal 
creeps on its foot with great rapidity, appearing ratlier to slide along 
than progress by a vermicular movement, and by spreading out and 
hollowing this organ at the surface of the water, as a freshwater 
Lymnsoad forms a boat of its foot, it buoys up its tiny body and is 
cast abroad on the face of the ocean. 

The pa]>er was Illustrated with coloured figures of most of the 
objects described. 


11. On the Anatomy of Nautilus umbilicatus^ compared with that 
of Nautilus Pompilius,^* By John Dknis Macdonald, 
Esq., B.N. Communicated by Sir W. Burnett, K.C.B. 
.Received February 22, 1855, 

During a visit of H.M.S.V. * Torch' to the Isle of Pines in July 
1854, a recent specimen of Nautilus umbilicatus picked upon 
the outer reef off Observatory Island, It was alive when brought on 
board, but was too much exhausted to exhibit active movements. 
Part of the hood ap|>eared to have been eaten away behind by some 
predaceous enemy, but in other respects the animal was perfect. 

The body when retracted lay more deeply in the shell than that 
of N Pompilius, so that no part was visible in a lateral view, and on 
account of the great depth of the chamber of occupation the orifice 
of the siphuncle in the last septum could not be seen when the soft 
parts were removed. As to this difference, however, the author ob- 
serves that it may depend on the time elapsed since the formation of 
the last partition. 

Apart from the shells, the author finds a close resemblance be- 
tween the corresponding parts of the two species. 

The specimen of N, umbilicatus examined proved to be a female ; 
a foot which may serve to modify the views of those who, adopting 
the speculations of D'Orbigny on the sexes of the Ammonites as in^ 
dicated by the characters of their shells, apply them also to the 
several kinds of Nautili known. 



S12 

Tht body of N, tmbilicatus i« larger and more elongated than 
that of N* Pompiiius as it occurs in the South Seas, although the 
specimens of the latter species brought from the Chinese Seas much 
exceed both in size. In the N» umhilicatue, the longitudinal lamelUe 
on the median lobe of the external labial processes are divided by a 
wide groove into two lateral sets, and the corresponding lamellae be- 
tween the internal labial processes are about seventeen in number 
and of considerable thickness. In N. Pompiiius, the latter lamellse are 
much thinner and more numerous, and the lateral sets of the former 
are united together in the median line, commencing anteriorly with 
an azygos transverse lamina. In both kinds, however, the corre- 
sponding tentacula may be distinctly traced out, with only such 
minor differences as might be expected to occur in different speci- 
mens of either separately; the digital, labial and ocular groups 
agreeing sufficiently both as to number and character in the two 
cases, considering the liability of these parts to slight modifications, 
from arrest of development or redundance, in the same species. 

Referring to former observations of his own on the eye of N, Pew- 
pilius, the author observes that they closely apply to AT. umbilicatu9, 
which affords confirmation of his opinion that the pigmentary coat- 
ing is subjacent to the retina. He finds no vestige of a lens, and in 
place of vitreous humour, a mere viscous matter protecting the 
retina from the sea- water. 

The organ of hearing, which had escaped detection in the speci- 
men of iV. PompiUus dissected by Professor Owen, altered as it 
doubtless had been by long immersion in spirit, was discovered in 
the example of N, umbilicatus examined by the author. It consists 
of two spheroidal acoustic capsules placed, one on each side, at the 
union of the supra and subcesophageal ganglia, and measuring about 
one-twelfth of an inch in diameter. Each capsule rests internally 
against the nervous moss, and is received on its outer side into a 
little depression in the cephalic cartilage. It is enveloped in a kind 
of fibrous tissue and filled with a cretaceous pulp ooxisisting of mi- 
nute, elliptical, otoconial particles, presenting under a high power a 
bright point near each end, varying much in size, and sometimes 
combined into stellate, cruciform or other figures. Cilia were not 
observed within the capsules. 

The inside of the mouth is furnished with three groups of pa|nlhe, 



318 


one of which oceopics the median line between the orifice of the 
tongne-eac and commencement of the msophagus. These lingual 
pepillfie, as well as the rest, are clothed with long and slender 
columnar epithelium-particles. 

The author agrees with Mayer in regarding the well-known folli- 
cular appendages of the aiferent branchial vessels of the Cephalo- 
poda, as performing the function of kidneys, but admits that they 
may also serve, by altering their capacity, to regulate the amount of 
blood passing through the branchiee under changes of pressure to 
which the animal may be subjected at different depths. These fol- 
licles are eubcylindrical in form, and somewhat dilated at the free 
extremity, to which is appended a folded and funnel-shaped process 
of membrane which expands rather suddenly and presents a jagged 
border. They open by an oval or slit-like orifice into the afferent 
branchicJ vessels, on ^ach of which, as Professor Owen has observed, 
they are disposed in three clusters. The outer membrane is smooth 
and glossy, homogeneous in structure, and sprinkled over with mi- 
nute, rounded, transparent bodies, resembling the nuclei of cells. 
Beneath this layer, flat bundles of fibres, apparently muscular, are 
traceable here and there, principally disposed in a longitudinal direc- 
tion, and sometimes branched. The lining membrane consists of a 
loose epithelial pavement, similar in many respects to that of the 
uriniferous tubules of the higher animals, the cells containing, be- 
sides the nuclei, numerous minute oil-globules, or a substance much 
resembling concrete fatty matter. This membrane is thrown up 
into very numerous papillae and comigationa, so as greatly to in- 
crease the extent of surface. The papillae are more numerous to- 
wards the attached end, and a circlet of longitudinal folds, with 
transverse zigzag corrugations, radiate from the bottom of the fol- 
licle, in which a number of small pits or fenestrations are sometimes 
visible. The funnel-shaped membranous process above noticed is 
continuous with the lining membrane. The cavity of each follicle, 
therefore, communicates with the exterior through the centre of this 
process, and the aperture is thus guarded by a kind of circular valve 
permitting the escape of secreted matters, but effsctually preventing 
idle entrance of fluid from without. 

Bom ooadlderations are next offered in support of the view 
idcfted as to the ftmctions of these vascular appendages. 



ai4 


Laiitly, on fche question whether the peculiarities of structure re- 
cognized respectively in N, Pompilius and N. umbilkatue are suffi- 
cient to establish a diffiereucc of species, or are attributable merely to 
variety, the author observes, that any tendency in a being to revert 
to an original type, when such has been determined, betrays variety; 
but this tendency is never manifested in the Nautili under conside- 
ration by the occasional occurrence of specimens ])re8enting charac- 
ters which place them intermediately between N. PompUiu» and 
N. umbilicaius. Having visited the Fijii Islands since he formerly 
wrote on N. Pampilimt he finds that the umbilicated Nautili are not 
known to the natives, although N. Pompilim is very plentiful ; but at 
Futuna or Wallis’s Island, where both are found, the people recog- 
nize the difference between them depending on the presence or 
absence of umbilical pits. On this the author remarks, that although 
particular localities, with all attending circumstances, may favour 
the production of varieties, yet the permanence of the distinctive 
characters of these NauUli without symptom of amalgumation» and 
the discovery of a female specimen of N. umbilicatus, are strong 
arguments in support of the view that they are distinct species, 
though very closely allied. 

Further descriptive details are given in the explanation of the 
figures which accompany the memoir. 


III. a Class of Differential Equations, including those 
which occur in Dynamical Problems.'^ — Part II. By W. 
F. Donkin, M.A«, F.E.S., F.E.A.S., Savilian Professor of 
Astronomy in the University of Oxford. Eeceived February 
17 , 1856 . 

This is the second and concluding port of a paper of which the 
first part was printed in the Philosophical Transactions for 1834. 
In the fourth section (the first of this part) some of the moat import- 
ant results of the former part are recapitulated. 

In the fifth section the theory of the Variation of Elements is con- 
sidered under ttiat aspect which belongs to it in connexion with the 
general methods of this paper; and tlie facility of its application is 
shown in two mstances: (1) the expressions for the variations of 



8T6 


the elliptic eleniente of a disturbed planet's orbit are deduced from 
the results of Art. 30 (Part I.), on undisturbed elliptic motion ; 
(2) the problem of determining the motion of a free simple pendulum 
(omitting the effect of the earth's rotation) is treated by considering 
the orbit of the projection of the bob upon a horizontal plane as a dis- 
turbed ellipse. The differential equations which define the variations 
of the elements of the ellipse are given in a rigorous form, and inte- 
grated approximately so as to give the motion of the apsides of the 
mean ellipse in any case where the pendulum never deviates much 
from the vertical, and the motion is not very nearly circular. The 
resiilt agrees with the conclusions tpf the Astronomer Royal (Pro- 
ceedings of the Royal Astronomical Society, vol. xi. p. 160). 

In the fifth section the transformation of the differential equations 
by the substitution of new variables is considered, and particularly 
that kind of transformation, called by the author a normal trann- 
formation t which leads to a new system of equations, not merely 
possessing the same general form as the old, but distinguished also 
by other common properties. A definition is given of those trans- 
formations which may be properly called, from analogy, transforma- 
tions of .coordinates, and it is shown that all transformations of coor- 
dinates are normal. General formulse are given for transforming the 
equations of any dynamical problem from fixed or moving systems of 
axes of coordinates ; and an illustration is drawn from the case of the 
motion of a planet referred to axes in the varying plane of its own 
orbit. 

In the seventh and last section the principles of transformation 
developed in the preceding section are ap])Iied in a more general 
manner to the differential equations of the planetary theory ; and it 
is shown that when the motions of a planetary system are referred 
to a system of rectangular axes having their origin in the sun, and 
otherwise moving in any arbitrary manner, the variations of the ele- 
ments will still be determined by the same formulse as if the axes 
were fixed, provided there be added to the disturbing function R, for 
each planet, the expression 

^f |aa(i — e®) . sin v sin Wj cos v sin 1 4 * cos *)» 

in which i is the inclination of the orbit to the (moving) plane of xy, 
the longitude of the node reckoned from the axis of x, and Wj, ; 

VOL. VII. ^ I 



the angnlar velocities of the moving system of axes about the three 
axes themselves. In this expression may be any arbitrary 

functions cither of the time or of the elements ; but in any case these 
functions are to be exempted from differentiation with respect to the 
elements in taking the partial differential coefficients of the disturb- 
ing function. 

This result is illustrated by referring the motion of a system con- 
sisting of two planets to axes so chosen that the plane of xy shall 
always coincide with the principal plane of the system^ and the axis 
of r, from which all longitudes are reckoned, shall always coincide 
with the line of nodes ; there are thus obtained twelve rigorous 
simultaneous differential equations, of which nine form a system 
apart, containing only the major axes, excentri cities, epochs, longi- 
tudes of perihelia, and mutual inclination of the two orbits, and 
afford an example of the so-called ''elimination of the nodes;** 
whilst the remaining three (wllich contain also these nine elements, 
but not their differential coefficients) determine the motion of the 
principal plane and of the line of nodes, relatively to fixed space. 
The mutual inclination of the two orbits being supposed knowny 
their several inclinations to the principal plane are given by simple 
relations ; and the positions of the planets in their orbits (their 
longitudes reckoned firom the line of nodes) being supposed known, 
their motions relatively to fixed space would thus be completely 
determined, 


IV. Extract of a Letter^ dated January 6, 1856 , from J. Mit- 
CHELL, Esq., Quartermaster of Artillery, Bangalore, On 
the Influence of Local Altitude on the Burning of the Puses 
of Shells.” 

" In the early jaurt of the year 1848, at the annual practice of the 
Artillery in this garrison, it was observed that the fuses burned too 
long a time. The reguto burning of fuses being a matter of much 
importance, the circumstance was duly reported to Artillery Head 
Quarters, and a portion of each kind was directed to be sent to 
St. Thomas's Mount (eight miles from Madras and on the same 



817 


level) for examination, where they were found to burn correctly, and 
as at that time no one suspected the real cause of the discrepance, it 
was concluded there had been some error in the length of our pen- 
dulum, and there for the time the matter rested. 

" But as I was satisfied, for many reasons, that it was not owing to 
an error in the pendulum, I determined to keep the subject in mind, 
and for the practice in the following year (1849) I caused to be 
made an adjustable pendulum which beat seconds very correctly for 
several minutes. This pendulum was daily compared with two or 
more seconds* watches to make all safe, and, as our longest time of 
flight did not exceed twenty seconds, no error could possibly arise 
from this source. The result was that the fuses again burnt too 
long at Bangalore, and were again found to burn correctly at 
St. Thomas's Mount, 

This was a mystery to all; but after the matte rhad cost me much 
thought, it occurred to me that the cause was to be sought in the 
difference of altitude between St. Thomas's Mount and Bangalore, 
nearly 3000 feet ; and arf a means of putting this to the test, 1 sug- 
gested that some fuses should be burnt at the Mount, or at Madras, 
under a receiver, exhausted until the barometer stood at the Banga- 
lore mean height, or about 27 inches. This, however, it 'W'as not 
found convenient to do ; but, as an equally satisfactory way of test- 
ing the accuracy of my conclusions, a small number of fuses were 
prepared and burnt at St. Thomas's Mount, at Bangalore, and at 
two different altitudes on the Neilgherry Hills, as will be seen by 
the annexed copy of an official memorandum; and although this ex- 
periment was too limited to enable us to compile a scale gf the pro- 
bable times a certain length of fuse composition would bum at given 
altitudes, it amply proves the fact that combustion is retarded at 
considerable elevations. 

" Memorandum of an experiment to ascertain whether the atmo- 
sphere influences the burning of fuses ; — 

'* Eighteen 8-inch fuses, made of the same description of wood 
(Congo), were filled with composition made for the purj)ose. The 
same man drove the whole on the morning of the 2nd August 1849, 
using the same mallet and drifts. Six of the fuses were burnt at the 
Mounts six at bangalore, and six on the Neilgherry Hills ; all in the 
presence of artillery officers ; the result is shown below ” : — 



818 





Time 

of 

burning 




Tims. 

Station. 

r..ength 
of fttse. 

Baro- 

meter. 

Thermo- 

meter. 

HMght above 
the level of the 

tea. 



in. 

sees. 

ia. 



August 2, 1849. 

St^ Thomas's 

3 

14*15 

29*78 

89 

Artillery 

} past 12 

Mount. 

3 

14*30 



Depot yard. 

o’clock. 


3 

14*30 





3 

14*30 






3 

14*15 



! 



3 

14*30 



1 

August 17i 1849. 

Bangalore. 

3 

10*00 

26*89 

82 

3000 ft. 

\ past 5 p.H. 


3 

00» 





3 

15-75 






3 1 

15-15 : 


i 




3 : 

15*75 i 

j 





3 i 

16*25 1 




August 31, 1849. 

Kotagherry, 

3 i 

17*00 i 

24*025 

Att. 62*7 

6500 ft. 

i past 7 ^.M. 

Neilgherries. 

3 

17*00 ! 


Det.61*8 



3 ! 

OO* 1 






3 ! 

17*30 1 




Sept. 8, 1840. 
20 minutes past 

Cotocamund, 

Neilghcaries. 

3 

13 

18*00 ! 
18*25 1 

23*030 

54*2 

7300 ft. 

8 A.M. 

1 

3 





The writer attributes the result to the rarity of the atmospheric 
air, and of its constituent oxygen at the higher stations. 


• Tlie fuses thus m«rhe<l accidentally lgt\ited at both ends. 









819 


March 29, 1866. 


THOMAS BELL, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 


The following communications were read : — 

I. ^^On the existence of an element of Strength in beams sub- 
jected to Transverse Strain, arising from the Lateral Action 
of the fibres or particles on each other, and named by the 
author the ^ Resistance to Flexure.^ By Willtam Henry 
Barlow, Esq., C.E., F.R.8. Derby, Received February 23, 
1855. 

The author commences by observing, that under the existiiig 
theory of beams, which recognizes only two elements of resistance, 
namely tension and compression, the strength of a beam of cast 
iron cannot be reconciled with the results of experiments on the 
direct tensile strength, if the neutral cuds {s in the centre of the 
beam. 

He then proceeds to describe experiments made on two solid 
beams of cast iron to determine the position of the neutral axis, 
'fhe beams employed were 7 feet long, 6 inches deep and 2 inches 
thick, on each of which small vertical ribs were cast, 12 inches 
apart ; nine small holes were drified opposite to each other in each 
rib, for the purpose of inserting the pins of a delicate measuring in- 
strument. The distances of the holes of the centre division of both 
beams were measured under various strains, and the results show 
that the extensions and compressions proceed in an arithmetioul 
ratio fVom the centre to upper and lower sides of the beam ; and 
that at any given distance on either side of the centre, the amount ^ 
of extension is equal to the amount of compression. 

Hie position of the neutral axis being thus conclusively ascertained 
td be in the centre, it is shown that, not only the ultimate strength, 

VOL. Vti, 2 x 



820 


bat also the mount of extenaion and oompresBion with a ^ven 
atrain« Indicates Oie existence of another element of resistance, in 
addition to the resistances to extension and compression* 

The author then points out, that in applying the law of 
tensio sic vis ** to contiguous fibres, under difierent degrees of exten- 
sion and cooipression, the efiect of the lateral adhesion has been 
omitted, and each fibre has been supposed to be capable of taking 
up the same degree of extension or compression as if it acted sepa- 
rately, and independently of the adjoining fibres. 

It is then shown that this supposed independent action of the 
fibres is inconsistent with other practical results, and evidence is 
exhibited of a powerful lateral action when unequal stndns are 
exerted. 

From these and other considerations, the author is led to think 
that the effect of the lateral^ action, tending to modify the effect of 
the unequal and opposite strains in a beam, constitutes, in effect, a 
** resistance to flexure *' acting in addition to the resistances of 
tension and compression. 

In order to ascertain whether the apparent difference in the 
amount of tensile strength when excited by direct and transverse 
strains is due to Jlejmre, t&b author caused open beams or girders to 
be made, each of whiajh was Wmed by two bars of metal ; the upper 
and lower bars of the same beam were in every case of the same 
form and dimensions ; but the depth of metal and the distance to 
which the bars were separated vertically, was varied in the several 
forms of girder experimented upon. By these means the bar form* 
ing the lower side of each girder was tom asunder under different 
degrees of flexure. The different forms of girder experimented 
upon were of equal length, and were compared with soUd beams and 
with bats of the same metal broken by direct tensile strab* 

From the mean of /our experiments on each form of girder* the 
value of the total resistance at the outer fibre is ascertained, and 
exhibits the following results : — 

1. In i^ers having the same depth of metal, namely about 2 
inches, but the total depth of the girder, and consequentily the 
deflections difibrent— 



821 


Form of bem or girder. 

Depth of 
gmer. 

Defleetton. 

Total roeiatnioe 
at the outer 
fibre. 

No. 1. Solid beam 

' 2*02 
2*51 
3*00 
4*00 

•670 

•510 

•401 

•301 

lbs. 

41709 

35386 

31977 

28032 

No. 2. Open girder 

No. 3. Open girder l 

No. 4. Open girder 



2. Ingirdetfl haviag the Bame total depth (namely 4 inches), and 
consequently nearly the same deflection, but differing in the deptli 
of metal — 


Fum of beani or girder. 

Depth of metal. 

Total rciifltanoe 
at tho outer 
fibre. 

No. 5. Open girder 

301 

1*97 

1-56 

1-48 

lbs. 

37408 

28032 

27908 

25271 

No. 4. Open girder 

No. 7. Open girder ........... .... 

No. 6. Open girder ....t..*.. 


The tensile strength of the metal employed was 
found to be .......................................... 

j- 18750 



From these experiments, the particulars of which are fully de- 
tailed, the following facts are elicited 

1. lliat in all cases the total resistance at the outer fibre, at the 
time of rupture, is greater than the tensile strength. 

2. That in girders having the same depth of metal, it increases 
when the deflection increases ; and 

S, That in girders having the same total depth, and the same de- 
flection, the resistance is greater when the depth of metal in the 
beam is greater. 

And it follows that there is an element of strength depending on 
the depth of metal in connexion with the deflection ; or in other 
words, dependent on the depree of flexure to which the metal form- 
ing the beam is subjected. 

Hie author next proceeds to examine the law under which this 
resistance varies ! and considering the total resistance in the solid 
beam to be composed of two resistances, one being constant and 
due to the tensile strength, and the other variable and depending on 
the, depth of the metal in connexion with its deflection, the expen- 
menta indicate that the resistance to flexure varies, throughout all 

2k2 








822 


the girders, directlj as the amount of defection into the depth of 
the metal. 

The paper concludes by pointing out the important amount of 
this resistance, the operation of udiich has been hitherto unknown, 
and which in cast iron exceeds the tensile strength of the metal, and 
shows that comparisons of the strength of different forms of section, 
based on the existing theory, which assumes the resistance at the 
outer fibre to be constant and equal to the tensile strength of the 
metal, must be entirely fallacious. 

The paper is accompanied by full details of all the experiments, 
and the measurements for determining the position of the neutral 
axis. 


II. ''On the Metallic and so^me other Oxides, in relation to 
Catalytic Phenomena." By the Eev, J. Eyrb Ashby* 
Communicated by the Rev. John Barlow, P.R.S, Re- 
ceived March 8, 1855. 

I purpose to detail some experiments on the metallic (and a few 
other) oxides, made with a view to ascertain their powers to produce 
and maintain, catalytically, the combustion of various gases and va> 
pours ; and to annex such considerations as appear to be suggested 
by the facts. By catalysis 1 understand the operation of one body 
upon another, under favourable circumstances, whereby the second 
body is resolved into new chemical combinations, while the first 
(whatever may happen during the process) remains finally un- 
changed. This must be taken as not including explosion by per- 
cussion, in which the change takes place owing to the external 
application of dynamic force. 

The apparatus for experimenting comprehends a variety of shal- 
low capsules ; wire-gauze, of iron, copper, and brass, of different de- 
grees of fineness, cut into discs a little larger than the vessels on 
which they are to be superimposed; a spirit-lamp with. large wick; 
a pair of pUers, os^d a few rings of wire to support the gauze, if 
necessary, while lufeting it in the Bj)irit flame. The method of pro- 
cedure is simple : the watch-glass, or capsule, is ftffor/y filled with 



323 


the liquid whose vapour is to be tried; on a wire*gauze disc is 
spread the oxide whose powers as a catalyser are to be tested, and 
this being warmed (more or less) o\rer the lamp, is set down upon 
the upper rim of the capsule. Sometimes it is necessary to heat a 
layer of the oxide in the middle of a small combustion-tube, and 
pass over it the gas, or mixture of gases. 

I tried the following substances with pyroxylic spirit (hydrated 
oxide of methyl) and alcohol separately. 

1. Co.O appeared to possess the power in some degree, but per* 
haps the specimen was in too dense agglomeration, which is not 
essentially reduced by trituration. 

2 . Cojj Ojj maintained the catalytic combustion very well. 

3. Ag.O, reduced to metallic silver, which shows a strong ten- 
dency on gauze, and acts perfectly in the combustion -tube. 

4. Ug 0,j, HO became, at red heat, anhydrous mixture of U O 
and U 3 O 4 , showing strong tendency, A very pure specimen cata- 
lysed the vapour as it changed from yellow to green, after which it 
died away. Will not act below 570° (F.). 

5. Sn.O; strong tendency. 

6 . Sn.O.^; slight tendency, 

7. W.Oy apparently produces the effect if placed while glowing, 
over alcohol, but gradually dies away, as if very slowly cooling. 

8 . Pb^ O 4 changed to Pb , O, and showed a strong tendency, but 
quickly faded and grew cold. 

9. Cd, O, placed while very warm over pyroxylic spirit, burst into 
glow and catalysed, but always died off after the lapse of from half a 
minute to two or three minutes, and then became incapable. 

10 . Ca.O (on the gauze), no effect. 

11 . Si. Oj exhibited a tendency. 

12 . Stourbridge clay ; no effect. 

13. Al^Oji appeared to have no effect in maintaining catalytic 
combustion on the gauze, but when made red-hot and quenched in 
absolute alcohol, it changed from pure white to a black substance 
and oxidized a portion of the alcohol. That this is not owing to 
carbon in the alcohol is evident* because the same change occurs 
when it is quenched in strong liquid ammonia. 1 suspect that it is 
a new oxide of aluminium. 

14 * Kif formed by heating carbonate of nickel nearly to red* 



nees, failed ; prepared from the common nitrate, it acted for a short 
time ; reduced as an intensely black velvety substance from the purest 
nitrate, then warmed but not made red-hot, it glowed and catalysed 
with alcohol or ether. With pyroxylic spirit, it was left at the end 
of the operation of a greenish drab, which I suspect to be a mixture 
of Nij^ O3 with Ni.O, although it may be Ni^Og changed only in ap- 
pearance, for when treated with nitric acid no nickel is dissolved, 

15 . Mn O2 is changed at red heat into MD2O3, which, with alco- 
hol, ether, and pyroxylic spirit, continues the slow combustion very 
steadily. A specimen of very pure Mn^ O3 acted extremely well, as 
did also a portion of ** cuchrome ** (a hydrated sesquioxide of man- 
ganese (impure) dug from the estate of Lord Audley), after being 
heated in the 'air to drive away the carbonaceous matter with which 
it was mingled. Mn^ O3 will, if sufficient care be taken, catalyse 
the moist gaa arising from a strong solution of ammonia. 

16 . Fcg O3, when in the state oSf a light puffy powder, catalyses the 
vapour of ether, alcohol, and pyroxylic spirit, only requiring to be 
heated on the gauze before it is laid over the capsule. It is cheap, 
easily employed, and of invariable action. I have kept up the com- 
bustion for several hours on a surface of 120 square inches. 

By means of a catalytic lamp in which the liquid employed is con- 
tinually supplied from a reservoir and maintained at a constant level 
in the capsule, I have used 7 or 8 square inches continuously during 
thirty. six hours. This lamp I have occasionally used for laboratory 
purposes, where a gentle and equable heat was required for several 
hours. 

Pursuing my experiments wilh the oxides of the metals, heated 
on wire gauze, I tried as many its I could procure or make, and by 
a tolerably wide induction 1 found that the ietquioxides have the 
strongest tendency to produce and maintain the catalytic glow, and 
do produce it in every case in which they are not decomposed by the 
amount of heat required to begin the operation. 

When hydrated Fe2 O3 is heated and placed over alcohol, its colour 
is deepened towards black, but not uniformly, and when cold the 
original colour returns. But if it be made red-hot imd quenched in 
boiling alcohol out of contact with air, it is converted into hydrated 
Fe3 04, and remains permanently a deep block magnetic powder, 
soluble in acids. .A strong solution of ammonia may be substituted 



826 


for tlie alcohol with the same effect, but in this case some of the 
seequioxide will remain unaltered and mixed with the black oxide. 
The alcohol or ammonia is correspondingly changed by oxidation 
derived from the oxygen which has been released from combination 
with the iron. If the hydrated Fcg O4 be heated in contact with air, 
it immediately (even when it has been kept for many mouths) be- 
comes Fbjj O3 by oxidation from the atmosphere, but if heated to red- 
ness in vacuo, it cools unchanged. [Can the black powder of alu- 
mina be AI3 O4, formed in a similar way ?] The process of catalysa- 
tion by Fcg O3 is thus evident ; the heated sesquioxide loses a por« 
tioa of oxygen to the alcohol and becomes Fe^ O^, which is instantly 
reconverted into Fe^ O3 by receiving oxygen from the air, and this 
alternation is constantly going on in every portion of the glowing 
mass. It is not a mere action de presence, but alternate reduction 
and oxidation of the sesquioxide, producing a continuous oxidation 
of the alcohol. 

This suggests a consideration apparently adverse to the atomic 
hypothesis of Dr. Dalton. How can a single compound molecule 
Fe.^ O3 be changed by deoxidation into another compound molecule 
Fe3 04, when, according to theory, there are in it but two combining 
projwtions of iron, whereas the resultant contains three ? and how 
(by deoxidation) can the resultant molecule contain four combining 
proportions of oxygen when the primary contained only three ? We 
can indeed represent to the imagination that three molecules of the 
sesquioxide, acting os if they were one triple molecule, lose one com- 
bining proportion of oxygen, and are converted into two molecules 
of the black oxide ; and conversely, that two molecules of the black 
oxide, acting as if they were one double molecule, combine with one 
atom of oxygen, and are converted into three atoms of sesquioxide. 
The only way to account for this, in accordance with the popular 
atomic theory, seems to be, to assume that the notation for these 
oxides is incorrect, and that 

for FcgOjj we should write Fe^Oi^, 
and for Fe3 O4 we should write Fe^ Og. 

If the current notation be retained, and any law be admitted, in 
virtue of which three molecules of sesquioxide may suffer reduction 
as if they were only one molecule, and divide into two molecules of 
the magnetie oxkte, we might conceive a peculiar structure in the 



826 


Fe 3 O 4 , with a tendency to eeparate again into FeO, Fe^ O 3 ; that it is 
really in combination as Fcj O 4 , but ready to yield to slight causes 
and become FcO, Fe^ O 3 . This would explain Mr. Mercer*s experi* 
meat (quoted by Brande, I. 716, edition 1848) of the chemical union 
of a mechanical mixture of protoxide and peroxide of iron. 

Perhaps the sesquioxides occupy a middle place in the scale of 
effects. Take the case of iron ; we have 

Fe~j-0» pyrophorus, — violent oxidation, 

FeoO;j+NHa-f- 0 » alternate reduction and oxidation » 

Fe + (iB water), reduction. 

To show the last, add ammonia to a solution of FeOg, KO, and 
Fe^ O 3 will be precipitated. 

A mixture of ten parts by weight of powdered chlorate of potassa 
with one part of Fcj O 3 disengages oxygen with extreme facility and 
great economy of heat as compared with the oxides of copper and 
manganese ; and it is the more convenient because n grains of the 
mixture will represent almost exactly n cubic inches of disengaged 
oxygen. 

A state of mechanical division is not absolutely necessary for the 
catalysatlon of some inflammable vapours by Fe^ O 3 ; an old nail, 
entirely transmuted into rust, will perform the operation ; and when 
we consider that in many cases of fermentation, decay and putrefac- 
tion, this oxide may be present, divided or aggregated, while heat is 
evolved, and inflammable gases and vapours are set free, we may 
hereafter be able to trace some instances of ** spontaneous com- 
bustion ” to the catalytic action of the sesquioxides of iron. 


HI. “ Ocular Spectres and Structures as Mutual Exponents.^^ 
By J AMISS Jaoo, A.B. Cantab., M.B. Oxon., Physician to 
the Royal Cornwall Infirmary. Communicated by Pro- 
fessor Stokes, Sec. K.S. Received March 6, 1855. 

The present communication is a revised and modified vemon of a 
paper bearing the same title, wliich was read on the 18th of January 
and Ist of February, and which was, by permission, withdrawn. The 
chief modification applies to the author's views respecting the struc- 



827 


ture of the vitreous body as deduced from entoptical phenomena. He 
is now of opinion that the arborescent system of which he infers the 
existence in that part of the eye (Proceedings, p. 209) does not con- 
sist of tubes hUed with globules or cells, as he at first supposed, but 
of cell-constituted filaments. In a note, dated March 27. 1855. he 
gives the following enunciation of his present views as to the struc- 
ture of the vitreous body : — 

In the vitreous humour are innumerable transparent globules, 
beads or cells, of lees specific gravity than the fluid, extremely 
minute, and of uniform size, which are arranged, without exception, 
in rows to form the threads of a lax. elongated, irregular web. 
springing from the general surface of the cujisule by, commonly, 
exquisitely small meshes, and extending into the interior by others 
of increasing size, so that the innermost part of the web— which lies 
nearer the circumference of the vitreous body than its centre — con- 
sists of comparatively large ones. 

** Whenever the eye rotates, this filamentous peripheral system 
will in its relative (counter) rotation, gradually, though soon, come to 
the end of its tether, and in this interval and when there, act as a 
check upon the relatively rotating fluid ; perpetually reiterating ob- 
struction. above till in the immediate vicinity of the capsule and (by 
the disposition of the threads to float vertically) most effectually in 
the most important or horizontal direction. The middle of the 
vitreous body being free of impediment, relative rotation of the fluid 
expends itself there, whilst a practical concurrence in the ocular ro- 
tation ensues near the capsule. And tlius in the incessant move- 
ments of the eye, head and body, the wall that confines the fluid can 
suffer no severe concussions from eddies in the latter. In other 
words, we have herein a provision that the crystalline lens may not 
be shaken, the circulation in the retinal vessels may nut be deranged, 
and sensations of light may not be ever assailing us from impulses 
of the vitreous fluid, perhaps that the retina may not itself sufl^er 
direct injury therefrom**^ 



328 


IV. An Account of some Experiments made with the Sub- 
marine Cable of the Mediterranean Electric Telegraph.” 
By Charles Wheatstone, E.R.S. Received March 29, 
1855. 

The following results were obtained between May 24 and June 8 
in last year, with the telegraphic cable manufactured by Messrs. 
Kuj;>er and Co. of East Greenwich, for the purpose of being laid 
across the Mediterranean sea, from Spezia on the coast of Italy to 
the island of Corsica. The manufacturers, in conjunction with 
Mr. Thomson the engineer of the undertaking, kindly afforded me 
every facility in carrying on the experiments. The short time that 
elapsed between the opportunity presenting itself and the shipping 
of the cable for its destination, prevented me from determining with 
sudicient accuracy some poirits of importance, respecting which I 
was only able to make preliminary experiments, but the following, 
which 1 was able to effect with the means at hand, may possess 
sufficient interest to be made public. They present perhaps nothing 
theoretically new, but I am not aware that experimental verifications 
of some of these points have been made before. 1 assume that the 
reader is acquainted with the experiments of Dr. Faraday described 
in the Philosophical Magazine, N, S., vol. vii. p. 197. 

The cable was 110 miles in length, and contained six copper wires, 
one- sixteenth of an inch in diameter, each separately insulated in 
a covering of gutta percha one-tenth of an inch in thickness. The 
whole was surrounded by twelve thick iron wires twisted spirally 
around it, forming a complete metallic envelope one -third of an inch 
in thickness. A section of the cable presented the six wires arranged 
in a circle of half an inch diameter, and one-fifth of an inch from the 
internal surface of the iron envelope, 

Tlie cable was coiled in a dry well in the yard, and one of its ends 
was brought into the manufactory. The wires were numbered I, 
2, 3, 4, 5, fi, and the ends in the well w^ere indicated by an accent ; 
the ends 1'2, 2'3, 34, 4'5, 5^6 were connected by supplementary 
wires, so that the electric current might be passed in the same direc- 
tion through all the six wires jpined to a single length, or through 



329 


any lesaer number of them, the connexions being made at pleasure 
in the experimenting room. 

The rheomotor employed was an insulated voltaic battery con- 
sisting of twelve troughs, each of twelve elements, which had been 
several weeks in action. 

First Series. 

The following experiments show that the iron envelope of the com- 
pound conductor gives rise to the same phenomena of induction 
which occur when the insulated wire is immersed in water, as in 
Dr. Faraday’s experiments. 

Ejcp. 1. One end of the entire length, 660 miles, was brought in 
connexion with one of the poles of the battery, the other end re- 
nmining insulated. The wire became charged with negative elec- 
tricity when its end touched the zinc pole, and with positive elec- 
tricity when it communicated with the copper pole. A current, 
indicated by a galvanometer placed near the battery, existed as long 
as the charge was going on, and ceased when it arrived at its maxi- 
mum. [The feeble current attributed to imperfect insulation, which 
continues as long as the contact with the battery remains, is here left 
out of consideration.] When the wire was charged, and the dis- 
charge effected by a wire communicating with the earth, the current 
produced was in the same direction, whether the discharge was made 
near the battery or at the opposite end ; i. c. the current in both 
cases proceeded from the wire to the earth in the same direction. 

Ejpp. 2. On bringing one end of the wire in contact with one of 
the poles of the battery, the other pole having no communication 
with the earth, the wire remained uncharged, A very slight and 
scarcely perceptible tremor was observed in the galvanometer needle 
interposed between the battery and the wire. 

Exp. 3. To each of the poles of the battery was attached a wire 
220 miles in length, and similar galvanometers were interposed be- 
tween the two wires (the remote extremities of which remained in- 
sulated) and the battery. So long as one wire alone was connected 
with the battery no charge was communicated to it, but on connect- 
ing the other wire with the opposite pole both wires were instan- 
taneously charged, as the strong deflection of both needles rendered 
evident. On bringing the free end of one of the wires in communi* 



830 


cation with the earth it alone was discharged, the other wire remain- 
ing fully charged. 

Second Series. 

Exp. 4. One pole of the battery was connected with the earth, 
and the other with ddO miles of wire, which had an earth commu- 
nication at its opposite end ; three galvanometers were interposed 
in the course of the conductor ; the first near the battery, the second 
in the middle of the wire, i. e. 330 miles from each extremity, and 
the third at the remote end near the communication with the earth. 
When the connexion of the battery with the wire was completed, 
the galvanometers were successively acted upon in the order of their 
distances from the battery, as in the experiments recorded by Dr. 
Faraday. When the earth connexion at the remote extremity of th^ 
wire, on the contrary, was completed, the disturbance of equilibrium 
commenced at this end, and tl^e galvanometers successively acted in 
the reverse order, i. e, the galvanometer which was the most distant 
from the battery was the first impelled into motion. In the latter 
case, before the completion of the circuit the needles of the galvano- 
meters had assumed constant deflections to a limited extent, owing 
to a feeble current arising from the uniform dispersion of the static 
electricity along the wire. 

Exp. 5. The two extremities of the 660 miles of wire were brought 
into connexion with the opposite poles of the battery. When one 
of the ends previously disconnected from the battery was united 
therewith, the galvanometers at the extremities of the wire, and con- 
sequently which were at equal distances from the poles of the bat- 
tery, were immediately and simultaneously acted upon, while that 
which was in the middle of the wire was subsequently caused to 
move. When the wire disconnected in the middle instead of near 
one of the poles of the battery was again united, the middle galvano- 
meter, which was the most remote from the battery, was the flrst 
acted upon, and those near the poles subsequently. 

Ulie comparison of the two above-mentioned experiments show 
that the earth must not be regarded simply as a conductor, which 
many suppose to be the cose. Since in the first experiment there were 
not many yards' distance between the two earth terminations, did 
the extent olground between them act only as a conductor, the two 



881 


galvanometers at the extremities of the wire should have acted simul- 
taneously, as in the second experiment, and as would have been the 
case had a short wire united the two extremities which proceeded 
to the earth. 

Third Series, 

Exp, 6. One pole of the battery was connected with the earth, and 
the opposite pole with one extremity of the 660 miles of wire, the 
other end remaining insulated; a delicate galvanometer wasinterposed 
near the battery. Notwithstanding there was no circuit formed, the 
needle showed a constant deflection of 33j°; the feeble current 
thus rendered evident is not so much to be attributed to imperfect 
insulation, as to the uniform and continual dispersion of the static 
electricity with which the wire is charged throughout its entire 
Ifength, in the same manner as would take place in any other 
charged body placed in an insulating medium. The strength of 
the current thus occasioned appears to be nearly, if not exactly, 
proportional to the length of the wire added, as the following table 
will show : the first column indicates the number of miles of w-ire 
subjoined beyond the galvanometer, and the second the correspond- 
ing deflections of the needle : — 


miJes. 

0 

0 

0 


no 6i 


330 

18 

440 

23i 

550 

28 

660 

31 


Exp, 7. One end of the 660 miles of wire was now allowed to 
remain constantly in contact with one of the poles of the battery ; 
but the galvanometer was successively shifted to different distances 
from the battery. The strength of the current was now shown to 
be inversely as the distance of the galvanometer from the battery, 
becoming null at its extremity, as shown in the following tabic. Ibe 
flrat ooluma shows the distance from the battery at which the gal* 
vanometer was placed, and the second column the corresponding 
deflection of the needle. 



382 


mUei* o 

Near the battery 38| 

110 31 

220 25 

830 15 

440 12 

550 5 

660 0 


The deflections of the needle of the galvanometer employed in 
these experiments were, when they did not surpass 36°, very nearly 
comparable with the force of the current. This I ascertained in Uie 
following way. 1 took six cells of the small constant battery de- 
scribed in my paper On new Instruments and Processes for deter- 
mining the Constanta of a Voltaic Circuit/* printed in the Philo- 
sophical Transactions for 1843, and placed in the circuit formed of 
the 660 miles of wire, the ea^th> and the galvanometer, successively 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 cells. Leaving out of consideration the resist- 
ances in tlie cells themselves and in tlie earth, which were very in- 
considerable in comparison with that in the long wire, the force of 
the current should be approximately proportionate to the number 
of the elements ; and since the deflections of the needle nearly indi- 
cated this proportionality, as the following table will show, it may 
be assumed that the force of the current, when the deflection of the 
needle did not suiposs 86°, nearly coiTe8])onded with the angular 
deviation. 


OJU. o 

1 6 

2 14 

8 19 

4 28 

5 32 

6 36 


From the preceding experiments (6. and 7.) it seems to result, 
that whatever length of wire is connected with the battery, if a gal- 
vanometer is placed at the farther extremity of the wire and a con- 
stant length added to the other termination of the galvanometer, its 
indication remains always nearly the same. Thus the galvanometer 
indicated 6i^when it was placed close to the battery and 110 miles 



888 


of wire were subjoined beyond it ; and 5*^ when 550 miles were in* 
terposed between the battery and galyanometer, the same length, 
110 milea> being subjoined. In like manner, when 220 miles were 
added beyond the galvanometer placed near the battery, the indica- 
tion was 12*^ ; precisely the same as when 440 miles were interposed 
and 220 added. So also when 330 miles were added, the deviation 
of the galvanometer was 18® ; and 15° when 330 miles were inter- 
posed and 330 added. I have no doubt that the correspondence 
would have been closer had it not been for the fluctuations of the 
battery. 

It would appear from this, that whatever be the length of wire 
attached to the insulated pole of a battery, it becomes charged to 
the same degree of tension throughout its entire extent; so that 
another insulated wire brought into connexion with its free extre- 
mity exhibits precisely the same phenomena, in kind and measure, 
as when it is brought into immediate connexion with a pole of the 
battery. Some important practical consequences flow from this 
conclusion, which 1 will not develope at present, as I have not yet 
had an opportunity of submitting them to the test of experiment. 


April 19, 1855. 


The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

The Right Hon. Lord Hatherton was admitted into the Society. 

The following communications were read : — 

I. '' On the descent of Glaciers/' By the Rev^ HENay Moseley, 
M.A,, E.R.S., Corresponding Member of the Institute of 
France. Received March 16, 1866. 

If weconpeive two bodies of the same form and dimensions (cubes 
for instance), and of the same material, to be placed upon a uniform 



384 * 


horizontal plane, and connected by a subatance which alternately 
extends and contracts itself, as does a metallic rod when subjected 
to Tariations of temperature, it is evident that by the extension of 
the intervening rod each will be made to recede from the other by 
the same distance, and, by its contraction, to approach it by the 
same distance* But if they be placed on an inclined plane (one 
being lower than the other), then when by the increased temperature 
of the rod its tendency to extend becomes sufficient to push the 
lower of the two bodies downwards, it will not have become suffi* 
cient to push the higher upwards. The effect of its extension will 
therefore be to cause the lower of the two bodies to descend whilst 
the higher remains at rest. The converse of this will result from 
contraction; for when the contractile force becomes sufficient to 
pull the upper body down the plane it will not have become suffi- 
cient to pull the lower up it. Thus, in the contraction of the sub- 
stance which intervenes betvyeen the two bodies, the lower will re- 
main at rest whilst the upper descends. As often, then, as the ex- 
pansion and contraction is repeated the two bodies will descend the 
plane until, step by step, they reach the bottom. 

Suppose the uniform bar AB placed 
on an inclined plane, and subject to ex- 
tension from increase of temperature, a 
portion XB will descend, and the rest XA 
will ascend ; the point X where they sepa- 
rate being determined by the condition 
that the force requisite to push XA up the plane is equal to that 
required to push XB down it. ^ 

Let AX=.r, AB=L, weight of each linear unit ==ii, inclina- 
tion of plane, limiting angle of resistance, 

/. weight of AX, 

«(L— weight of BX. 

Now, the force actipg parallel to an inclined plane which is neces- 
sary to push a weight W up it, is represented by 

+ . 

cos 9 

and that necessary to push it down the plane by 
y «in (»->) . 
cos^ 




335 


coa ^ cos ^ 

4p{8in sin (^— i)}=5L8in (^—*) 

2^ sin ^ cos ts=L sin 

a-=rlL®‘“^ri) 

2 sin ^ cos I 


2 I tanAj 


When contraction takes place the con- Fig. 2. 

verse of the above will be true. The 
separating point X will be such, that the 
force requisite to pull XB up the plane la 
equal to that required to pull AX down 
it. BX is obviously in this case equal to' 

AX in the other. 

Let \ be the elongation per linear unit under any variation of 
temperature; then the distance which the point B (see fig. 1) will 
be made to descend by this elongation 
=X.BX 
=\(L-jr) 


If we conceive tlie bar now to return to its former temi>erature, 
contracting by the same amount (X) per linear unit ; then the point 
B (fig. 2) will by this contraction be made to ascend through the 
space ^ 


BX X='E\ 


iLxh-^] . 

2 I tan it J 


Total descent / of B by elongation and contraction is therefore 
determined by the equation 

lizihK^Si ( 2 ) 

tan^ 

To determine the pressure upon a nail. 
driven through the rod at any point P 
fastening it to the plane. 

It is evident that in the act of exten- 
sion the part BP of the rod will descend 
the plane and tlie part AP ascend; and 

vox.. VII, 2 t 





886 


conversely in the act of contraction ; and that in the former case 
the nfldl B will sustain a pressure upwards equal to that necessary 
to cause BP to descend, and a pressure downwards equal to that 
necessary to cause PA to ascend ; so that, assuming the pressure to 
be downwards, and adopting the same notation as before, except 
that AP is represented by p, AB by a, and the pressure upon the 
nail (assumed to be downwards) by P, we have in the case of ex- 
tension 


P=„/i!Lfchi) 


cos ^ 


cos^ 


and in the case of contraction 


-up 

COS f cos ^ 

Reducing, these formulas become respectively 

pss 2p sin (b cos i— c sin ((& --i) > 
CO8 0 L J 

P= |a sin (^-fi) — 2p sin ^ cost } 


. . ( 3 ) 

. . (4) 


My attention was first draw^n to the influence of variations in 
temperature to cause the descent of a lamina of metal resting on an 
inclined plane, by observing, in the autumn of 1853, that a portion 
of the lead which covers the south side of the choir of the Bristol 
Cathedral, which had been renewed in tlje year 1851, but had not 
been properly fastened to the ridge befttn, had descended bodily 
1 8 inches into the gutter ; so that if plates of lead had not been in- 
serted at the top, a strip of the roof of that length would have been 
left exposed to the weather. The sheet of lead which had so de- 
scended measured, from the ridge to the gutter, 13 feet 4 inches 
and along the ridge 60 feet. The descent had been continually 
going on, from the time the lead had been laid down. An attempt 
made to stop it by driving noils through it into the rafters had failed. 
The force by which the lead had been made to descend, whatever it 
was, had been found sufficient to draw the nails As^the pitch of 


• The evfl was remedied by placiag a beam across the rafters near the ridge, 
and doubling the sheets round it, and dxing their ends with spike nails. 



887 


the roof was only 1 6|^i it was sufliciently evident that the weight of 
the lead alone could not have caused it to descend. Sheet lead, 
whose surface is in the state of that used in roohng, will stand firmly 
upon a surface of planed deal when inclined at an angle of 30^*, if 
no other force than its weight tends to cause it to descend, llie 
considerations which I have stated in the preceding articles led me 
to the conclusion that the daily variations in the temperature of the 
lead, exposed as it was to the action of the sun by its southern 
aspect, could not but cause it to descend considerably, and the only 
question which remained on my mind was, whether this descent 
could be so great as was observed. To determine this I took the 
following data ; — 

Mean daily variation of temperature at Bristol in the month of 
August, assumed to be the same as at Leith (Kaeratz, Meteorology, 
by Walker, p. 18), Cent. 

Linear expansion of lead through 100® Cent. *0028436. 

Length of sheets of lead forming the roof from the ridge to the 
gutter 232 inches. 

Inclination of roof 16® 32^ 

Limiting angle of resistance between sheet lend and deal 30®. 

Whence the mean daily descent of the lead, in inches, in the 
month of August, is determined by equation (2) to be 

/=232 X X -0028436 X 

100 ton 80" 

/= *027848 inches. 

The average doily delcent gives for the whole month of August a 
descent of *863288. If the average daily variation of temperature 
of the month of August had continued throughout the year, the 
lead would have descended 10*19148 inches every year. And in the 

* Thii may ca«Uy be verified. I give it as the result of a rough experiment of 

my own. 1 am not acquainted with any experiments on the firiction of lead made 
with sufficient care to be received as authority in this matter. Tim friction of 
copper on oak has, however, been determined by General Morin to be 0 C2, and its 
limiting angle of resistance Si** 48'{ so that if the roof of Bristol Cathedral had 
been inclined at 31* instead of 16*, and had been covered with sheets of copper 
resting on oak boards, instead of sheets of lead resting on deal, the sheeting 
would not have slipped by its weight only. 


2l2 



338 


two yeara fiom 1851 to 1853 it would have descended 20*582!96 
inches. But the daily variations of uttnospheric temperature are less 
in the other months of the year than in the month of August. For 
this reason, therefore, the calculation is in excess. F'or the following 
reasons it is in defect Ist, the daily variations in the temperature 
of the lead cannot but have been greater than those of the surround- 
ing atmosphere. It must have been heated above the surrounding 
atmosphere by radiation from the sun in the day-time, and cooled 
below it by radiation into space at night, Sndly. One variation of 
tempcratm e only has been assumed to take place every twenty -four 
hours, viz. that from the extreme heat of the day to the extreme 
cold of the night ; whereas such variations are notoriously of con- 
stant occurrence during the twenty -four hours. Each cannot but 
have caused a corresponding descent of the lead, and their aggregate 
result cannot but have been greater than if the temperature had 
passed uniformly (without oscillations backwards and forwards) from 
one extreme to the other. 

I'kese considerations show, I think, that the causes I have 
assigned are sufficient to account for the fact observed. They sug- 
gest, moreover, the possibility that results of importance in meteor- 
ology may be obtained from observing with accuracy the descent of 
a metallic rod thus placed upon an iu61ined plane. I’hat descent 
would be a measure of the aggregate of the changes of temperature 
to which the metal was subjected during the time of observation. 
As every such change of temperature is associated with a corre- 
sponding development of mechanical action under the form of work^, 
it would be a measure of the aggregate of such changes and of the 
work so developed during that period ; and relations might be found 
between measurements so taken in different equal periods of times, 
successive years for instance, tending to the development of new 
meteorological laws. 

I’he following ore the results of recent experiments f on the 
expansion of ice : — 

♦ Mr, Joule hiw sln^wn (Phil. Tnins. 1850, Part I.) that the quantity of heat 
capable of raising a pound of water by 1*^ Fahr. requires for its evolution 772 units 
of work. 

t Vide Archiv f. Wissenchaftl Kuude r. Kussland, Bd. vii. S. 333, 



389 


Linear expansion of ice for an interval of 100® of the Centigrade 
thermometer. 

0*00524, Schumacher. 

0 00513, Johrt. 

0*00518, Moritz.. 

Ice, therefore, has nearly twice the expansibility of lead, so that a 
sheet of ice would, under similar circumstances, have descended a 
plane similarly inclined, twice the distance that the sheet of lead 
referred to in the preceding article descended. Glaciers are, on an 
increased scale, sheets of ice placed upon the slopes of mountuius, 
and subjected to atmospheric variations of temperature throughout 
their masses by variations in the quantity and the temperature of 
the water, which flowing from the surface everywhere percolates 
them. That they must from this cause descend into the valleys is 
tlierefore certain. I'hat portion of the Mer de Glace of Chumouni 
which extends from Montanvert to very near the origin of the Glacier 
de L<Schaud, has been accurately observed by Professor James Forbes*. 
Its length is 22,600 feet, and its inclination varies from 4° 19' 22" 
to 5® 5' 63". The Glacier du Geant, from the Tiicul to the Col du 
Geant, Professor Forbes estimates (but not from his own observa- 
tions, or with the same certainty) to be 24,700 feet in length, and 
to have a mean inclination of 8® 46' 40". 

According to the observations of Dc Saussure, the mean daily 
range of Reaumur’s thermometer in the month of July, at the Col 
du G^ant, is 4®*257t, and at Chamouni 10®*092. The resistance 
opposed by the rugged channel of a glacier to its descent cannot but 
be different at different points and in respect to different glaciers. 
The following passage from Professor Forbes’s work contains the 
most authentic information I am able to Arid on this subject. 
Speaking of the Glacier of la Brenva, he says, ** The ice removed, 
a layer of fine mud covered the rock, not composed however alone 
of the clayey limestone mud, but of sharp sand derived from the 
granitic moraines of the glacier, and brought down with it from 
the opposite side of the valley. Upon examining the face of the 
ice removed from contact with the rock, we found it set all over 

* Travels through the Alp* of Savoy. Edmburghi 1843, 

t Quoted hy Prothteor Forbes, p. 231. 



340 


with ftharp angular fragments, from the size of grains of sand to 
that of a cherry, or larger, of the same species of rock, and 
which were so firmly fixed in the ice as to demonstrate the impossi- 
bility of such a surface being forcibly urged forwards without saw- 
ing and tearing any comparatively soft body which might be below it. 
Accordingly, it was not difiicult to discover in the limestone the very 
grooves and scratches which were in the act of being made at the 
time by the pressure of the ice and its contained fragments of stone.” 
(Alps of the Savoy, pp, 203-4.) It is not difficult from this descrip- 
tion to account for the fact that small glaciers arc sometimes seen to 
lie on a slope of 30° (p. 35). The most probable supposition would 
indeed fix the limiting angle of resistance between the rock and the 
under surface of the ice, set all over, as it is described to be, with 
particles of sand and small fragments of stone, at about 30°, that 
being nearly the slope at which calcareous stones will rest on one 
another. If we take then 30° to be the limiting angle of resistance 
between the under surface of the Mer de Glace and the rock on 
which it rests, and if we assume the same mean daily variation of 
temperature (4'257 Reaumur, or 5*321 Centigrade) to obtain through- 
out the length of the Glacier du G&nt, which De Saussure observed 
in July at the Col du G^ant j if, furtiier, we take the linear expan- 
sion of ice at 100° Centigrade to be that (*00524) which was deter- 
mined by the experiments of Schumacher ; and, lastly, if we assume 
the Glacier du Qdant to descend as it would if its descent were un- 
opposed by its confiuence with the Glacier de L^chaud, we shall ob- 
tain, by substitution in equation (2) for the mean daily descent of 
the Glacier du G&nt at the Tacul, the formula — 


l- 24700 X 5-321 X x 

lOo tan 30° 

1=1 -8395 feet. 

The actual descent of the glacier in the centre was 1*6 foot. If the 
Glacier de L^chaud descended at a mean slope of 5°, singly in a 
sheet of uniform breadth to Montanvert without receiving the tri- 
butary glacier of the TalMre, or uniting with the Glacier du G^ont, 
its diurnal descent would be given by the same formula, and would 
be found to be *95487 foot. Reasoning similarly with reference to 
the Glacier du G^ant, supposing it to have continued its course singly 
from the Col du Gdant to Montanvert without confluence with the 



341 


Glacier de L^haud» its length being 4Ui420 feet, and its mean incli- 
nation 6° 53^ its mean diurnal motion / at Montanvert would, by 
formula (2) have been 2*3364 feet*. The actual mean daily mo- 
tion of the united glaciers, between the let and the 28th July, was 
Montanvert (Forbes's * Alps of tlie Savoy,’ p, 140), — 


Near the side of the glacier 1*441 foot. 

Between the side and the centre . . T750 foot. 
Near the centre 2*141 feet. 


llie motion of the Glacier de Lechaut was therefore accelerated by 
their confluence, and that of the Glacier du G(!ant retarded. The 
former is dragged down by the latter. 

1 have had the less hesitation in oflering this solution of the me- 
chanical problem of the motion of glaciers, as those hitherto pro- 
posed are confessedly imperfect, lliat of De Saussure, which attri- 
butes the descent of the glacier simply to its weight, is contradicted 
by the fact that isolated fragments of the glacier stand firtnly on 
the slope on which the whole nevertheless descends j it being ob- 
vious that if the parts would remain at rest separately on the bed of 
the glacier, they would also remain at rest when united. 

That of Professor J. Forbes, which supposes a viscous or semi- 
fluid structure of the glacier, is not consistent with the fact that no 
viscosity is to be traced in its parts when separated. They appear 
as solid fragments, and they cannot acquire in their union proper- 
ties in this respect which individually they have not. 

Lastly, the theory of Charpentier, which attributes the descent of 
the glacier to the daily congelation of the water which percolates it, 
and the expansion of its mass conseqiieut thereon, whilst it assigns 
a cause which, so far as it operates, cannot, «s 1 have shown, but 
cause the glacier to descend, appears to assign one inadequate to the 
result ; for the congelation of the water which percolates the glacier 
does not, according to the observations of Professor Forbes f. take 
place at all in summer more than a few inches from the surface. 
Nevertheless it is in the summer that the daily motion of the glacier 
is the greatest. 

* Or the 1st of July, the osatre of the setusl motion of the Mer de Glace at 
Montanvert wa« 2*23 feet, 
t TmveU in tho Alps. 



842 


llie following remarkable experiment of Mr. Hopkins of Cam- 
bridge which is considered by him to be confirmatory of the sliding 
theory of De Saussure as opposed to De Charpentier’s dilatation 
theory, receives a ready explanation on the principles which I have 
laid down in this note. It is indeed a necessary result of them. 
** Mr. Hopkins placed a mass of rough ice, confined by a square 
frame or bottomless box, upon a roughly chiselled flag stone, which 
he then inclined at a small angle, and found that a slow but uni- 
form motion was produced, when even it was placed at an incon- 
siderable slope.'' This motion, which Mr. Hopkins attributed to 
the dissolution of the ice in contact with the stone, would, I appre- 
hend, have taken place if the mass had been of lead instead of ice ; 
and it would have been but about half as fasti because the linear 
expansion of lead is only about half that of ice. 


IL Reply of the President and Council of the Royal Society 
to an application from the Lords of the Committee of Privy 
Council for Trade, on the subject of Marine Meteorological 
Observations.^' 

[This Letter was communicated to the Society in pursuance of a 
resolution of the Council. The Secretary explained that it had been 
drawn up by the Treasurer, Colonel Sabine, and submitted, before 
final adoption by the Council, to several Fellows of the Society spe- 
cially conversant with the subjects to which it refers.} 

Royal Society, Somerset House, 
February 22, 1856, 

Six, — In the month of June last, the Lords of the Committee of 
the Privy Council for Trade caused a letter to be addressed to the 
President and Council of the Royal Society, acquainting them that 
their Lordships were about to submit to Parliament an estimate for 
an Office for the Discussion of the Observations on Meteorology, to 

* I have quoted the above account of it from Professor Forbes’s book, p. 419. 



843 


be made at sea m all parts of the globe, ia conformity with the re- 
commendation of a conference held at BrusBels in 1853; and that 
they were about to construct a set of forms for the use of that 
Office, in which they proposed to publish from time to time and to 
circulate such statistical results obtained by means of the observa- 
tions referred to, as might be considered most desirable by men 
learned in the science of Meteorology, in addition to such other in- 
formation as might be required for the purposes of Navigation. 

Before doing so, however, their Lordships were desirous of having 
the opinion of the Iloyal Society, as to what were the great desU 
derata in Meteorological science ; and as to the forms which may 
be best calculated to exhibit the great atmospheric laws which it 
may be most desirable to develope. 

Their Lordships further state, that as it may possibly happen that 
observations on land upon an extended scale may hereafter be made 
and discussed in the same Office, it is desirable that the reply of 
the Royal Society should keep in view, and provide for such a con- 
tingency. 

Deeply impressed with a sense of the magnitude and importance 
of the work which has been thus undertaken by Her Majesty's 
Government and confided to the Board of Trade, and fully appre- 
ciating the honour of being consulted, and the responsibility of the 
reply which they are called upon to make considering also that 
by including the contingency of land observations, the inquiry is, in 
fact, co-extensive with the requirements of Meteorology over all 
accessible parts of the earth's surface,— the President and Council 
of the Royal Society deemed it advisable, before making their reply, 
to obtain the opinion of those amongst their foreign members who 
are known as distinguished cultivators of Meteorological science, as 
well as of others in foreign countries, who either bold offices con- 
nected with the advancement of Meteorology, or have otherwise 
devoted themselves to this branch of science. 

A circular was accordingly addressed to several gentlemen whose 
names were transmitted to the Board of Trade in June last, con- 
taining a copy of the communication from the Board of Trade, mad 
a request to be favoured with any suggestions which might aid Her 
Mjyesty's Government in an undertaking which was obviously one of 
general concernment. 



344 


Replies in some degree of detail have been received from five of 
these gentlemen copies of wliich are herewith transmitted. 

The President and Council are glad to avail themselves of this 
o|>](IN>rtunity of expressing tlioir acknowledgements to these gentle* 
men, and more particularly to Professor Dove, Director of the Me- 
teorological Establishments and Institutions in Prussia, whose zeal 
for the advancement of Meteorology induced him to repair personally 
to England, and to join himself to the Committee by whom the 
present reply has been prepared. Those who are most familiar with 
the labours and writings of this eminent meteorologist will best be 
able to appreciate the value of his co-operation. 

The President and Council have considered it as the most con- 
venient course to divide their reply under the different heads into 
which the subject naturally branches. But before they proceed to 
treat of these, they wish to remark generally, that one of the chief 
impediments to the advanceiiient of Meteorology consists in the very 
slow progress which is made in the transmission from one country to 
another of the observations and discussions on which, under the 
fostering aid of different Governments, so much labour is bestowed in 
Europe and America ; and they would therefore recommend that 
such steps as may appear desirable should be taken by Her Majesty's 
Government, to promote and facilitate the mutual interchange of 
Meteorological publications emanating from the Governments of 
different countries. 


Barometer. 

It is known that considerable differences, apparently of a perma- 
nent character, are found to exist in the mean barometric pressure 
in different places ; and that the periodical variations in the pressure 
in different months and seasons at the same place, are very different 
in different parts of the globe, both as respects period and amount ; 
insomuch that in extreme cases, the varia^ons have even opposite 
features in regard to period, in places situated in the same hemi- 
sphere and at equal distances from the equator. 

For the purpose of extending our knowledge of the ^ts of these 
departures from tjie state of equilibrium, and of more fully investi^ 

* !>r, Knoan of Berlin; Dr. Hels of Munster; Prof. KreU of Visxuui} Lieut. 
Maxury of 'WasMngton $ and M. Quetelet of Brossela. 



345 


gating the causes thereof, it is desirable to obtain, by means of 
barometric observations strictly comparable with each other, and 
extending over all parts of the globe accessible by land or sea, 
tables, showing the mean barometric pressure t» the year, ta each 
month of the year, and in the four meteorological seasons, — on land, 
at all stations of observation, — and at sea, corresponding to the 
middle points of spaces bounded by geographical latitudes and longi^ 
tudes, not far distant from each other. 

The manner of forming such tables from the marine observations 
which are now proposed to be made, by collecting together observa- 
tions of the same month in separate ledgers, each of which should 
correspond to a geographical space comprised between specified 
meridians and parallels, and to a particular month, is t6o obvious 
to require to be further dwelt upon. The distances apart of the 
meridians and parallels will require to be varied in different ports 
of the globe, so that the magnitudes of the spaces which they 
enclose, and for each of which a table will be formed, may be 
more circumscribed, when the rapidity of the variation of the par- 
ticular phenomenon to be elucidated is greatest in regard to 
geographical space. Their magnitude will also necessarily vary 
with the number of observations which it may be possible to collect 
in each space, inasmuch as it is well known that there are extensive 
portions of the ocean which are scarcely ever traversed by ships, 
whilst other portions may be viewed as the highways of a constant 
traffic. 

The strict comparability of observations made in different ships 
may perhaps be best assured, by limiting tlie examination of the 
instruments to comparisons which it is proposed to make at the Kew 
Observatory, before and after their employment in particular ships. 
From the nature of their construction, the barometers with which 
Her Majesty's navy and the mercantile marine are to be supplied 
are not very liable to derangement, except from such accidents as 
would destroy them altogether. Under present arrangements they 
will all be carefully compared at Kew before they are sent to the 
Admiralty or to the Board of Trade ! and similar arrangements may 
easily be made by which they may be returned to Kew for re-examina* 
tlon at the expiration of each tour of service. The comparison of 
barometers when embarked and in use, with standards, or supposed 



840 


standardSf at ports which the vessels may visit, entails many incon- 
veniences, and is in many respects a far less satisfactory method. 
The limitation here recommended is not, however, to be understood 
as applicable in the case of other establishments than Kew, where 
a special provision may be made for an equally careful and correct 
examination. 

At land stations, in addition to proper measures to assure the 
correctness of the barometer and consequent comparability of the 
observations, care should be taken to ascertain by the best possible 
means (independently of the barometer itself), the height of the 
station above the level of the sea at some stated locality. For this 
purpose the extension of levels for the construction of railroads will 
often afford facilities. 

It may be desirable to indicate some of the localities where the 
data, which tables such as f^hose which have been 8})oken of would 
exhibit, are required for the solution of problems of immediate 
interest* 

It is known, that, over the Atlantic Ocean, a low mean 
annual pressure exists near the equator, and a high pressure at the 
north and south borders of the torrid zone (23® to 30® north and 
south latitudes) ; and it is probable that from similar causes similar 
phenomena exist over the corresponding latitudes in the Pacific 
Ocean : the few observations which we possess are in accord with 
this supposition ; but the extent of space covered by the Pacific is 
large and the observations are few ; they may be expected to be 
greatly increased by the means now contemplated. But it is parti- 
cularly over the Indian Ocean, both at the equator and at tlie 
borders of the torrid zone, that the phenomena of the barometric 
pressure, not only annual but also monthly, require elucidation by 
observations. The Trade-winds, which would prevail generally 
round the globe if it were wholly covered by a surface of water, arc 
interrupted by the large continental spaces in Asia and Australia, 
and give place to the phenomena of monsoons, which are the indi- 
rect results of the heating action of the sun's rays on those conti- 
nental spaces. These are the causes of that displacement of the 
trade-winds, and substitution of a current flowing in another direc- 
tion, which occasion the atmospbeiic phenomena over the Indian 
.Ocean, and on the north and south sides of that Ocean, to be 



347 


different from those in corresponding localities over, and on either 
side of the equator In the Atlantic Ocean, and (probably generally 
also) in the Pacific Ocean. 

It is important alike to navigation and to general science to know 
the limits where the phenomena of the trade-winds give place to 
those of the monsoons ; and whether any and what variations take 
place in those limits in different parts of the year. The burometric 
variations are intimately connected with the causes of these variations^ 
and require to be known for their more perfect elucidation. 

The importance, indeed, of a full and complete knowledge of the 
variations which take place in the limits of the trade-winds gene- 
rally in both hemispheres, at different seasons of the year, has 
long been recognized. On this account, although the present 
section is headed “ Barometer,” it may be well to remark here, that 
it is desirable that the forms supplied to ships should contain 
headings, calling forth a sjiecial record of the latitude and longitude 
where the trade wind is first met with, and where it is first found 
to fail. 

4°. The great extent of continental space in Northern Asia 
causes, by reason of the great heat of the summer and the ascending 
current produced thereby, a remarkable diminution of atmospheric 
pressure in the summer months, extending in the north to the Polar 
Sea, and on the European side as fur as Moscow. Towards the 
east it is known to include the coasts of China and Japan, but the 
extent of this great diminution of summer pressure beyond the 
coasts thus named is not known. A determination of the monthly 
variation of the [iressure over the adjacent parts of the Pacific Ocean 
is therefore a desideratum ; and for the same object it is desirable 
to have a more accurate knowledge than we now possess of the pre- 
vailing direction of the m ind in different seasons in the vicinity of 
the coasts of China and Japan. 

With reference to regions or districts of increased or dimi- 
nished mean annual pressure, it is known that in certain districts in 
the tetnperate and polar zones, such as in the vicinity of Cape Horn 
extending into the antarctic polar Ocean, and in the vicinity of Ice- 
land, the mean annual barometric pressure is considerably less than 
the average pressure on the surface of the globe generally; and tEat 
anomalous differences, also of considerable amount, exist in the 



848 


mean annual pressure in different parts of the arctic ocean. These 
all require special attention, a^ith a view to obtain a more perfect 
knowledge of the facts, in regard to their amootit, geographical 
extension, and variation with the change of seasons, as well as to 
the elucidation of their causes. 

Dry Air and Aqueous Vapour, 

The apparently anomalous variations which have been noticed to 
exist in the mean annual barometric pressure, and in its distribution 
in the different seasons and months of the year, are also found to exist 
in each of the two coustituent pressures which conjointly constitute 
the barometric pressure* In order to study the problems connected 
with these departures from a state of equilibrium under their most 
simple forms, — and generally for the true understanding of almost all 
the great laws of atmospheric change, — it is necessary to have a 
separate knowledge of the two constituents (viz. the pressures of 
the dry air and of the aqueous vapour) which we are accustomed to 
measure together by the barometer. This separate knowledge is 
obtained by means of the hygrometer, which determines tlie elasti- 
city of the vapour, and leads to the determination of that of 
the dry air, by enabling us to deduct the elasticity of the vapour 
from that of the whole barometric pressure. It is therefore 
extremely desirable that tables, similar to those recommended under 
tlie preceding head of the barometer, should be formed at every 
land station, and over the ocean at the centres of geographical spaces 
bounded by certain values of latitude and longitude, for the annual, 
and scaaon pressures, — 1, Of the aqueous vapour; and 
2, Of the dry air; each considered separately. Each of the said 
geographical spaces will require its ajjpropriatc ledger for each of 
the twelve months. 

It may be desirable to notice one or two of the problems con- 
nected with extensive and important atmospherical laws which may 
be materially assisted by such tables. 

IK By the operation of causes which are too well-known to re- 
quire explanation here, the dry air should always have a minimum 
pressure in the hottest months of the year* But we know that 
there are places where the contrary prevails* namely , that the pres- 
sure of the dry air is greater in summer than in winter. We also 



849 


know that when camparison is made between places in the same 
latitude, and having the same, or very nearly the same, differences of 
temperature in summer and in winter, the differences between the 
summer and winter pressures of the dry air are found to be subject 
to many remarkable anomalies. The variations in the pressure of 
the dry air do not therefore, as might be at first imagined, depend 
altogether on the differences between the summer and winter tem- 
peratures at the places where the variations themselves occur. The 
increased pressure in the hottest months appears rather to point to 
the existence of an overflow of air in the higher regions of the 
atmosphere from lateral eourceB \ the statical pressure at the base 
of the column being increased by the augmentation of the super- 
incumbent mass of air arising from an influx in the upper portion. 
Such lateral sources may well be supposed to be due to excessive 
ascensional currents caused by excessive summer heats in certain 
places of the globe (as, for example, in Central Asia). Now the 
lateral overflow from such sources, traversing in the shape of cur- 
rents the higher regions of the atmosphere, and encountering the 
well-known general current flowing from the equator towards the 
pole, has been recently assigned with considerable probability (de- 
rived from its correspondence with many otherwise anomalous 
phenomena already known, and which all receive an explanation 
from such supposition) to be the original source or primary cause 
of the rotating storms or cyclones, so well known in the West Indies 
and in China under the names of hurricanes and typhoons. A 
single illustration may be desirable. Let it be supposed that such 
an excessive ascensional current exists over the greatly heated parts 
of Asia and Africa in the northern tropical zone, — giving rise, in 
the continuation of the same zone over the Atlantic Ocean, to a 
lateral current in the upper regions ; this would then be a current 
prevailing in those regions from east to west: and it would encounter 
over the Atlantic Ocean the well-known ui^>er current proceeding 
from the equator towards the pole, which is a current from the 
south-west. An easterly current impinging on a south-west cunent 
may give rise, by well-known laws, to a rotatory motion in the atmo- 
sphere, of which the direction may be the same as that which cha- 
racterises the cyclones of the northern hemisphere. To test the 
accuracy of this explanation, we desire to be acquainted with the 



850 


variatioas which the m&an pressure o/ the dry air undergoes in the 
different seasons in the part of tiie globe, where, according to this 
explanation, considerable variations having particular characters 
ought to be found. 

2^, We have named one of the exjdanations which have been 
recently offered of the primary cause of the northern cyclones. 
Another mode of explanation has been proposed, by assuming the 
condensation of large quantities of vapour, and the consequent 
influx of air to supply the place. In such case the phenomena are 
to be tested in considerable measure by the variations which the 
other constituent of the barometric j)res8ure, namely, the aqueous 
vapour t undergoes. 

3^, The surface of sea in the southern hemisphere much exceeds 
that in the northern hemisphere. It is therefore probable that at 
the season when the sun is over the southern hemisphere, evapora- 
tion over the whole surface of the globe is more considerable than 
in the opposite season when the sun is over the northern hemi- 
sphere. Supposing the pressure of the dry air to be a constant, 
the difference of evaporation in the two seasons may thus produce 
for the whole globe an annual barometric variation » the aggre- 
gate barometric pressure over the whole surface being highest 
during the northern winter. The separation of the barometric 
pressure into its two constituent pressures would give direct and 
conclusive evidence of the cause to which such a barometric 
variation should be ascribed. It would also follow, that evapo- 
ration being greatest in the south, and condensation greatest in 
the north, the water which proceeds from south to north in a state 
of vapour, would have to return to the south in a liquid state, and 
might possibly exert some discernible influence on the currents of 
the ocean. The tests by which the truth of the suppositions thus 
advanced may be determined, are the variations of the meteor- 
ological elements in difFerent seasons and months, determined by 
methods and instruments strictly comparable with each other, and 
arranged in such tables as have been suggested. A still more 
direct test would indeed be furnished by the fact (if it could be 
ascertained), that the quantity of rain which falls in the northern is 
greater than that which falls in the southern hemisphere ; and by 
examining its distribution into the different months and seasons 



861 


of its occurrence. Data for such conclusions are as yet very insuf- 
ficient ; they should always, however, form a part of the record at 
all land stations where registers are kept. 

In order that all observations of the elasticity of the aqueous 
vapour may be strictly comparable, it is desirable that all should be 
computed by the same tables ; those founded upon the experiments 
of MM. Regnault and Magnus may be most suitably recommended 
for this purpose, not only on their general merits, but also as being 
likely to be most generally adopted by observers in other coun- 
tries. 

7'emperature of the Air. 

Tables of the mean temperature of the air in the year, and in the 
different months and seasons of the year, at above 1000 stations on 
the globe, have recently been computed by Professor Dove, and 
published under the auspices of the Royal Academy of Sciences 
at Berfin. This work, — which is a true model of the method in 
which a great body of meteorological facts, collected by different 
observers and at different times, should be brought together and 
coordinated, — has conducted, as is well known, to conclusions of 
very considerable importance in their bearing on climatology, and 
on the general laws of the distribution of heat on the surface of the 
globe. These tables have, however, been formed exclusively from 
observations made on land. For the completion of this great 
work of physical geography, there is yet wanting a similar investi- 
gation for the oceanic portion ; and this we may hopefully anticipate 
as likely to be now accomplished by means of the marine observa- 
tions about to be undertaken. In the case of the temperature of 
the air, as in that of the atmospheric pressure previously adverted 
to, the centres of geographical spaces bounded by certain latitudes and 
longitudes will form points of concentration for observations, which 
may be made within those spaces, not only by the same but also by^ 
different ships ; provided that the system be steadily maintained of 
employing only instruments which shall have been examined, and 
their intercomparability ascertained, by a competent and responsible 
Authority ; — ^and provided that no observations be used bttt thSose in 
which careful attention shall have been given to the preoautiohs 
which it will be necessary to adopt, for the purpose of obtiihihg the 
correct knowledge of the temperature of the external air, amidst the 
vot. VII, , 2 M 



852 


many disturbing influences from heat and moisture so difficult to 
escape on board ship. In this respect additional precautions must 
be used if night obstervatiom are to be required, since the ordinary 
difficulties are necessarily much enhanced by the employment of arti- 
ficial light. Amongst the instructions which will be required, perhaps 
there will be none which will need to be more carefully drawn, than 
those for obtaining the correct temperature of the external air under 
the continually varying circumstances that j>rescnt themselves on 
board ship. 

In regard to land stations. Professor Dove's tables have shown that 
data are still pressingly required from the British North American 
possessions intermediate between the stations of theArcticExpeditioris 
and those of the United States; and that the deficiency extends 
across the whole North American Continent in those latitudes from 
the Atlantic to the Pacific. Professor Dove has also indicated as 
desiderata, observations af< the British Military stations in the 
Mediterranean (Gibraltar, Malta and Corfu), and iu*ound the Coasts 
of Australia and New Zealand : also that hourlg observations, 
continued for at least one year, are particularly required at some 
one station in the West Indies, to supply tlie diurnal corrections for 
existing observations. 

Whilst the study of the distribution of heat at the surface of the 
globe has thus been making progress, in respect to the mean annml 
temperature in different places, and to its periodical variations in 
different parts of the year at the same place, the attention of phy- 
sical geographers has recently been directed (and with great promise 
of important results to the material interests of men as well as to 
general science), to the causes of those fluctuations in the tempera- 
ture, or departures from its mean or normal state at the same place 
and at the same period of the year, which have received the name 
non-periodic variations.” It is known that these frequently 
ailect extensive portions of the globe at the same time ; and are 
generally, if not always, accompanied by a fluctuation of an opposite 
character, prevailing at the same time iu some adjoining but distant 
region; so that by the comparison of synchronous observations a 
progression is traceable, from a locality of maximum increased heat 
in one region, to one of maximum diminished heat in another 
region. For the elucidation of the non-periodic variatians even 



353 


monthly means are insufficient; and the necessity has been felt 
of computing the mean temperatures for periods of much shorter 
duration. The Meteorological Institutions of those of the European 
States which have token the foremost part in the prosecution of 
meteorology, have in consequence adopted Jive-daij means, as the 
most suitable intermediate gradation between daily and monthly 
means : and as an evidence of the conviction which is entertained 
of the value of the conclusions to which this investigation is likely 
to lead, it has been considered worth while to undertake the pro- 
digious labour of calculating the five-day means of the most reliable 
existing observations during a century past. This work is already 
far advanced ; and it cannot be too strongly recommended, that at 
all fixed stations, where observations shall hereafter be made with 
sufficient care to be worth recording, five-day means may invariably 
be added to the daily, monthly, and annual means into which the 
observations are usually collected. The five-day means should always 
commence with January I, for the purpose of preserving the uni- 
formity at different stations, which is essential for comparison ; in 
leap years, the period which includes the 29th of February will be 
of six days. 

In treating climatology as a science, it is desirable that some 
correct and convenient mode should be adopted, for computing and 
expressing the comparative variability to which the temperature in 
different parts of the globe, and in different parts of the year in the 
same place, is subject from non-periodic causes. The probable 
variability, computed on the same principle as the probable error of 
each of a number of independent observations, has recently been 
suggested os furnishing an index of the probable daily non-periodic 
variation ** at the different seasons of the year ; and its use in this 
respect has been exemplified by calculations of the ** index from 
the five-day means of twelve years of observations at Toronto, jn 
Canada (Phil, Trans. 1853, Art. V.). An index of this description 
is of course of absolute and general application ; supplying the 
means of comparing the probable variability of the temperature in 
different seasong at different places (where the same method of com- 
putation is adopted) as well as at the same place. It is desirable that 
this (or some preferable method if such can be devised for ob- 
taining the same object) should be adopted by those who may desire 

2 M 2 



354 


to make their observations practically useful for sanitary or agri* 
cultural purposes, or for any of the great variety of objects for which 
climatic peculiarities are required to be known. Having these three 
data, viz, the mean annual temperature, — ^its periodical changes in 
respect to days, months, and seasons, — and the measure of its 
liability to non-periodic (or what would commonly be called, irre- 
gular) variations, — we may consider that we possess as complete a 
representation of the climate of any particular place (so far as 
temperature is concerned), as the present state of our knowledge 
permits. 

It is obvious that much of what has been said under this article 
is more applicable to land than to sea observations ; but the letter 
of the Board of Trade, to which this is a reply, requests that botli 
should be contemplated. 

Temperature of the Sea, (tnd Investigations regarding Currents, 

It is unnecessary to dwell on the practical importance to navigation 
of a correct knowledge of the currents of the ocean ; their direction, 
extent, velocity, and the temperature of the surface water relatively 
to the ordinary ocean temperature in the same latitude j together 
with the variations in all these respects which currents experience 
in different parts of the year, and in different parts of their course. 
As the information on these points, which may be expected to follow 
from the measures adopted by the Board of Trade, must necessarily 
depend in great degree on the intelligence, as well as the interest 
taken in them by the observers, it is desirable that the instructions 
to be supplied with the meteorological instruments should contain a 
brief summary of what is already known in regard to the principal 
oceanic currents ; accompanied by charts on which their supposed 
limits in different seasons, and the variations in those limits which 
xna.y have been observed in particular years, may be indicated, with 
i^oticeB of the particularities of the temperature of the surface-water 
by which the presence of the current may be recognised. Farms 
will also be required for use in such localities, in which the sur^e 
temperatures may be recorded at hourly or half-hourly intervals, 
with the corresponding geographical positions of the ship, as they 
may be best inferred from observation and reckoning. For such 
localities also it will be necessary that the tables, into which the 



865 


observations of different ships at different seasons are collected^ 
should have their bounding lines of latitude and longitude brought 
nearer together than may be required for the ocean at large. 

In looking forward to the results which are likely to be obtained 
by the contemplated marine observations, it is reasonable that those 
which may bear practically on the interests of navigation should 
occupy the first place ; but, on the other hand, it would not be 
easy to over-estimate the advantages to physical geography, of 
general tables of the surface temperature of the ocean in the dif- 
ferent months of the year, exhibiting, as they would do, its normal 
and its abnormal states, the mean temperature of the different 
parallcis, and the deviations therefrom, whether permanent, peri- 
odical, or occasional. The knowledge which such tables would 
convey is essentially required for the study of climatology as a 
science. 

The degree in which climatic variations extending over large 
portions of the earth's surface may be influenced by the variable 
phenomena of oceanic currents in different years, may perhaps be 
illustrated by circumstances of known occurrence in the vicinity 
of our own coasts. The admirable researches of Major Rennell 
have shown that in ordinary years, the warm water of the great 
current known by the name of the Gulf-stream is not found to the 
east of the meridian of the Azores j the sea being of ordinary ocean 
temperature for its latitude at all seasons and in every direction, In 
the great space comprised between the Azores, and the coasts of 
Europe and North Africa : but Major Rennell baa also shown that 
on two occasions, viz, in 1776 and in 1821-1822, the warm water by 
which the Gulf-stream is characterised throughout its whole course 
several degrees above the ordinary ocean temperature in the 
same latitude), was found to extend across this great expanse of 
ocean, and in 1776 (in particular) was traced (by Dr, Franklin) 
quite home to the coast of Europe. The presence of a body of 
unusually heated water, extending for several hundred miles both in 
latitude and in longitude, and continuing for several weeks, at a 
season of the year when the prevailing winds blow firom that quarter 
on the coasts of England and France, can scarcely be imagined to 
be without a considerable influence on the relations of temperature 
and moisture in those countries. In accordance with this supposition. 



856 


we find in the Meteorological Journals of the more recent period 
(which are more easily accessible), that the state of the weather in 
November and December 1821 and January 1822 was so unusual in 
the southern parts of Great Britain and in France, as to have excited 
general observation ; we find it cliaracterised os most extraordi- 
narily hot, damp, stormy, and oppressive/' that *'the gales from 
the W. and S.W. were almost without intermission," “ the fall of 
rain was excessive " and ** the barometer lower than it had ever 
been known for 35 years before." 

There can be little doubt that Major Renncll was right in 
ascribing the unuauol extension of the Gulf-stream in particular 
years to its greater initial velocity, occasioned by a more than ordi- 
nary difference in the levels of the Gulf of Mexico and of the Atlantic 
in the preceding summer. An unusual height of ^ the Gulf of Mexico 
at the head of the stream, or aa unusual velocity of the stream at its 
outset in the Strait of FloAda^ are facts wliich may admit of being 
recognised by properly directed attention ; and as these must pre- 
cede, by many weeks, the arrival of the warm water of the stream 
at above 3000 miles distance from its outset, and the climatic effects 
thence resulting, it might be possible to anticipate the occurrence 
of such unusual seasons upon our coasts. 

Much, indeed, may undoubtedly be done towards the increase of 
our partial acquaintance with the phsenomena of the Gulf-stream, 
and of its counter currents, by the collection and coordination of 
observations made by casual passages of ships in different years and 
different seasons across different parts of its course ; but for that 
full and complete knowledge of all its particulars, which should meet 
the maritime and scientific requirements of the period in which 
live, we must await the disposition of Government to accede to the 
recommendation, so frequently made to them by the most eminent 
hydrographical authorities, of a specific survey of the stream by 
vessels employed for that special service. What has been recently 
accomplished by the Government of the United States in this respect, 
shows both the importance of the inquiry and the great extent of 
the research ; and lends great weight to the proposition, which has 
been made to Her Majesty's Government on the pait bf the United 
States, for a joint survey of the whole stream by vessels of the two 
countries. Hie establishment of an olfice under the Board of Trade 



867 


specially charged with the reduction and coordination of auch data 
may materially facilitate auch an undertaking. 

Storms or Gales, 

It is much to be desired both for the purposes of navigation and 
for those of general science, that the captains of Her Majesty's ships 
and masters of merchant vessels should be correctly and thoroughly 
instructed in the methods of distinguishing in all cases between the 
rotatory storms or gales, which are properly called CycloneSt and 
gales of a more ordinary character, but which are frequently accom- 
panied by a veering of the wind, which under certain circumstances 
might easily be confounded with the phenomena of Cyclones, though 
due to a very different cause. It is recommended therefore that the 
instructions, proposed to be given to ships supplied with meteorolo- 
gical instruments, should contain clear and simple directions for 
distinguishing in all cases and under all circumstances between these 
two kinds of storms ; and that the forms to be issued for recording 
the meteorological phenomena during great atmospheric disturbances 
should comprehend a notice of all the particulars which are required 
for forming a correct judgment in this respect. 

Thunder-storm. 

It is known that in the high latitudes of the northern and southern 
hemispheres thunder-storms are almost wholly unknown ; and it is 
believed that they are of very rare occurrence over the ocean in the 
middle latitudes when distant from continents. By a suitable class!- 
dcation and arrangement of tlie documents which will be hencefor- 
ward received by the Board of Trade, statistical tables may in pro- 
cess of time be formed, showing the comparative frequency of these 
phenomena in different parts of the ocean, and in different months 
of the year. 

It is known that there are localities on the globe where, during 
certain months of the year» thunder-storms may be considered as a 
periodical phenomenon of daily occurrence., In the Port Royal 
Mountains in^Jamaica, for example, thunder-storms are said to take 
place daify about the hour of noon from the middle of November 
to the middle of April. It is much to be desired that a full and 



858 


ptecise account of such thunder-storms, and of the circumstances in 
which they appear to originate, should be obtained. 

In recording the phenomena of thunder and lightning it is de- 
sirable to state the duration of the interval between the flashes of 
lightning and the thunder which follows. This may be done by means 
of a seconds hand watch, by which the time of the apparition of the 
flash, and of the commencement (and of the conclusion also) of the 
thunder may be noted. The interval between the flash, and the com- 
mencement of the thunder, has been known to vary in different cases, 
from less than a single second to between 40 and 50 seconds, and 
even on very rare occasions to exceed 50 seconds. The two forms 
of ordinary lightning, viz. zigzag (or forked) lightning, and sheet 
lightning, should always be distinguished apart; and particular atten- 
tion should be given both to the observation and to the record, in the 
rare cases when zigzag lightning either bifurcates, or returns upwards. 
A special notice should not fpl to be made when thunder and light- 
ning, *or either separately, occur in a perfectly cloudless sky. When 
globular lightning (balls of lire) are seen, a particular record should 
be made of all the attendant circumstances. These phenomena are 
known to be of the nature of lightning, hrom the injury they have 
occasioned in ships and buildings that have been struck by them ; 
but they differ from ordinary lightning not only by their globular 
shape, but by the length of time they continue visible, and by their 
slow motion. They are said to occur sometimes without the usual 
accompaniments of a storm, and even with a perfectly serene sky. 
Conductors are now so universally employed in Bhij>e, that it may 
seem almost superfluous to remark that, should a ship be struck 
by lightning, the most circumstantial account will be desirable of 
the course which the lightning took, and of the injuries it ooca^ 
sioned ; or to remind the seaman that it is always prudent, after 
such an accident has befallen a ship, to distrust her compasses until 
it has been ascertained that their direction has not been altered. 
Accidents occurring on land from lightning will, of course, receive 
the fullest attention from meteorologists who may be within con- 
venient distance of the spot. 

jhroras and Falling Stars. 

Auroras are of such rare occurrence in seas frequented by ships 



359 


engaged in commerce, that it may seem superfluous to give any par- 
ticular directions for their obaervation at sea ; and land observa- 
tories ore already abundantly furnished with such. It is, of course, 
desirable that the meteorological reports received from ships should 
always contain a notice of the time and place where Auroras may 
be seen, and of any remarkable features that may attract attention. 

The letter from Professor Hels, which is one of the foreign com- 
munications annexed, indicates the principal points to be attended 
to in the instructions which it may be desirable to draw up for the 
observation of Falling Stars.” For directions concerning Halos 
and Parhelia, a paper by Monsieur Bravais in the ‘ Annuaire Mdtdo- 
rologique de la France ' for 1851, contains suggestions which will 
be found of much value. 

Charts of the Magnetic Variation. 

Although the variation of the compass does not belong in strict- 
ness to the domain of meteorology, it has been included, with^great 
propriety, amongst the subjects treated of by the Brussels Confer- 
ence, and should not therefore be omitted here. It is scarcely 
necessary to remark, that wlmtever may have been the practice in 
times past, when the phenomena of the earth^s magnetism were 
less understood than at present, it should in future be regarded as 
indispensable, that variation-charts should always be constructed for 
a j^orftcidar epoch, and that all parts of the chart should show the 
variation corresponding to the epoch for which it is constructed. Such 
charts should also have, either engraved on the face or attached in 
some convenient manner, a table, showing the approximate annual 
rate of the secular change of the variation in the different latitudes 
and longitudes co^iprised : so that, by means of this table, the varia- 
tion taken from the chart for any particular latitude and longitude 
may be corrected to the year for which it is required, if that should 
happen to be different from the epoch for which the chart is con- 
structed. 

A valuable service would be rendered to this very important 
branch of hydrography, if, under the authority of the new depart- 
ment of the Board of Trade, variation-charts for the North and 
South Atlantic Oceans, for the North and South Pacific Oceans, for 
the Indian Ocean, and for any other localities in which the require- 



860 


meuta of navigation might call for them, were published at Btated 
intervals, corrected for the secular change that had taken place 
since the preceding publication. Materials would l>e furnished for 
this purpose by the observations which are now intended to be 
made, supposing (hem to be collected and suitably arranged with 
proper ref^enoes to date and to geographical j)os]tion, and to the 
original r0pok||s in w^ich the results and the data on which they 
were founded were communicated. By means of these observations 
the tables of approximate correction for secular change might also 
be altered from time to time as occasion should require, since the 
rate of secular change itself is not constant. 

All observed variations, communicated or employed as data upon 
which variation -charts may be either constructed or corrected, should 
be accompanied by other observational data (the nature of which 
ought now to be well understood), for correcting the observed varia- 
tion for the error of the compass occasioned by the ship's iron. It 
is also strongly recommended that no observations be received as data 
for the formation or correction of variation-charts, but such as are ac- 
companied by a detailed statement of the principal elements both of 
observation and of calculation. Proi^er forms should be supplied for 
this }.urpose ; or, what is still better, books of blank forms may be 
supplied, in which the observations themselves may be entered, and 
the calculation performed by which the results are obtained. Such 
books of blank forms would be found extremely useful both for the 
variation of the needle, and for the chronometrical longitude ; (as 
well as for lunar observations, if the practice of lunar observations 
be not, as there is too much reason to fear it is, almost wholly dis- 
continued). By preparing and issuing books of blank forms suit- 
able for these purposes, and by requesting their return in accompa- 
niment with the other reports to be transmitted to the Board of 
Trade at the conclusion of a voyage, the groundwork would be laid 
for the attainment of greatly improved habits of accuracy in prac- 
tical navigation in the British mercantile marine. 

The President and Council are aware that they have not exhausted 
the subject of this reply in what they have thus directed me to ad- 
dress to you ; but they think that perhaps they have noticed as 
many points as may be desirable for presetU attention; and they 
desire me to add, that they will be at ail rimes ready to resume the 



861 


coasideration if required » and to supply auy further suggestions 
which may appear likely to be useful. 

I have the honour to be, Sir, 

Your obedient Servant, 

W, BHAHPEY, 

To the Secretary of the Lords of the Com- Sec. R.S. 

mittee of Privy Council for Trade. 


April 1855. 

Sir BENJAMIN BUOWE, Bart., V.P., in the Chair. 


Dr. Dickenson was admitted into the Society. 

ff 

The following communications were read : — 

I. A letter from Edwin Canton, Esq., accompanying the 
collection of autograph letters to which it refers. Com- 
municated by Professor Stokes, Sec. ll.S. 

“ 4 Montagu Street, RuasoU Square, 
March 29, 1855, 

*‘Deae Sift, — Will you do me the favour of presenting to the 
Royal Society, for their acceptance, the accompanying collection of 
autograph letters from Franklin, Priestley, Sir J. Banks and others, 
together with several documents which were formerly in the posses- 
sion of my great-grandfather, John Canton, F.R.S. 

The collection was given to me when a lad of about fourteen 
years of age by my uncle (Mr. Nathaniel Canton), who resides in 
the neighbourhood of Sjntal Square. It was received by him from 
his father (Mr. William Canton), whose residence was the same as 
that now occupied by his son, 

** I mention^ particularly, the time when the letters came into my 
possession in explanation of the circumstance of some of them being 
wanting in address or suiierscription, for, being but a lad at the 



362 


time of their receipt, I was unaware of the value which attaches to a 
* direction/ * post-mark/ &c., and, in my ignorance, I tore away, in 
a few instances, these important aids to proof of authenticity. 

Accompanying this note and the above collection is one of the 
balls of * elastic substance,* mentioned by Sir Joseph Banks in a 
communication to my great-grandfather. Should the Hoyal Society 
deem this, too^ worthy of being in their possession, 1 shall have much 
pleasure in their accepting it. 

I am, dear Sir, 

To C. 72. Weld, Esq., “ Yours very truly, 

i2oya/ Society.** *' Edwin Canton.*' 

*' P.S. In thanking you, Sir, for your suggestion that I should be- 
queath the letters, &c. to the Royal Society, I beg to say that I shall 
feel myself much gratified in finding the present to be one which 
they will now do me the h(jnour of accepting ; and in conclusion, 
may I beg that you will oblige me by retaining, yourself, the seal, 
in which you take an interest ? ** 


II, Some Observations on the Ova of the Salmon, in relation 
to the distribution of Species; in a letter addressed to 
CiiAKLEs Daewin, Esq., M.A., V.P.R.S. &c/^ By John 
Davy, M.D., F.E.8S. Lond. & Edinb,, Inspector-General 
of Army Hospitals. Received March 27, 1865, 

In this paper the author describes a series of experiments on the 
ova of the Salmon, mode with the intent of ascertaining their power 
of endurance under a variety of circumstances without loss of life, 
with the expectation suggested by Mr. Darwin, that the results 
might possibly throw some light on the geographical distribution of 
fishes. 

The details of the experiments are given in five sections. The 
results obtained were the following : — 

1 . That the ova of the Salmon in their advanced stage can be ex- 
posed only for a short time to the air if dry, at ordinary tempera- 
tures, without loss of life ; but for a considerable time, if the tempe- 
rature be low, and if the air be moist; the limit in the former case 



368 


not having exceeded an hour, whilst in the latter it has exceeded 
raany hours. 

2. That the vitality of the ova was as well preserved in air satu- 
rated with moisture, as it would have been had they been in water. 

3. That the ova may be included in ice without loss of vitality, 
provided the temperature is not so low as to freeze them* 

4. That the ova, and also the fry recently produced, can bear for 
some time a temperature of about 80° or 82° in water, without 
materially suffering; but not without loss of life, if raised above 84® 
or 85°. 

5. That the ova and young fry are speedily killed by a solution 
of common salt nearly of tlie specific gravity of sea- water, viz, 1026; 
and also by a weaker solution of specific gravity 1016, 

Finally, in reference to the inquiry regarding the distribution of 
the species of fishes, he expresses his belief that some of the results 
may be of useful application, especially tliose given in the second 
and third sections ; inferring, that as in moist air, the vitality of the 
ova is capable of being long sustained, they may during rain or fog 
be conveyed from one river or lake to another adhering to some port 
of an animal, such as a Heron or Otter, and also during a time of 
snow or frost ; and, further, that other of the results may be useful 
towards determining the fittest age of ova for transport for the pur^ 
pose of stocking rivers, and likewise as a help to explain the habitats, 
and some of the habits of the migratory species, 

III. Observations on the Anatomy and Affinities of the PkyU 
lirrhoe bucephala (Peron)/' By John Dbnis MAcnoNAtn^ 
Esq,, Assistant-Surgeon of ^ Torch/ Com- 

municated by Sir W. Burnett, K.C,B. Received March 
30 , 1855 . 

• 

As the true position of Peron’s genus PhylUrrho^, and even the 
very existence of the animals composing it, have been matters of 
doubt to zoolo^ts, during a late cruise to the Fiji Islands I deter- 
mined to ply towing-net wi^ a little more diligence than usual, 
ho|nng to obtain a few of these almost hypothetical beings, and was 
rewarded by the capture of many specimens. 



364 


Same were taken in the neighbourhood of I^ord Howe's Island, 
S. lat, 31° 31", E. long, 159° 5", some near Norfolk Island, S. lat, 
29° 2", B, long. 168° 2", and others, although in smaller numbers, 
in different parts of our track. They generally made their appear- 
ance after dusk in the evening, and presented a great diversity in 
size, form and other external characters, which is due to changes in 
the muscular system, a variable amount of pigment spots, &c. In- 
deed at first I fully believed that several distinct species had been 
l)rought up together, but this idea was abandoned when I observed 
the most dissimilar forms gradually assume so close a resemblance 
to each other, as ultimately to render it difiicuit to distinguish them. 

From these facts I am much inclined to think that the three spe- 
cies described by Quoy and Guimard, viz. P, amboinensis. P. punc- 
tulata and P. rubra t P. Lichtensteinii {Bury dice Lichienstteinii of 
Bschscholtz) and P. roeea of D'Orbigny, are all referable to Peron's 
original species P. bucephala^ 

The body of PhylUrrho^ is elongated in form and compressed 
laterally, presenting for description an anterior and posterior extre- 
mity, a right and left surface, and a dorsal and ventral border. The 
head is surmounted by two lengthy, somewhat flattened and acumi- 
nate tcntacula ; the eyes lie beneath the skin, not being visible ex* 
ternally, and the mouth is in the form of a short truncated proboscis, 
with a vertical opening. The oval- shaped body is on an average 
about one inch and a half in length, which is something over twice 
the measurement from the dorsal to the ventral border token at the 
middle or broadest part. The tail is quadrilateral in figure, gradu- 
ally widening towards its posterior border, which is exceedingly 
thin. The outer integument is perfectly transparent and lined by 
muscular bundles, disposed longitudinally, and somewhat more than 
their own breadth apart. ITiese communicate with one another by 
oblique branching slips, which thus form a kind of network enclosing 
long lozenge-shaped spaces. Here and there nerve-trunks of con- 
siderable size accompany the longitudinal bundles, dividing ofiF into 
smaller twigs, which distribute themselves at pretty equal distances 
in a direction more or less perpendicular to that of the muscular 
fibres. Scattered about at irregular intervals amongst these struc- 
tures are numerous reddish-brown pigment- spots, in the centre of 
each of which a clear vesicle is generally distinguishable. As above 



865 


alluded to, the actual tint of this pigment, and the relative number 
of spots deposited within a certain space, determine both the general 
quality and the depth of colour which are found to vary so much in 
different specimens of Phylltrrho^, 

The alimentary canal of this creature consists of a muscular tube 
lined with mucous membrane, extending without flexure from the 
mouth to the vent. It commences anteriorly in an oral dilatation, 
in connexion with which wc notice a pair of lateral homy jaws arti- 
culated w’ith each other superiorly, and beset with very minute and 
8har])-poiuted teeth along the cutting edge, altogether much resem- 
bling those of Glaucus, and a lingual ribbon gradually increasing in 
diameter from before backwards, and siipporting a pavement of long, 
conical, flattened and gracefully curved teeth with fine denticula- 
tions at the base. The central series of plates being symmetrical, 
the large tooth in each tedccs up a middle position, but in the lateral 
plates it inclines to the inner side. In some examples I have ob- 
served certain lobulated bodies lying in contact with the buccal 
mass, and which I am disposed to regard as salivary glands. The 
cssophagus is short, and suddenly expands into a moderately large 
stomach ; and the latter, having received the biliary ducts near its 
posterior extremity, is continued into the rectum, which passes 
directly backwards some little distance, and ends in the anus, on the 
right side of the body, at the union of its posterior and middle thirds. 
The liver in consists of four elongated, tubular, and sac- 

culated portions or lobes, disposed along the borders of the body, 
two lying above and two below the alimentary canal. Each of the 
superior hepatic glands opens by a distinct duct into the supero- 
posterior part of the stomach, while the ducts of the inferior ones 
unite to form a common tube joining it at its infero-posterior port. 
The opposite or ciecal extremities of tlie two anterior hepatic lobes 
end in the neighbourhood of the head, while those of the others 
extend to within a short distance of the tail. The secreting cells of 
these organs are of a rounded or polyhedral form, containing, be- 
sides the nucleus, a reddish-brown pigment and fatty globules. 

PAy//irrAc^ possesses a simple systemic heart, consisting of a single 
auricle and ventricle. This organ lies upon the stomach, between 
the ducts of the two superior biliary glands ; and a large vessel or 
sinus, with inany circular constrictions in its walls, may be traced 



366 


towards the auricle, bringing back the aerated blood from the hinder 
extremity of the body. There are no visible respiratory organs, but 
it is probable that the cutaneous surface permits of the necessary 
exposure of the blood to the air contained in the surrounding 
medium. 

The nervous system is well developed. The supra- and subceso- 
phageal ganglia, with their commissural chords, form a close ring 
round the gullet immediately behind the buccal mass. The audi- 
tory sacs, which are filled with vibratory otokonia, appear to He be- 
tween both sets of ganglia, and the rudimentary visual organs, con- 
sisting each of a simple cell containing a refracting globule imbedded 
in black pigment, are also in contact with the nervous matter. Be- 
sides the actual distribution of the nerves given ofi* from the cephalic 
ganglia, 1 noticed nodules of neurine lying at the base of the tenta- 
cula, communicating by commissural threads, and sending off each 
a principal nerve to the corresponding tentacle. The ganglion- 
globules were lined with a reddish-coloured pigment, deposited 
round the vesicular nuclei, and when twigs are given off from the 
smaller nerves, both the homogeneous neurilemma and the contained 
nervous matter break up like a dividing vessel, without preserving 
the individuality of distinct nerve tubes. 

The sexes are combined in PhyllirrhoS^ the male and female 
generative openings lying close together on the right side of the 
body in the inferior gastero-hepatic space, and before the anal aper- 
ture. I'he ovaries lie in the inferior recto- hepatic space, varying in 
number from two to five, in general. ITiey are dark- coloured, sub- 
rotund, and finely lobulated bodies, from the fore part of each of 
which a very delicate duct arises, and all the ducts unite to form a 
single tube, with a trilling increase in its diameter. This common 
oviduct, lined by a pavement of transparent epithelial cells, passes foa:- 
werds beneath the stomach in a flexuous manner ; and in the inferior 
gastero-hepatic space, it first unites with the duct of the testis and 
again continues its devious course until it ends in the fundus of a 
much larger tube, whose Uning membrane is armed with numerous 
conical and tooth-like processes, and to this is appended e long caecal 
process much resembling the apermatheca of Helix for example. 
The external orifice of the male generative apparatus lies immedi.^ 
ately posterior to that of the female organs. The testu is rather 



367 


«nian, suhglobular in form, and closely connected with a short 
twisted tube*, much dilated at the middle part, and coated over with 
a layer of dark pigment cells. It is with this tube, as above noticed, 
the small oviduct communicates, in order, as it would seem, to permit 
of self- impregnation, or to answer some other purpose, with the na- 
ture of which we are unacquainted ; but there is also on intromit- 
tent organ, which, however, I have never seen properly exserted. 

As to the affinities of PhylUrrho^ with {gasteropoda, it maybe ob- 
served that the animal is bisexual, that the eyes, like those of Glaucun 
and lanthina, are very small and rudimentary, being closely applied to 
the ganglia of the brain, after the manner of the acoustic sacs, and 
that both j^kyllirrhoe and Glaucua agree in possessing two lateral 
horny jaws, articulated with each other superiorly, and bordered 
with minute conical teeth. 

In the Glaucida, the branchice, which consist of simple papillary 
projections of the skin, are distributed in an equable manner over 
the dorsal region of the body ; and any deviation from this arrange- 
ment would naturally tend, either to a more definite localization, or 
still further dispersion. It is the latter modification which appears 
to have taken place in Phyllirrhoi ; so that its respiratory vessels 
ramify minutely through the common integument, just as the vas- 
cular trunks analogous to those which break up in the pectinate gill, 
adapted for aquatic breathing, are subdivided, and spread themselves 
over the smooth walls of the lung-chamber in Pulmonifera. 

As respects its affinity to the Pteropods, here too the lateral jaws 
of PAyi/irrAoi/ must be borne in mind, together wifli the almost com- 
plete suppression of the organs of vision. It is worthy of note also, 
that its acoustic capsules contain otokonia, as in Pteropoda, instead 
of single globular otolithes like those of Glauca»^ and there is some 
reason to believe that the long tentacula, so called, are the homo- 
logues of the cephalic fins of Pteropods. 

The particular features of PhyilirrhoU, expressed in the last para- 
graph, also serve to distinguish it firom the Heteropoda, but it some- 
what approximates this order in the general conformation of its body, 
which is elongated, laterally compressed, and presents a kind of pro- 
boscis at the anterior, and a rudder-fin at the posterior extremity. 
There is also, as it would appear to be, a small remnant of the foot 

* 1 Uve^dnetly tiaosdthe homologaeoftlds tabs in 
Slid tbs OmimpodA 

VOL. VII. 


2 N 



368 


on the inferior thin margin of the body, and the lateral undulatory 
motion of the animal in the water exactly resembles that of Cero- 
phora, or Carinaria, 

The heart of PhylHrrhu'^, in common with that of Heteropods in 
general, holds a dorsal position. The auricle lies posterior to the 
ventricle, as in Cerophora and Firola, but the reverse is the case in 
Atlanta and Car marta, the difference being due to the relation which 
the respiratory surface bears to the heart itself, lying in every case 
on the auricular side. Moreover it is remarkable that the rectum 
is directed backwards in the former instances, but turns forwards in 
the latter, taking, an opposite course to that of the circulation 
through the heart,, ^ 

It may be observed in conclusion, that in Heteropoda the viscera 
are closely packed together so as to occupy the smallest possible 
space, while they are widely distributed through the abdomen in 
PhyllirrhoU ; thus, again, calling to mind its relationship to the 
Pteropoda. * 

This paper is illustrated with drawings representing the animal 
described and some of the details of its internal structure. 


IV. Brief sketch of the Anatomy of a new genus of pelagic 
Gasteropoda, named Jasonilla.^^ By John Denis Mac- 
donald, Esq., R.N. Communicated by Sir W, Burnett, 
K.C.B. Received March 30, 1855. 

This communication refers to a remarkable genus of pelagic Gas- 
teropoda, characterized, like Macgillivraya and Cheletropis, by the 
presence of ciliated cephalic appendages, but having, as in the pre- 
sent instance, a beautifully transparent, cartilaginous and perfectly 
symmetrical shell. The author has seen but one species, which was 
frequently taken between Port Jackson and the Isle of Pines. 

The shell resembles that of .^r^oaatUa in shape, is less than one- 
eighth of an inch in diameter, and the little animal, when fully re- 
tracted, occupies but aismall portion of its cavity. The margin of 
the mantle is of considerable thickness, containing loosely-packed 
cells, similar to those of the middle or operculigerous lobe of many 
Pteropods. About eight ciliated arms, identical in character with those 
of Macgillivraya^ Ac., encircle the head, including the mouth, which 



869 


is furnished with two massive lateral jaws bearing sharp prominent 
dental processes on the anterior border, and with a pair of simple 
tentacula having a dark ocellus at the outer side of the base of each. 
A well -formed foot arises by a narrow pedicle from the under surface 
of the body, immediately behind the ciliated collar. Tlie creeping 
disc is elongated in form, subquadrate in front, and tapers off gradu- 
ally towards the posterior extremity. The latter part, correspond- 
ing to the uperculigerous lobe of other species, is speckled with 
little clusters of dark pigment-cells, disposed so much after the 
manner of those of the ciliated arms as to lead to the impression that 
it is one of the same series, or whorl of organa^ 4o use botanical 
phraseology. A pectinate gill extends beneath the mantle, along 
the anterior third of the dorsal region, lying, as in most cases, in 
advance of the heart. The visceral mass of the body, though elon- 
gated, is but slightly curved upon itself, not exceeding half a turn. 
The lobules of the liver, distended with large amber- coloured oil- 
globulee, may be distinctly seen through the transparent outer enve- 
lope and shell. Single spherical otohthes are contained in the 
acoustic sacs, and the lingual ribbon is lengthy and flexuous, pre- 
senting a row of uncini on each side, with a series of minute 
denticulations, pointing backwards on their anterior and posterior 
borders. The uncini of opposite sides interlock with one another 
so closely as to conceal the rudimentary segments of the rachis 
almost completely. The shell is cartilaginous, transparent/ planor- 
bicular, and perfectly symmetrical, presenting four rows of minute 
conical tuberculations on its convex or dorsal surface, llie gyri of 
the involute nucleus are so curved as to leave a central perforation ; 
the mouth of the tube encroaches considerably on the last whorl, 
and the outer lip is deeply notched between the two lateral rows of 
tubercles. The author has named the species Jasonilla M^Leayiana, 
The paper is accompanied with illustrative figures. 


y. Note “ On the position of Aluminutn in the Voltaic series.'' 
By CHAEtEs Wheatstone, Esq., F*R.S, Received April 
26 , 1856 , 

Having, through the kindness of Dr, Hofmann, been permitted to 
examine a apecimen of aluminum prepared by M. Claire-Devillc, I 



870 


availed myself of the opportunity to ascertain one of the physical 
properties of this extraordinary metal, which it does not appear 
has been yet determined, viz. its order in the voltaic series. The 
following are the results of my experiments. 

Solution of potass acts more energetically and with a greater evo- 
lution of hydrogen gas upon aluminum than it does on zinc, cadmium 
or tin. In this liquid aluminum is negative to zinc, and positive to 
cadmium, tin, lead, iron, copper and platina. Employed as the po- 
sitive metal, the most steady and energetic current is obtained 
when it is opposed to copper as the negative metal ; all the other 
metals negative it which were tried became rapidly polarized, 
whether above or below copper in the series. 

In absolution of h)’drochloric acid aluminum is negative to zinc 
and ca^ium, and positive to oil the other metals above named. 
With this liquid also copper opposed to it as the negative metal gave 
the strongest and most constant current. 

Nitric and sulphuric acids are known not to act chemically in any 
sensible manner on aluminum. With the former acid diluted as 
the exciting liquid aluminum is negative to zinc, cadmium, tin, lead 
and iron. The current with zinc is strong; with the other metals 
very weak, and it is probable that their apparent negative condition 
is the Result of polarization. When aluminum is immersed in dilute 
sulphuric acid, this metal appears negative to zinc, cadmium, tin 
and iron, but with lead, on which sulphuric acid has no action, the 
current is insensible. In both these liquids copper and platina are 
negative to aluminum, and notwithstanding the apparent absence 
of chemical action on the latter metal, weak currents are produced. 

It is rather remarkable, that a metal, the atomic number of which 
is so small, and the specific gravity of which is so low, should occupy 
such a position in the electromotive scale as to be more negative 
than zinc in the series. 


VI. An Experimental Inquiry into the nature of the metamor- 
phosis of Saccharine Matter^ as a normal process of the 
animal economy.” By FRansatCK W, Pavy, M.D, Lond. , 
Communicated by G. 0. Ebbs, M.D., F.E.S. 

This paper was in part read. 



871 


Afay a, 1855. 


CHARLES WHEATSTONE, Esq., V.P., in the Chair. 


In accordance with the Statutes, the Secretary read the following 
list of Candidates recommended by the Council for election into the 
Society. 


Arthur Connell, Esq. 

William Farr, Esq. 

William Lewis Ferdinand Fis- 
, cher, Esq. 

Isaac Fletcher, Esq. 

William John Hamilton, Esq. 
John Hawkshaw, Esq. 

John Hippisley, Esq. 

James Luke, Esq. 


A. Follett Osier, Esq. ^ 
Thomas Thomson, M.Di^ 
Charles B* Vignoles, Esq. 
Charles Vincent Walker, Esq. 
Robert Wight, M.D. 

Alexander Wilham Williamson, 
Esq. 

George Fergusson Wilson, Esq. 


The reading of Dr. Pavy's paper, entitled ** An Experimental 
Inquiry into the nature of the metamorphosis of Saccharine 
Matter, as a normal process of the animal economy/^ was 
resumed and concluded. 

The author begins by obseiring, that the saccharine matter met 
with in the animal economy is derived from two souroes-^-^m the 
vegetable kingdom, and from the Ever of the aaunsl itself; in each 
case being poured mto the general circulation through the hepatic 
veins. TluMiver not only enjoys the power of fonniii^ sugar, but 
it likewise exerts (as shown by the experiments of Bernard) some 
modifying influence over that which is traversing its capillaries and 
vAich has been absorbed from tiie fbod, by which it is transibnned 
from into m^mai sugar, and thus rendered more apt for 

serving in tiie proeeniea of animal life. 

Tot. nr. 2o 



872 


The sugar poAtsd into the general circulation tlirough the hepatic 
veins is conveyed to the capillaries of the lungs, where it in great part 
disappears, but never entirely so, according to very numerous analyses 
which the author has made on this subject. If the blood be traced 
onwards from the arteries through the systemic capillaries into the 
veins, the small amount of sugar which impregnates arterial blood 
will be found to be still undergoing a process of destruction ; and 
what appears escceedingly interesting, this process of destruction is 
not carried on witli equal activity in the different parts of the 
system at large. In the capillaries of the chylo-poietic viscera, the 
destruction is so complete, that the blood in the portal vein may be 
entirely free from saccharine principle, when the blood returning 
from other patts, as that contained in the femoral or jugular veins, 
remains slightly impregnated. This curious fact has a bearing that 
will be presently adverted to, with reference to the views to be 
advanced concerning the nature of the metamorphosis of sugar in 
the animal economy. 

The principal seat of destruction of saccharine matter in the 
animal system being located in the respiratory organs, seems at first 
sight to support the theory of Liebig — that sugar is one of those sub- 
stances which undergoes a process of combustion, by its direct com- 
bination with oxygen and its resolution into water and carbonic acid. 
Some experiments on the temporary obstruction of the respiration 
and the examination of arterial blood before and after the operation, 
led the author to call in question this view, as he obsei^ed that 
notwithstanding the supply of oxygen was cut off to such an extent 
as almost to occasion death, yet a considerable destruction of sugar 
took place in the lungs. This, coupled with the fact that a disap- 
pearance of sugar takes place in the systemic capillaries, and un- 
equally so in different portions of them, induced him to push his 
investigations, and see if there might not be some other cause in 
operation in the living animal to effect the normal destruction of 
sugar, besides the direct chemical action of the oxygeiiiabsorbfi4 in 
req)iration. The results of these investigations^ which were first 
directed towards the changes produced in blood runimally containing 
sugar, injected through the capillaries of lungs removed firom the 
funmal, and artificially infiated with atmospheric air or oxygen gas, 
have induced the author to refer the metamoi^ihosis of sugar in the 



878 


ftnima! economy^ to a proceaa which is perfectly cansistent and 
analogous with the welUknown chemical bearings of this substance 
apart from the animal system^ 

In experiments which the author has now several times re- 
peated, he ir^ected blood removed from the right side of the heart of 
an animal— *aEid therefore normally containing sugar— tltrough the 
capillaries of the artificially infiated lungs of another; and found 
that as long as the blood retains its fibrine, there is as much de- 
struction of its sugar as would take place in the living animal ; but 
that where the fibrine has been separated from the scrum and 
corpuscles, the sugar ceases to be influenced by the presence of 
oxygen, or ceases to disappear during this process of artificial respi- 
ration. It would hence appear, that something besides mere con- 
tact with oxygen is requisite for the destruction of sugar. But in 
other experiments, be has found that oxygen is nevertheless a ne- 
cessary agent concerned in the process of transformation observed 
during the arterialization of the blood that has not undergone spon- 
taneous coagulation. It would therefore seem, in fact, that oxygen 
acts secondarily on the sugar through the medium of the fibrinous 
constituent of the blood that it exerts some changes upon this 
aaotized principle, which are capable of inducing the metamorphosis 
of sugar. 

If we look to the ordinary chemical bearings of saccharine matter 
apart from tlie animal system, we find that an azotized substance 
undergoing the molecular changes of decomposition, placed in con- 
tact with sugar readily excites a process of fermentation, and con- 
verts it by a mere alteration of the grouping of its elements into 
another substance, one atom of sugar (C 12 H 12 Oj^) being resolved into 
two atoms of lactic acid (C^ O^). We also find that sugar is 

not susceptible of oxidation except under the influence of strong 
chemical reagents. Chemical analogy, therefore, would lead us to 
lck>k upon the secondary action of oxygen as the more probable pro- 
oess of phylKologicai destruction; especially when we take into con- 
sideration, that nowhere do we meet with such a constant series of 
molecular changes tidciug place as amongst the azotized coiHstituents 
oi a hving animal. In the above-mentioned experiment of injecting 
ibrinated and defihrianted blood riirough an artlfidaliy inflated 
huig, when ^e blood is Capable of undeigoing the molecular changea 

So2 



874 


of assimilation on contact vnik oxygen as in the living animal, the 
sugar in great part disappears, but so soon as the hbrine is sepa- 
rated by spontaneous coagulation, and the blood has thus lost its 
vital characteristics, oxygen is no longer capable of exerting any 
metamorphosing influence on its saccharine ingredients. 

If the molecular changes occurring duiing the decomposition of an 
azotized substance be capable of converting sugar into lactic acid, why 
should not the molecular changes occurring during the building-up 
or elaboration of this same nitrogenized compound effect the same ? 
Indeed, we have seen that the process of destruction is carried on to 
a certain extent in the systemic capillaries, and more especially 
in those of the chylo-poietic viscera, where the molecular changes 
of nutrition are also correspondingly carried on with greater activity 
than elsewhere. So that analogy and experiment would tend to 
show that the physiological destruction of sugar is owing to a pro- 
cess similar to fermentation induced by the molecular changes 
occurring in the nitrogenized ciinstituents of the animal during life. 
And, in accordance with this, we find lactic acid present in the 
system, and largely separated from arterial blood by the muscular 
tissue, and the secerning follicles of the stomach. 

As regards the lactic acid fermentation, it is well known that 
the presence of an alkali favours, whilst that of an acid retards the 
process. In two experiments on animals, the author injected car- 
bonate of soda and phosphoric acid into the circulating current, and 
observed in the case of the latter that sugar immediately accumu- 
lated in the blood. 

The preceding observations refer more especially to the changes 
that take place in the saccharine ingredient of the blood during 
life ; and the author next proceeds to notice some interesting phe- 
nomena observable during the^decomposition, and even the sponta- 
neous coagulation of blood containing sugar. 

If blood of an animal normally impregnated with sugar be 
placed aside, and allowed to undergo spontaneous coagulation, on 
examining separately the serum and clot on the following day, it 
will be found, that although the shrum may he largely saturated 
with sugar, the clot is entirelyt or almost entir^y destitute of it 
Now, as the dot is moist and remdiu to a jcertain extent infiltrated 
with the serum from which it has partially separated, it would 



876 


appear that even the molecular changes arising from the sponta* 
neous coagulation of the blood are sufficient to effect the destruc- 
tion of normal animal sugar. And this conclusion is strengthened 
by the fact, that in diabetic blood (the sugar of which, as would 
appear from other considerations also, is not so susceptible of 
metamorphosis as the healthy variety) the sugar does not disap- 
pear to a similar extent in the clot. 

Under the changes of the decomposition of blood, normal animal 
glucose is very readily metamorphosed. The rapidity of the meta- 
morphosis depends on the activity of the decomposition of the 
animal substances present, and when the destruction of the sugar is 
complete the blood has assumed an acid reaction. 

This acid reaction of decomposing blood is only observable in 
that which was previously pretty largely impregnated with sugar. 
It appears to be owing to the formation of lactic acid. Certainl5% 
It cannot be due to carbonic acid, for the reaction remains after 
exposure to a boiling temperature. 

, The disappearance of sugar in the manner just pointed out does 
not depend on the oxygen of the air, except in so far as this agent is 
concerned in exciting the decomposition of the azotiaed constituents 
of the blood ; for the sugar disappears as rapidly when there is a 
small, as when there is a large amount of surface exposed to the air. 
But if the air be carefully and completely excluded, no signs of de- 
composition of the animal parts of the blood are to be observed, and 
under these oircfumstances the sugar also remains. I'he disappear- 
ance of sugar is more rapid where the fibrine and corpuscles are pre- 
sent, than when the serum is exposed alone ; and in accordance 
with this, the blood in the one case undergoes deoomposltion much 
sooner than in the other — a fact easily intelligible from the greater 
amount of azotized ingredients present. 

If blood normally impregnated with saccharine matter be placed 
aside until signs of incipient decomposltiou are observed, and the 
sugar is beginning to disappear, exposure to a current of oxygen 
rapidly completes the total disappearance of the saccharine con- 
stituent. In this observation we have a further illustration of the 
analogy that appears to exist, in the nature of the metamorphosis of 
sog^ as a physiological process, and that which takes place chemi^ 
cally under the induenoe of an azotlsed oompound# whose ekmen- 



876 


toy particles are in a state of molecular ^ansition* During life, 
the higher organic constituents of the blood are capable of under-* 
going the changes of assimilation on exposiu'e to contact with 
oxygen, and there is a considerable destruction of sugar ejected ; 
for a short period after death these axotixed constituents remain 
stationary and uninduenced by oxygen, and with this, there is a 
corresponding suspension of the transformation of sugar ; but finally, 
the animal matter of the blood on contact with oxygen, especially 
during a warm temperature, assumes a state of decomposition, the 
molecular changes of which again excite the destruction or meta* 
morphosis of saccharine matter. 

The sugar disappears far less rapidly from diabetic blood under 
the influence of exposure to the atmosphere, than from healthy 
right- ventricular blood. From these, and a few other observations 
which he has as yet been able to make on the blood iu Diabetes 
Mellitus, the author, were he to ^ard an opinion on the nature of 
that obseme disease, would be disposed to say that there appears to 
be a modification of sugar produced by the liver, which is not suscep- 
tible of undergoing the normal process of destruction in the animal 
system, and which, therefore, accumulating in the blood, is elimi- 
nated by the kidneys. The experiments of Bernard have shown 
that vegetable glucose (grape-sugar) is not susceptible of destruc-> 
tlon in the processes of animal life, unless converted into animal 
glucose by the agency of the liver. Diabetic sugar would there- 
fore seem to bear a resemblance in its physiological relations to 
vegetable, rather than to animal glucose. 


The following communications were in part read 

I. Researches on the Partition of Numbers.'^ By Artbvr 
Cavljev, Esq., P.R,S* Received April 14, 1866, 

The author discusses the following problem To find in how 
many ways a number q can be made up of ^e elements a, c . „ 
each element being repeatable an indefixdte number of tiimes/^ The 
solution depends upon a peculiar decompositioii of an algebnucal 



877 


fractioa where the denominator fx is the product of any number 

of factors, the same or different of the form 1— and upon the 
expansion by means thereof of the fraction in ascending powers of x. 
The coe6&cient of the general term is expressed in terms of circu- 
lating functions, such that the sums of certain groups of the coeffi- 
cients are severally equal to zero ; these functions the author calls 
prime circulators. The investigations show the general form of the 
analytical expression for the number of partitions, and they also in- 
dicate how the values of the coefficients of tlie prime circulators 
entering into such expression are to be determined. 


II, Further Researches on the Partition of Numbers.^^ By 
Arthue Cayley, Esq., F.B,S. Received April 14, 1855. 
With Postscript. Received April 20, 1855. 

The memoir contains a discussion of the problem ** to find in how 
many ways a number g can be made up as a sum of m terms with 
the elements 0, 1, 2,. ... A, each element being repeatable an inde- 
finite number of times.** The number q may without loss of gene- 
rality be taken to be equal to a), and the expression for the 

number of partitions of this number is by a peculiar me- 

thod reduced to the form coeff. or"* in where ^ iS an algebraical 

fraction, the form of which depends on the value of A, but which does 
in anywise involve the number m ; the denominator /r is the product 
of factors of the form 1— and up to certain limiting values of a 
the fraction is a proper fraction. The author remarks in conclusion 
that the researches were made for the sake of their application to 
the theory developed in his ** Second Memoir upon Quantics.’* 



a78 


May 10, 1856. 

The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

The reading of Mr. Caylby^s Papers on the Partition of Numbers 
was resumed and concluded. 

The following communications were read : — 

L Experimental Inquiry undertaken with the view of 

ascertaining whether any farce is evolved during Muscular 
Contraction analogous to the force evolved in the Pish, 
Gymnotus, and Torpedo.** By Hbney Fostisb Baxter, 
Esq. Communicated by Sir B. C. Baonis, Bart., V.P.R.B. 
Received Aprd 17, 1856. 

After referring to the results obtained by Matteucci by means of 
the frog, by Du Bois-Eeymond by means of the galvanometer, and 
those of Zantedeschi, BudT, Tyndall, Despretz, Becquerel and 
Matteucci in reference to Du Bois-Keymond's experiments ; in re- 
peating the experiments of Du Bois-Eeymond, the author has 
been led to the following conclusions ; — * 

First. That during muscular contraction in man and in frogs an 
effect upon the galvanometer may be obtained, indioatimg the mani^ 
festation of an electric current ; and 

Secondly, That this manifestation of an electric current is due, in 
a great measure, to secondary reactions, viz. between the animal 
secretions and the solutions on the one hand, and between the solu- 
tions and the surfaces of the platinum electrodes on the other i but 
that there nevertheless remains a residual efect^ which we cannot 
refer to either of these actions, or to those pointed out by Du Bois- 
Reymond. 

The principal reasons upon which the author considers that the 
effects cannot be entirely referred to secondary actions are these : — 
1st. The current due to muscular contraction may be made to over- 



379 


come a alight constant current circulatmg through the galvanometer • 
and 2ndly» the fact obtained by Matteucci with the galvanoscopic 
irog would indicate that some force is evolved duiing muscular 
contraction. 

Some differences appear to exist in the results obtained by the 
author and those of Du Bois-Reymond, viz. the direction of tlie 
current. Du Boia- Raymond considers it as direct in the frog, and 
inverse in man ; the author's experiments indicate it to be direct in 
both cases, but he thinks that this difference will be found to be 
more in appearance than in reality, inasmuch as two distinct ques- 
tions may have been involved, viz. 1st, whether the muscular cur- 
rent is affected during the act of contraction ; and 2ndly, whether 
any force is or is not evolved during muscular contraction. 

As the author wishes the paper to be considered as strictly experi- 
mental, and his object being to establish facts, he has endeavoured 
to avoid everything of a purely controversial character. 

II, a simple Geometrical construction, giving a very 

approximate Quadrature of the Circle.^^ By C. M. Willich, 
Esq. Communicated by Professor Stokes, Sec. E.S. 
Received April 17 , 1866 . 

Let AB be a quadrant of a circle A, B, C. In the arc BG place a 
chord BD equal to the radius, so that the arc BD is one of 60*^. 
Bisect BD in £ ; join A£, and produce the joining line to meet the 
circumference in F. Then AF differs hrom the side of a square 
equal in area to the circle by somewhat less than the one four- 
thousandth part of that side. 

The Society then adjourned to the 24th of May. 



m 


May 24, 1855. 


m LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

The following communications were read : — 

L A Second Memoir upon Quantics/^ By Arthur Cayley, 
Esq., F.R.8. Received April 14, 1855. 

The memoir is intended as a continuation of the author's intro- 
ductory memoir upon Qu&ntics (vide Proc. R.S. p, 58, and Phil, 
Trans. 1 854, p. 245 ) ; the special subject of the memoir is the theorem 
referred to in the postscript 4if the introductory memoir, and the 
numerous developments arising thereout in relation to the number 
and form of the covariants of a binary quantic. The author, after some 
remark as to the asyzygetic integrals and the irreducible integrals of 
a system of partial differential equations, and after noticing that the 
number of irreducible integrals is in general infinite, proceeds to 
establish the above-mentioned theorem, viz. that a function of any 
order and degree satisfying the necessary condition as to weight, and 
such that it is reduced to zero by one of the operations {xdy} 
and — ydr, is reduced to zero by the other of the two opera- 

tions, I. e. that it is a oovariant ; and he shows how by means of the 
theorem the actual calculation of the covariants is to be effected, llie 
theorem g^ves at once (in terms of symbols P, P^ which denote a 
number of partitions) expressions for the number of the asyzygetic 
covariants of a given degree and order, or of a given degree only, of 
a quantic of any order ; this enables the discussion of particular cases, 
but to obtain more general results it is necessary to transform the 
expressions for the numbers of partitions by the method explained in 
the author 8 " Further Researches on the Partition of Numbers." It 
appears by the resulting formula tliat the number of the irreducible 
invariants or covariants does in fact become infinite for quantios of 
an order sufficiently high ; the number of the irreducible invariants 



381 


^rst becomes infimte in the case of a quantlc of the order 7 ; the 
number of irreducible covariaats first becomes infinite in the case of 
a quantic of the order 5. In particular, the formulee show that in 
the case of a quantic of the order 6, or quintic, there are 4 irre- 
ducible invariants of the degrees 4. 8, 13 and 18, respectively con- 
nected by an equation of the degree 36 ; and that in the dte of a 
quantic of the order 6, or sextic, there are 5 irreducible invariants 
of the degrees 3, 4, 6, 10 and 15 respectively connected by an 
equation of the degree 30 ; so that the system of the irreducible in- 
variants of a sextic is analogous to that of the irreducible invariants 
of a quintic. The memoir concludes with a table of the covariants 
of a quadric, a cubic, and a quartic, and of certain of the covariants 
of a quintic. 


II. ** On a Decimal Compass Card.” By James M. Share^ Esq., 
Master R.N. Communicated by Rear-Admiral Smyth, 
Foreign Secretaiy R.S. Received April 23, 1856. 

The mariners’ compass -needle having of late years received great 
improvements, I am of opinion it is high time the card, as at present 
arranged, should take its place by the side of such things as are 
superseded by others better adapted to the advancing spirit of the 
times. 

1 venture to make an attempt to innovate on an old custom, by 
suggesting the substitution of a compass card containing thirty- six 
points of ten degrees each — every degree being one-tenUi of a point. 

By the use of this card the mariner will avoid the constantly re- 
curring trouble of turning degrees into points, and vice versd. 

The ship’s course having been worked out in degrees, tiie devia- 
tion and local attraction have but to be applied to adapt it to the 
decimal steering card, thus rendering the ** traverse table for 
points ” no longer necessary to those steering by it ; the course 
N. 35^ E. being the same as ** north three and a half points east,” 
&e. The same remark apidies also to astronomical bearings, azi- 
muths, amplitudes, Ac. 

Should the decinml card be adopted, the old-fashioned method of 



882 


** boxing the compass/' which takes young people so long to become 
familiar with, will be entirely superseded, and I think the sooner such 
method becomes obsolete the better it will be for the interests of the 
mariner, for, together with other advantages, the tedious operation 
of a day's work " will be divested of half the usual trouble, 

Whia giving a course to the ** quarter-master,*' or man at the 
wheel/' no mistake, so liable to be the case at present, can well 
occur ; it will merely be necessary to direct him to steer, for instance, 
** north five points east," or more briefly, ** north five east," ** soutli 
six west/' &c. die. 

I recollect an instance of a vessel steering N.W. by N. -J-N., 
instead of W. by K. ^ N. during thick weather in the Bristol Channel, 
thus running into danger from the similarity of sound between the 
courses alluded to. 

The practical application of the decimal card would not materially 
afiPect the charts previously published, which could have printed 
compasses containing thirty-si^ points pasted over the others. Such 
might be sold by any chart-seller. 


III. the Theory of the Electric Telegraph.” By Pro- 
fessor William Thomson, F.R.S. Received May 3, 1855. 

The following investigation was commenced in consequence of a 
letter received by the author from Prof. Stokes, dated Oct. 16, 1854. 
It is now communicated to the Royal Society, although only in an 
incomplete form, as it may serve to indicate some important practi- 
cal applications of the theory, especially in estimating the dimeh- 
slons of telegraph wires and cables required for long distances ; and 
the author reserves a more complete development and illustratioii of 
the mathematical parts of the investigation for a paper on the conduo- 
rion of Electricity and Heat through solids, which he intends to lay 
before^the Royal Society on another occasion. 

Extract from a letter to Prof. Stokes, dated Large^ Oct. 28, 1854. 

" •* Let c be the electro-statical capacity per unit of length of the 
wire ; that iS) let c be snob that civ is tlie quantity of electricity 
required to charge a length ( of the wire up to potential v, In q 



383 


note communicated as an addition to a paper in tbe last June Num- 
ber of the Philosophical Magazine, and I believe at present in the 
Editor's hands for publication, 1 proved that the value of c is 

— if 1 denote the specific inductive capacity of the gutta 

21og^ 


percha, and R, R' the radii of its inner and outer cylindrical surfaces. 

** Let h denote the galvanic resistance of the wire in absolute elec- 
tro-statical measure (see a paper * On the application of the Principle 
of Mechanical Effect to the Measurement of Electromotive Forces 
and Galvanic Resistances/ PhU, Mag. Dec. 1851). 

** Let y denote the strength at the time t, of the current (also in 
electro-statical measure) at a point P of the wire at a distance x from 
one end which may be called O. Let v denote the potential at the 
same point P, at the time /. 

The potential at the outside of the gutta percha may be taken as 
at each instant rigorously zero (the resistance of the water, if the 
wire be extended as in a submarine telegraph, being certainly inca- 
pable of preventing the inductive action from being completed in- 
stantaneously round each point of the wire. If the wire be closely 
coiled, the resistance of the water may possibly produce sensible 
effects). 

•* Hence, at the time L the quantity of electricity on a length ifr of 
the wire at P will be vcdjp, 

** The quantity that leaves it in the time dt will be 


*' Hence we mutt have 





-cdx~dt=^dt^dx 
dt dx 


(!)• 


**But the electromotive force, in electro-static units, at the point P, is 

dv 

S’ 

and therefore at each instant 

J (2). 

Eliminating y from (1) by means of this, we have 

“a-S" 



884 


Tvhich i« the equation of electrical excitation in a submarine telegraph* 
wire, perfectly insulated by its gutta percha covering, 

** This equation agrees with the well-known equation of the linear 
motion of heat in a solid conductor ; and various forms of solution 
which Fourier has given are perfectly adapted for answering practi- 
cal questions regarding the use of the telegraph- wire^ Thus first, 
suppose the wire infinitely long and communicating with the earth 
at its infinitely distant end : let the end O be suddenly raised to 
the potential V (by being put in communication with the positive 
pole of a galvanic battery of which the negative pole is in commu- 
nication with the ground, the resistance of the battery being small, 
say not more than u few yards of the wire) ; let it be kept at that 
potential for a time T ; and lastly, let it bo put in communication 
with the ground (». e, suddenly reduced to, and ever afterwards 
kept at, the zero of potential). An elementary expression for the 
solution of the equation in thjs case is 


dnt 


where for brevity 


sin [2«f ■ 




• sin [(^ 
» 






( 4 ). 


z^Xi^/kc ( 5 )/* 

That this expresses truly the solution with the stated conditions 
is proved by observing, — 1st, that the second member of the equa- 
tion, (4), is convergent for all positive values of z and vanishes 
when z is infinitely great; 2ndly, that it fulfils the diflPerential 
equation (3) ; and 3rdly, that when ar=0 it vanishes except for 
^lues of t between 0 and T, and for these it is equal to V, It is 
curious to remark, that we may conclude, by considering the phy- 
sical circumstances of the problem, that the value of the definite 
integral in the second member of (4) is zero for all negative values 
of h and positive values of jr. 

" This solufion may be put under the following form, 

cos(3a3--s»*), • » . (6:),” 


•//-T Ju 


which is in fact the primary solution as derived from the elementary 
type co» given by Fourier in his investig*. 

tion' bf periodic varietions ieirestm temperature. 



866 


" ITiia, if T be infinitely small, becomes 


«=!iTr 

Jo 


cos(2»/— (7). 


which expreascB the effect of putting the end O of the wire for 
an infinitely short time in communication with the battery and 
immediately after with the ground. It may be reduced at once to 
finite terms by the evaluation of the integral, which stands as fol- 
lows ; — 

r i i ir^Z ** 

C 08 ( 2 n<"“Zr)a= — » 


and when t is negative. 

And so we have 

4n*ti 

or by (6), when t is not infinitely small, 


VtC* d6 ~ 

VS-—.! . 

27rV 


or which is the same, 

v=lLC- JL^yr^~o) .... ( 10 ). 

2.r*Jo(<-0)* 

It is to be remarked that in (9) and (10) the limits of the integral 
must be taken 0 to t (instead of f— T to 0 to T), if it be de- 

sired to express the potential at any time t between 0 and T, since 
the quantity multiplied by d6 in the second number of (6) vanishes 
for all negative values of fi. ^ 

These last forma may be obtained synthetically from the follow- 
ing solution* also one of Fourier’s elementary solutions 


Q /k 

7V-C 


which expresses the potential in the wire consequent upon instan- 
taneously communicating a quantity Q of electricity to it at O, and 
leaving this end insulated. For if we suppose the wire to be continued 
to an infinite distance on each mde of O, and its infinitely distant ends 
to 1^ in commumoation with the earth, the same equation will ex- 
press thoeconaequenoe of instant^! to the wire 

at Ou Now suiqpose at the same to be com- 



municAted at the pomt O' at a distance 


on the negative side 


of 0, the consequent potential at any time ^ at a distance 

a/ kc 

along the wire from 0, will be 

*• 


Q fe 1 


and if ol be infinitely smalls this becomes 
Qa re 

’’“S-'T <“>■ 

which with positive values of r, expresses obviously the effect of 
communicating the point O with the positive pole for an infinitely 
short time, and then instantly with the ground. 

“ The strength of the current at any point of the wire, being equal to 

\ 08 shown above, in Equation (2), will vary proportionally 

k dx 

to or to ~ The time of the maximum electrodynamic effect 
dir or 

of impulses such as those expressed by (11) or (IS) will be found 
by determining t, in each case, to make ^ a maximum. Thus 
we find 


as the time at which the maximum electrodynamic effect of oonnecto 
the battery for an instant at O. and then leaving this point in- 
sulated, is experienced at a distance jt. 

** In these cases there is no regular * velocity of transmission.' 
But, on the other hand, if the potential at 0 be made to vary regu- 
larly accordmg to the simple harmonic law (sin 2nt), the phases are 

propagated regularly at the rate 2 
known solution 

vase"***** 8in(2sf— jm*) ..... (14), 


s/fc^ as is shown by the well- 


*Wd issy ialMrUist the retiodations of sisnelt areproportionsl to the squares 
of the dlstuieei, and not to the distance! simply ; and hence Afferent obii^eri, 
beUevhtg they have fonad^a electric prqpagatloti/' may ivsU have 

obtilsed wid^diecrepant restiM^ tpparent vriucity would, n^si4i>Na4* 
Sim, be the isas, llm graisiir M 



887 


The «fieot8 of pulam at one end, when the other m in connexion 
with the ground, and the length finite, will be most eonveniently 
investigated by considering a wire of double length, with equal positive 
and negative agencies applied at its two extremitieB. The synthe- 
tical method founded on the use of the solution (11) appears per- 
fectly adapted for answering all the practical questions that can be 
proposed. 

** To take into account the effect of imperfect insulation (which 
appears to have been very sensible in Faraday’s experiments), we 
may assume the gutta-percha to be uniform, and the flow of electri- 
city across it to be proportional to the difference of potential at its 
outer and inner surfaces. The equation of electrical excitation will 
then become 


kc 


dv d^v 

dt~^ dx’^ 


— Av 


(15), 


and if wc assume 
we have 




, d(p d^<b 


(16). 

(17). 


an equation, to the treatment of which the preceding investigations 
are applicable/* 

Extract from Letter to Prof. Stokes, dated targe, Oct. 30, 1854, 


**An application of the theory of the transmission of electricity 
along a submarine telegraph-wire, shows how the question receq^^y 
nused as to the practicability of sending distinct signals along such a 
length as the 2000 or 3000 miles of wire that would be required for 
America, may be answered. The general investigation will show 
exactly how much the sharpness of the signals will be worn down* 
and will show what maattmum strength of current through the iqj- 
paratus, in America, would be produced by a specified battery action 
cm the end in England, with wire of given dunensions, &c, 

** The following form of solution of the general equation 


.^dv tPv , 

*"3?“ Si 


is iUe first given hy Fourier^ 

* fiae tbc dispam of 



!m us to compare the times 
JMow. 

2r 


VOL. Vll. 



888 


until a given strength of current shall be obtained, with different 
dimenaions,' of wire 


. 2IA4 sin y^j • « • 

If / denote the length of the wire* and V the potential at the end 
communicating with the battery* the final distribution of potential 
in the wire will be expressed by the equation 






which, when hssO, becomes reduced to 



corresponding to the case of perfect insulation* The final maximum 
strength of current at the remote end is expressed by 

_ v' a/v'A 


or, when AasO, yss . 

Hence if we determine so that 


SAjSin 




•when jf>0 and 


the ^nation 


va;V' 


.,(<-») V*— VA 


_*< 

+ * te XAjUn 



will expreu the actual condition of the wire at any time t after 
one end ie put in connexion with the battery, the othw ysng 
kept in connexion with the ground. 

•* We may infer that the time required to reach a ctated firaction 
of the maximum atrength of current at the remote end wiU be 
proportional to kel*. We may be ture beforehand that the American 
telegraph will aucoeed, with a battery sufficient to gire a 
current at the remote end. when kept long enough in action : but 
the time required for each deflection •will be sixteen limea aa long as 
would be with a wire a qua^r of the length, such, for as 

in the French submarine to Sardinia and Afoiea. One 



589 

very important result is, that by increasing the diameter of the wire 
and of the gutta-percha covering in proportion to the whole length, 
the distinctness of utterance will be kept constant; for a varies 
inversely as the square of the diameter, and c (the electro- statical 
capacity of the unit of length) is unchanged when the diameters of 
the wire and the covering are altered in the same proportion. 

** Hence when the French submarine telegraph is fairly tested, we 
may make sure of the same degree of success in an American tele- 
gnq>h by increasing all the dimensions of the wire in the ratio of 
the greatest distance to which it is to extend, to that for which the 
French one has been tried.** It wdl be an economical problem, 
easily solved by the ordinary analytical method of maxima and mi- 
nima, to determine the dimensions of wire and covering which, with 
stated prices of copper, gutta percha, and iron, will give a stated 
rapidity of action with the smallest initial expense. 

** The solution derived from the type maybe iq)pHed to give 

n 

the conditiou of the wire, when one end, £, is kept connected with 
the ground, and the other, O, is operated on so that its potential 
may be kept varying according to a given arbitrary function of the 
time : only this, which I omitted to mention in my last letter, must 
be attended to: instead of merely considering sources (so to spesk) at 
O and O' (the latter in on imaginary continuation of the wire), we 
must suppose sources at 0,0i,02,&c., and at 0',0/,02', &c, arranged 
according to the general principle of successive images, so that the 
potential at B may be xero, and that at O may be uninfluermed by all 

other sources except the source at O itself. Taking Ojj, Op O, 

O', O/, Oj'. . * . equidistant, we have only to suppose equal sources, 
each represented by the type 

if 

IT’ 

to be placed at these points. For the effects of 0 ^ and O' will 
balance one another as far as regards the potential at O. 

So will those of Oj, and 0 ',. 

M »i 0 ^ and 0'2* 

6 ic. 


2 1^2 



3d0 

And agflun, O and O' would alone keep the potential at £» aero. 
So would Oj and O',. 

<< and O'g. 

&c. &c. 




L 


1 , 


u 

■ 

Hi 


0 t N 

“ \ 


0 >, 


Hence if we denote 2/Ac by for brevity, the general solution is 
1 (^ rfOF(fl) J 


I . . .(z + 2a)e" 


’2tr*Jo (^-0)^ 

(»-«)« (ip-8a)* 

-f (jy— a)e (if““2o)e -f 


where F(d) is an arbitrary function such that F(0 expresses the 
potential sustained at O by the battery. 

The corresponding solutic^ of the equation 

, dv d^v . 


18 


M 

DBS — -e kc\ 

2^1 J, 


J (jr— ia)c 4(<— #) I, 


by which the elFect of imperfect insulation may be taken into 
account.** 


Ea:traet of Lotior from Prof. Btokoo to Prof W. Thomon (dated 
Nov. 1854). 

'* In working out for myself various forms of the solution of the 

equation under the conditions vs=0 when fssO hrom «=s0 to 

3 CZZ CO ; vas/(0, when 4fs=0 from /=:0 to « , I found that the so- 
lution with a single integral only (and there must necessarily bl this 
one) was got out most easily thus : — 

“ Let V be expanded in a definite integral of the form 

tr (f ,a)8in 


which we know is possible. 


891 


“ Since v doec not vanish when jfssO, 




is not obtained by differ- 


entiating under the integral sign, but the term - a must be aup- 

w 

plied*, so that (observing that v^sto^/Q) by one of the equations 
of condition) we have 

r* f2 1 

^ Jo I » / **" 

Hence 

dv d^v r* . 0 2 • . 

"Jo I * ^ 

and the second member of the equation being the direct develop- 
ment of the first, which is equal to zero, we must have 


^ +»«w-?«/(/)=0, 

whence 

w = € I -a/(0e 

the inferior limit being an arbitrary function of a, 3ut the oUier 
equation of condition gives I* 


arase 

therefore 


therefore 


But r"*’ co» 6«rfa= 



whence writing t—f, g, for «. b, utd subsritutii^’, we have 

Your conclusion as to the American wire follows from the dif- 


tAeeordlag to the method explained in a peper On the Critical Values of the 
Sanm of Fniiodie $erie•#'^Camb• Phil, Trans. voL idil, p. 533, 



m 


ferential equation itself which you have obtained. For the equation 


^ that two flubsikftHiie wires will be similar/ provided 


^ squares of the leng^ measured to similarly situated points, 
a^ therefore of course those of the whole lengths I, vary as the times 


divided by ck ; or the time of any electrical operation is proportional 


toifec/®. 

'* The equation ^ ^ A oc for the additional 

condition of similarity of leakage/* 


The accompanying set of curves represents the strength of the 
Current through the instrument at the remote end of a wire as it 
gradually rises, or gradually rises and Ms, after the end operated 
on is put in connexion with one jpold of a battery, and either kept 
so permanently, or detached and put in connexion with the ground 
after v^ous short intervals of^time. 

The abscissas, measured on OX, represent the time reckoned 
from the first application of the battery, and the of^nates, mea- 
sured parallel to OY, the strength of the current. 

The time corresponding to « is equal to ^ log^ if / be the 

lengtit of tiie wire in feet^ its ** resistance” per foot, in electro- 
statical units, and c its eleotrc^statioal capacity per foot (which is 

equal to — i-wr, if I be the ekotio-statioal inductive power of the 

21qg^ 

gutta peroha, probably about % aii4 R' the radii of its outer and 
kmer Burihoes). The p^Oipal curve (L) represents the rise of the 
in the rmote imitraaient. whjm the^ ^d opera^l on m kq>t 
pmiiihe&tly in oonsiesdon with the lottery, It so nearly omnei^ 
with the Uue of a^mssas at as ^ indicate cutmit 

atliet^ eitet it the remote end is (is. 

aoe6rdiU|f1»4^ such 

as those assumed in hydrodynamics When water is treated as if in- 
compressible, or tfae Velocity ofsound in it conridered infinitely great, 
which requires insMtaaieoua effects to be propagated throu^ the 
‘ whole mass of the'^wsfter/on a disturbance bcii^ made in any part * 





894 


of it). After the interval a, the current very rapidly riaea, and after 
about 4a more« attaina to half ita full atrength. After 10a from the 
bommeneement, it haa attained ao nearly ita full atrengtji; that the 
fiarther inoreaae would be probably insensible. The full atrengUi is 
theoretically reached only after an infinite time haa passed. The 
first (1) of the smaller curves represents the rise and fall of the 
current in the remote instrument when the end operated on ia put 
in connexion with the ground after having been for a time a in 
connexion with the battery; the second (2) represents similarly 
the effect of the battery for a time 2a ; the third (fi) for a time 3a 
and so on. The curve (11) derived frbm the primary curve (I) by 
difibrentiation (exhibiting in fact the steepness of the primary curve 
at its different points, as regards the line of abscissas), represbnfo 
the strength of current at different times through the remote end of 
the wire, consequent upon putting a very intense battery in com* 
municatton with the end fooos which the signal is sent> for a very 
short time, uid then instantly piittmg this end in eommunicatbn 
with the ground. Thus, relatively to one another, the curves (1) 
and (II) may be oonridered as representing the relative cffbcts of 
putting a certain battery in communication for the time o, and a 

battery of ten nr twenty times as many cells for a time ^ a nr ^a. 

If I were to guess what might be called 'Uhe retardation,’* n^hioh 
in the observations between Greenwich and Brussels was fonnd to 


be about ^h of a second^ 1 should say it conesponded to four or 
five times a, but tips mtnit ifopend on the Idnd of instnuheut used, 
and tiie mode of nmking and breaking iKmtacu Vrifh the batt^ 
which was followed. 

Equation of prinoipid curve (I). 


y:*l0a—20«(*— •>«+ato,), where ; 

a being half the side of one of the squares. 

If denote the ^uatioa of the prine^ wevoi end If /(#) 

be to vna^i^ for •& segaloTe voluee of «/ toe Milee of 4^^ 


rived dnrVto equatateia 


( 1 ) 

( 3 ) 


• V=^/M-A»-Sa) 



(3) . . . . y=/(»)— /(»— 3«) 


( 7 ) . . 

(ID . . 


»“/(*)— /(*-7«) 


ytma- 


da 


1 think clearly the right way of making obeervations on telegraph 
retardations would be to use cither Weber's electro-dynamometer, 
or any instrument of suitable sensibility constructed on the same 
principle, that is, adapted to show defections experienced by a 
moreable part of a circuit, in virtue of the mutual electro-dynamic 
force between it and the fxed part of the same circuit due to a 
current flowing for a very short time through the circuit. Buch an 
instrument, and an ordinary galvanometer, (showing impulsive de- 
flections of a steel needle,) both kept in the circuit at the remote end 
of the telegraph-wire from that at which the signal is made, would 

poo pm 

give the values of I and 1 yd^ (or the area), for any of the 

curves ; and the ratio of the time a of the diagrams to the time 
during which the battery was held in communication with the 
wire, might be deduced. The method will lose sensibility if the 
battery be held too long in communication, but will be quite suffi- 
ciently precise if this be not more than ten or twenty times a. « I 
believe there will be no difficulty in applying the method to tele- 
gnq>h-wires of only twenty or thirty miles long, where no retarda- 
tion would be noticed by ordinary observation. Before, however, 
planning any observations of this kind with a view to having them 
executed, 1 wished to form some estimate of the probable value of a 
certain element. — the number of electro- statical units in the electro- 
magnetic unit of electrical quantity, ---which 1 hoped to be able to 
do from the observation of -^th of a second as the apparent retarda- 
tion of signals between Greenwich and Brussels. I therefore applied 
to the Astronomer Royal for some data regarding the mode of obser- 
vation on the indications of the needle, and the dimensions and cir- 
cumstances of insulation of the wire ; and he was so good as to send 
me immediately all the information that was available for my pur- 
pose. lliis has enabled me to make the estimate, and so has con- 
v^ed me that a kind of experiment winch I proposed in a paper on 
Transient Electric Ourrents in the Philosophical Magazine for June 



896 


1 853i and whioh 1 hope to be able before long to put in practice, will 
be successful in giving a tolerably accurate comparison of the electro- 
statical and electro-dynmic units ; and, with a further investiga- 
tion of the specific inductive capacity of gutta peroha which will 
present no difficulty, will enable me to give all the data required for 
estimating telegraph retardations, without any data firom telegraphic 
operations. This experiment is simply to put two plane-conducting 
discs in communication with the two poles of a DanielFs battery (or 
any other battery of which the electromotive force is known in 
electro- magnetic units), and to weigh the attraction between 
them. I now find that lOO cells of Danielles so applied would 
give a force of not less than four grains between two discs each 
a square foot in area, and placed ^ apart. As the 

force varies inversely os the square of the distance between the discs, 
the weighing will be rather troublesome in consequence of instabi- 
lity, but 1 think with a go(^d balance it will be quite practi- 
cable. 

In making this estimate, I suppose the retardation observed between 
Greenwich and Brussels to be cbiefiy due to the subterranean part 
of the wire, and I have taken it as if it were actually observed in 180 
miles of coated copper wire. Not having worked out the theoretical 
]]toblem in the case of a number of insulated wires under the same 
sheathing, I have considered the cases of a single wire excentrically 
placed in the iron sheathing, and insulated from it by gutta percha, 
and a single wire in its own gutta percha tube with the others re- 
moved, and itself symmetrically sheathed with tow and iron wire in 
the usual manner. In the former case the electro-statical capacity of 

the wire would be ^ approximately* ** , if E, the inner radius 

2 log 4" 

of the conducting sheath, be a considerable multiple of E' the radius 
of the copper wire, / denoting be distance between their axes. In 


the latter case it is 




where E^ is the inner radius of the 


• Th« rigerotts expression, which is very easily found by the method of 

** eleetrical images," wed not he given here. 



807 


d.«lh. The» b»om. it « I=a (» it p». 

bably is for gutta percha* nearly enough), and 

R'ss*0325, as the information given me by the Astronomer Royal 
indicates. Whatever the theory may show for the induence of the 
other wires, the result as regards retardation must be intermediate 
between what it would be if the other wires were removed, and if 
the one used were separated from them by a sheathing of its own. 
We may therefore apply the theoretical result by taking c something 


between and Hence if “ the retardation agree with 

the time corresponding to o in the diagrams, k must be intermediate 
between 




ir»x. 


and 

^ X (180 X 6280)*xlog.(|) j:^X(l80X5280)«Xlog.^l j ’ 


or again, if the retardation” correspond to 9 o, ^ must be interme- 
diate between 


ir«X- 


ir«X 


1 

2'45 


90 

X{180X5280)»Xlog, ^1) x (180X6280)»Xlog,Qy 


I think it quite certain that what wa^ observed as the retardation 
must be in reality intermediate between a and 9a of the diagrams. 
Hence the true value of k for 1 foot of the wire must be between the 
greatest and least of the preceding estimates, that is, between 

_JL_and-— i~. 

108X10» 176X10*0 


But the value of K (the ** resistance” in British absolute electro-mag- 
netic measure of 1 foot of the wire) must, aocordipg to Weber*B obser- 
vations on copper, be about 99810, or nearly enough 100, 000*. Hence 
a (the number of electro-statical units in the eketro-magnetio unit) 
K 

beiig equal to a/ must be between 104,000,000 and 4 19,000,000. 


* See a paper on the appHostton of the general principle of mechanical to 
the ^eory of eleotromotiee fame, Ae., publiahed in the Philotophical Magasine, 

0eo.lB5l. 



400 


now add our own deductions from the observationfl which the image 
reflected by the mirTor has afforded us. 

Opening of the Glottle, 

At the moment when the person draws a deep breath, the epi* 
glottis being raised, we are able to see the following series of move- 
ments : — the arytenoid cartilages become separated by a very free 
lateral movement ; the superior ligaments are placed against the ven- 
tricles ; the inferior ligaments are also drawn back, though in a less 
degree, into the same cavities ; and the glottis, large and wide open, 
is exhibited so as to show in part the rings of the trachea. But 
unfortunately, however dexterous we may be in disposing these 
organs, and even when we are most successful, at least the third 
part of the anterior of the glottis remains concealed by the epi- 
glottis. 

Movement of the Glottis. 

As soon as we prepare to produce a sound, the arytenoid carti- 
lages approach each other, and press together by their interior 
surfaces, and by the anterior apophyses, without leaving any space, 
or intercartiiaginoas glottis ; sometimes even they come in contact 
so closely as to cross each other by the tubercles of Santorini. To 
this movement of the anterior apophyses, that of the ligaments of 
the glottis corresponds, which detach themselves flt>m the ventricles, 
come in contact with different degrees of energy, and show them- 
selves at the bottom of the larynx under the form of an ellipse of a 
yellowish colour. The superior ligaments, together with the ary- 
teno*epiglottidean folds, assist to form the tube which surmounts 
the glottis ; and being the lower and free extremity of that tubef 
enframe the ellipse, the surfooe of which they enlarge or diminish 
according as they enter more or less into the ventricles. These last 
scarcely retcun a trace of their opening. By anticiparion, we mi^t 
say of these cavities, that, as will afterwards appev dearly enough 
in these pages, they only afford to the two pedr of ligaments a 
space in which they may easily range themaelTes. When the 
aryteno-epiglottidean folds contract, they lower the epjglottb, and 
make the superior orifice of the larynx considerably narrower. 

Hie meeting of the lips of the glottis, naturally proceeding from 
the front towards the bsK^k, if this movement is well managed, it 



401 


will allow* between the apoj^yaes* ol the formation of a triangular 
apace, or inter- cartilaginoua glottis* but one which, however, is 
cloaed as soon as the sounds are produced* 

After some essays* we perceive that this internal disposition of 
the larynx is only visible when the epiglottis remains raised. But 
neither all the registers of the voice, nor all the degrees of intensity, 
are equally fitted for its taking this position. We soon discover 
that the brilliant and powerful sounds of the chest-register contract 
the cavity of the larynx, and close still more its orifice ; and, on the 
contrary, that veiled notes, and notes of moderate power* open both 
so as to render any observation easy. The falsetto register especial- 
ly possesses this prerogative, as well as the first notes of the head- 
voice*. 8o as to render these facts more precise, we will study in 
the voice of the tenor the ascending progression of the chest- 
renter, and in the soprano that of the falsetto and head-registers. 

Emission of the Chest-voice, 

If we emit veiled and feeble sounds, the larjmx opens at the notes 

do, r4, mi, 

2 2 2 

and we see the glottis agitated by large and loose vibrations through- 
out its entire extent. Its lips comprehend in their length the ante- 
rior apophyses of the arytenoid cartilages and the vocal cords ; but, 
I repeat it* there remains no triangular space. 

As the sounds ascend, the apophyses, which are slightly rounded 
on their internal side* by a gradual apposition commencing at the 
back, encroach on the length of the glottis; and as soon as we 

* liCt 01 hers observe, that three rc^ten of voice are generally admitted,— 
chest, fslsetto, and head. The first begins lower in a man's vmce than in a 
woman's ; the second extends equally in both voices ; the third readies higher in 
the female vdoe. 

Tahk qf the Eumsn Voice in UsfiM e^ent* 



t The mnstesl timits we establish in the course of these pages vary a little in 
eadi indbidtial. 




m 


rench the Bounds A, doj 

a a 


;> they finish by touching each 


other throughout their whole extent; but their summits are only 
solidly fixed one against the other at the notes do^, — cxz. . 


In some organs these summits arc a little vacillating when they 
form the posterior end of the glottis, and the two or three half-tones 
which are formed show a certmn want of purity and strength, which 
is very well known to singers. From the dojf, rd, the 


vibrations, having become rounder and purer, are accomplished by 
the vocal ligaments alone, up to the end of the register. 

The glottis at this moment .presents the aspect of a line slightly 
swelled towards its midcOe, the length of which diminishes still 
more as the voice ascends: We also see that the cavity of the larynx 
has become very small, and that the superior ligaments have con* 
tractcd the extent of the ellipse to less than one-half. 

When instead of veiled aild feeble sounds, we make use of full 
and vibrating ones, the glottis becomes visible only at the som&ds 
mi, fa, and those above tbemi a limit which depends 


to a certain extent on the dexterity of the singer. For all the rest, 
the organs act as we have just said, but with a double difference : 
1. The cavity of the larynx contracts itself more when the voice is 
intense, than when it is feeble, 2. The superior ligaments are con- 
tracted so as to reduce the small diameter of the ellipse to a width 
of two or three lines. But however powerful these contractions 
may be, neither the cartilages of Wrisberg, nor the superior liga- 
ments themselves, ever close sufficiently to prevent the passage of 
the air, or even to render it difficult. This fact, which is verified 
also with regard to the falsetto an4 head-registers, suffices to prove 
that the superior ligaments do not fill a generative part in the format 
tioa of the voice. We may draw the same conclusion by consider- 
ing the position occupied by the somewhat feeble muscles which 
correspond to these ligaments ; they cover externally the extremity 
of the diverging fibres of the thyro- arytenoid muscles, and take 
part especially in the contractions of the cavity of the larynx during 
the formation of the high notes of the chest- and of the head- 
registers. 



Production of the F(U$uUo» 


8ol, la|i» lat], 
2 2 2 

show the glottis infinitely better than the unisons of the chest-voice 
and produce vibrations more extended and more distinct. Its 
vibradng sides, formed by the anterior apo])hyseB of the arytenoid 
cartilages, and by the ligaments, become gradually shorter as the 

voice ascends ; at the notes la, si, the apophyses take 

3 3 ^ 

part only at their summits ; and in these notes there results a weak- 
ness similar to that which we have remarked in the chest-notes an 
octave below. At the notes do|i, rd, the ligaments 

alone continue to act ; then begins the series of notes called head* 
voice. The moment in which the action of the apophyses ceases, 
exhibits in the female voice a very sensible difference at once to the 
ear and in the organ itself. I^tly, we verify, that, up to the highest 
sounds of the register, the glottis continues to diminish in length 
and in width. 

If we compare the two registers in these movements, we shall find 
some analogies in them : the sides of the glottis, formed at first by 
the apophyses and the ligaments, become shorter by degrees, and 
end by consisting only of the ligaments. The ebest-register is 
divided into two parts, corresponding to these two states of the 
glotds. The register of falsetto-head presents a complete similarity, 
and in a still more striking manner. 

On other points, on the contrary, these same registers are very 
unUke. The length of the glottis necessary to form a falsetto note, 
always exceeds that which produces the unison of the chest. The 
movements which agitate the aides of the glottis are also aug- 
mented, and keep the vibrating orifice continually half opened, which 
naturally produces a great waste of air. A last trait of difference, 
is in the increased extent of that elliptic surface. 

All these circumstances, which we shall refer to again, show in 
the mechanism of the fidsetto, a state of relaxation, which we do not 
find in the same degree in the chest-register. 

Manner in which ike eounds are formed. 

As we have just said, and what we have seen proves it, the in- 
VOh, VII. 2 Q 


The low notes of the falsetto, 



404 


ferior ligaments, at the bottom of the larynx, form exclusively the 
voice, whatever may be its register or its intensity ; for they alone 
vibrate at the bottom of the larynx*. But by virtue of what prin- 
ciple is the voice formed ? It seems to me, that the answer to this 
question can be but this ; the voice is formed in one unique manner, — 
by the compressions and expansions of the atV, or the successive and 
regular explosions which it produces in passing through the glottis* 

The ligaments of the glottis are situate about the mean level of 
the upper border of the cricoid, close the passage, and present a 
resistance to the air. As soon as the air has accumulated suffi- 
ciently, it parts these folds and produces an explosion. But at the 
same instant, by virtue of their elasticity, and the pressure from be- 
low being relieved, they meet again to give rise to a fresh explosion. 
A series of these compressions and expansions, or of explosions, 
occasioned by the expansive force of the air and the reaction of the 
glottis, produces the voice. * 

This theory, though now generally admitted for reeds, and un- 
doubtedly evident in the liquid vein, the toothed-wheel of Savart, 
the syrdne of the Baron Cagnard Latour &c., has not to my know- 
ledge, been yet applied to the glottis f. If we consider that the 
lips of this aperture, taken separately, can give no kind of sound, 
however we may try to make them speak, we must admit that the 
sounds which they give forth by their mutual action, are only owing 
to the explosions of the air produced by their strokes It is not 
necessary in order to obtain the explosion of sound, that the glottis 
should be perfectly closed each time after its opening ; it suffices 
that it should oppose an obstacle to the air capable of developing its 
elasticity. In this case the rushing of the air is heard accompanying 

* Ws gladly acknowledge that thif most important faet has been already 
announced by J, Muller, although wc have our objections to the theory which 
acoompahies dsr Physiologie den Mmsehen. 

t I find that Dr. MUUer hints at the possibility of the voice being thus formed, 
but only to attack and reject the notion.— 

X Many controversies have aiisen respecting the sounds sometimes emitted by 
animals after the section of the superior and recurrent laryngeal nerves ; sounds 
which have been perhaps occasioned by the struggling of the animal causing a 
swelling of the neck and a mechanical contact of the vocal U^ments. However, 
without doubt, after the section of these nerves, voice, as a voluntary act, can no 
longer take place. 



405 


the §ound8» aod they take a veiled, and aometimee an extremely 
muffled character ; an observation i^hich >ve have already preaented 
to the reader'a notice in speaking of the falsetto. 

Cor^fectures on the Formation of the different Registers. 

Aa the entire system of vibrations arises solely from the inferior 
ligaments, it is evident that the cause of the different tones called 
registers, must be sought for in the muscles which set these liga- 
ments in motion ; and that the other parts of the larynx must be 
considered only as apparatus for strengthening the sounds obtained, 
and for modifying their quality. In our efforts to discover the more 
intimate processes of the vocal organs which produce the sounds, 
we shall recur at once to the observations already mentioned, to 
some anatomical remarks which we are going to make, and to the 
sensations which we feel in the organ itself whilst it is producing 
sounds. 

If we detach one of the halves of the thyroid cartilage, we shall 
see a large muscular surface of oblique fibres, which fills all the 
space between the arytenoid and thyroid cartilages. At its upper 
end is to be seen the muscle corresponding to the superior vocal 
ligaments, and which sometimes extends to the notch in the 
thyroid. After detaching this generally frail muscle, all the fibres 
constituting this muscular surface seem to start from two opposite 
centres, viz. the anterior surface of the arytenoid, and the re-enter- 
ing angle of the thyroid. These centres, occupying the extremities 
of a diagonal line, send their fibres towards each other in parallel 
lines. Those which start from the anterior face of the arytenoid 
descend obliquely ; the most external ones go to the cricoid, whose 
posterior half they cover at the side; the most internal ones de- 
scend to the vocal membrane*^, which they cover entirely. The 
fibres which terminate at the membrane become longer, as they be- 
come more intemaL Tliose which start from the re-entering angle 
of the thyroid, reascend obliquely to the summit of the arytenoid, 
then diverge in order to form the sides of the ventricles, and then 
disappear in the cuyteno-epiglottidean folds and even the under sur- 
face of the epiglottis. If we cut it away in successive layers, pro- 

Ws thus designate that part of the membrane which goes finom the bottom 
of the vocal Ugament, to the edge of the cricoid. 

3 Q 



406 


ceeding/rom the outaide to the in, we reach a thick bundle of fibres, 
{wrfcctly horizontal, which line the outer aspect of the vocal liga- 
ment, and which go from the anterior apophyses of the arytenoid 
to the re-entering angle of the thyroid*. 

This bundle has its posterior half covered by the lateral crico- 
arytenoid muscle, and its anterior half by the diverging fibres which 
start from the thyroid. If we cut away the horizontal bundle in 
successive layers, we see that the fibres are not all of the same 
length ; the most external fibres are the longest, and the succeeding 
ones get gradually shorter as they become more internal ; but they 
all originate in the anterior cavity of the arytenoid, and the muscle 
is inserted in the manner above explained throughout the whole 
length of the vocal ligaments, the thyro-arytenoid portion of it ex- 
cepted. As the fibres all begin from the arytenoid, and terminate 
successively at more distant points of the membrane, we see that the 
muscle is thicker behind thdn before. 

Thus the vocal ligament, and the membrane which depends from 
it, t!ie sole sources of all vocal sounds, are under the direct action of 
the fibres which come from the anterior cavity of the arytenoid ; the 
ligament under the action of the horizontal bundle, the membrane 
under that of the oblique fibres. The long horizontal fibres, ex- 
tending from one cartilage to the other, are placed at the exterior of 
the short horizontal fibres, and at the interior of the oblique fibres. 
The diverging fibres which start from the thyroid, acting only on 
the superior vocal ligaments and the folds, seem to influence by . 
their contractions only the quality and volume of the voice. 

The remarkable arrangement of the fibres which we have just ex- 
amined, enables us to explain a fundamental fact, — the elevation of 
the voice, llie fibres of the horizontal bundle being placed over 
each other, in layers, one covering the other, and getting gradually 
longer and longer, as they become more external, extend their action 
to the more anterior parts of the edges of the glottis. This progress- 
ive action from the back to the front, encroaches gradually on the 
length of the vibrating portion of the ligament, and likewise increases 
its tension, and its faculty of accelerating its pulsations. 

Another portion of the thyro-arytenoid muscle at the same time 
stretches and nuses the vocal membrane more and more, causing a 
Another portion of the tbyio-Srytenoid muscle. 



407 


lesser depth of the ligaments to be in contact, in proportion as the 
sounds become higher, and thus assists by increasing the mobility 
of the ligaments. 

We shall see in a few moments that the rotatory movement, 
which the external £brea of the lateral orico-arytenoid muscles give 
to the arytenoid, by making the vocal membrane deeper, partly 
counteracts the above effect, and produces the chest-register. 

The crico-th 3 rroid muscle, on the contrary, is a powerful auxiliary 
in the elevation of the voice. This muscle, which at the same time 
causes the thyroid to come forwards and downwards, gives rise to a 
mechanical tension, not only in the vocal ligament, but even in the 
whole vocal membrane. The meeting of the thyroid and cricoid 
cartilages, which we can feel by the touch, becomes especially 
marked when the inter-ligamentous glottis alone produces the sounds, 

which takes place as we have seen at the notes doit, r6> 

S 0 

in the chest- register, and an octave above for that of the head ; with 
this difference, however, that for the latter a more vigorous and 
complete connexion is necessary. 

Let us now see what we may learn from the sensations we feel in 
the vocal organ. When we produce a chest-note, the least attention 
enables us to distinguish a ** pinching ** at the jmaterior part of the 
glottis, which becomes more vigorous as the notes ascend. This 
pinching seems to be formed by extension of the depth of the touch- 
ing surfaces, and may become very painful ; whilst the notes of fal- 
setto, when higher than chest ones, give comparatively great relief to 
this part, and the sur&ces in contact seem to have become thinner. 

If we combine these sensations with the different remarks which 
have been furnished to us by the examination of the muscles, we 
can fix the particular mechanism of each register. 

Che^t Register, 

In fact, when the arytenoid muscles have brought in contact the 
arytenoid cartilages, and closed the glottis, the voice may take two 
very different charaoters ; nay, more, it will be produced in pitches 
widely apart firom one another, and will give forth the chest, or 
fslsetto registers, according as the fibres of the thyro-arytenoid. 
attached tfo vocal membrane are active or not. By the action 



408 


of tbe«e fibres* as we have seen* this muscle raises the vocal mem^ 
brane, aod makes its apposable part thinner; whereas the lateral 
crico-arytenoid gives a rotatory movement to the cartilage* which 
brings the apophyses into deep contact. This deep contact* 'which 
continues even after the apophyses no longer partake in the vibra- 
tions* gives a deep tension to the membranes* increases the depth of 
their contact** and* os a necessary consequence* augments the re- 
sistance they present to the air. It is to the extent of this resistance 
that we attribute the formation of the chest-register* so distinct by 
its particular amplitude. To it we attribute also the slowness of 
the beats of the glottis* and the consequent low pitch of the sounds* 
a pitch which* even in the highest tenor voices* is at least an octave 
lower than the head notes of ordinary soprani. 

Register of Falsetto. 

Wlien, on the contrary, the external fibres of the lateral crico- 
arytenoid muscle remain iiiactive, we produce the falsetto. The 
lips of the glottis, stretched by the horizontal bundle of the thyro- 
arytenoid* come in contact by their edge alone, formed at once by 
the ligament and the apophyses, and offer little resistance to the 
air. Hence arises the great loss of this agent* and the general 
weakness of the sounds produced here. 

But as soon as we reach the sound do, the beats ore produced by 
the ligaments exclusively* and we have attained the head-register. 
It is certain* as we may deduce from the movement of the ligaments* 
that then the vocal membrane is raised by the action of the fibres of 
the thyro-arytenoid muscle* and its surface is diminished to an edge ; 
but we think that the external fibres of the lateral crico-arytenoid* 
which would prevent this movement, remain inactive. Then also 
the very decided tension, which the crico-thyroid muscle efifects on 
the voc^ tendons* and which accelerates their movements* takes 
place. 

During the chest-register, therefore, the vocal ligaments are 
stretched* and are in contact to an extent corresponding with the 
depth of the anterior apophyses of the arytenoid, whilst in the 
falsetto the edges alone of the ligaments are stretched and apposed s 
in both oases the sounds being formed, not by the actual vibrations 
* It is then that we feel the pinching of which we have spoken. 



40d 


of either the whole or part of the tendons, but by the successive 
explosions which they allow. 

Pre99ure of the Air. 

Until now, in our remarks on the manner in which the voice is 
formed, we have only referred to the rigidity of the glotds, a rigidity 
necessary to accomplish the 1056 vibrations in one second*, which 
form the do of the chest-voice, and to accomplish the double number 

4 

which produces the octave above in the head-voice. There is, notwith- 
standing, another indispensable element for the production of vocal 
sounds, the pressure of the air. Pressure, as is well known, developes 
an elastic force in this agent, in a degree inverse to the volume 
which it occupies. It is by means of this power that the intensity 
of the sounds is obtained. The intensity of the sound can only de- 
pend on the quantity of air which goes to each sharp explosion. I 
say sharp explosion, as an express condition: the glottis should 
close itself perfectly after every vibration ; for if the air foimd a con- 
stant passage, as in the notes of falsetto, then the greatest move- 
ments of the glottis, and the greatest waste of air, would produce 
precisely the weakest notes. To reject this theory would be to 
attribute the intensity of the sound to the extent of the vibrations 
accomplished by the lips of the glottis, and to suppose that these 
lips, each taken separately, possess the power of producing sounds, 
suppositions quite contrary to the facts. 

The elastic force of the air arises not only from the compression 
of the lungs, but also from the contractions of the trachea, which 
adjusts its calibre to the different dimensions of the glottis. It is 
by means of this force that the air conquers the continually-in- 
creasing obstacle presented by the lips of the glottis when they 
produce sounds more and more intense. 

Thus the problem of the elevation of the voice, always complicated 
with that of its intensity, in order to be complete, ought to show 
the connexion which exists between the tension of the lips of the 
glottis, the pressure of the air, and the number and intensity of the 
explosions obtained. As a consequence, we may state that the 
greater pressure of air necessary to produce the greater intensity, 

* PoaUlst, Pkjfdquef Sixth Bdltion, toI. ii. page 77. 



410 


ivould at the same time increase the number of pulsations, and so 
raise the tone ; hut to prevent tbis> the glottis must at the same 
time be lengthened, and vice versd ; or, in other words, that the dif- 
ferent lengths of the glottis can, under different degrees of pressure, 
produce the same number of shocks, but at different degrees of 
intensity. 

Of the Qualities of the Voice, 

Various simultaneous causes modify the qualities of the voice : — 
I, according as the glottis partially or entirely closes the passage 
between the explosions, it produces veiled or brilliant sounds ; 2, the 
tube which surmounts and surrounds it also greatly affects the 
quality of the voice ; by its contractions it gives brilliancy to it and 
its widening volume ; 3, the epiglottis also plays a very important 
part, for every time that it lowers itself, and nearly closes the orifice 
of the larynx, the voice gains in brilliancy ; and when, on the other 
hand, it is drawn up, the^ voice immediately becomes veiled. 



411 


Jime 7, 1855. 

The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 


llie Annual General Meeting for the Election of Fellows was 
held. 

The Statutes respecting the election of Fellows having been read, 
the Rev. Dr. Booth and William Tooke, Esq., were, with the con- 
sent of the Society, ap|>oint6d Scrutators to assist the Secretaries in 
examining the lists. 

The votes of the Fellows present having been collected, the fol- 
lowing gentlemen were declared duly elected 


Arthur Connell, Esq. 

William Farr, Esq. 

William Lewis Ferdinand Fis- 
cher, Esq. 

Isaac Fletcher, Esq. 

William John Hamilton, Esq. 
John Hawkshaw, Esq. 

John Hippisley. Etq. 

James Luke, Esq. 


A. Follett Osier, Esq. 

Thomas Thomson, M.D. 

Charles B. Vignoles, Esq. 
Charles Vincent Walker, Esq. 
Robert Wight, M.D. 

Alexander William Williamson, 
Esq. 

George Fergusson Wilson, Esq. 


The Society then adjourned. 


June 14, 1866. 

The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

The following nobleman and gentlemen were admitted into the 
Society : — 

Hia Grace the Duke of Argyll. John Hawkshaw, Esq. 

Arthur Connell, Esq. John Hippisley, Esq. 

WiUtam Farr, Esq. James Luke, Esq. 

William Lewie Ferdinand Fis« Charles B. Vignoles, Esq. 

oher. Esq. Alexander W. Williamson^ Esq 

Isaac Fletoher, Esq. 

von, VII, 2 K 



412 


The following gentlemen were recommended by the Council for 
election as Foreign Members ; — 

Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet. Heinrich llathke. 

Julius Plucker. Carl Riimker. 

The President announced that Edward Tuaou, Esq., who at last 
Anniversary had ceased to be a Fellow of the Society in consequence 
of the non-payment of his subscription, had applied to the Council 
to be reinstated, alleging that unforeseen circumstances had pre- 
vented him from paying the annual contribution. The President 
therefore, in accordance with the Statutes, gave notice that the 
question of Mr. Tuson’s readmisslon would be put to the vote at the 
ensuing ordinary meeting. 

The following commujiications were read ; — 

I. ^'Remarks on the Rev. H. Moseley^s Theory of the Descent 
of Glaciers ” By James D. Foebes, D.C.L., P.R.S.^ Corn 
Inst. France, and Professor of Natural Philosophy in the 
University of Edinburgh. Received May 22, 1866. 

In a paper On the Descent of Glaciers,’* communicated to the 
Royal Society on the 19th of April, 1855, and printed in their Pro- 
ceedings, the Rev. Henry Moseley has proposed an explanation of 
tliat phenomenon. 

The first part of his paper contains a lucid description of the 
gradual motion of a sheet of lead covering the roof of Bristol Cathe- 
dral, which he ascribes (I have no doubt justly) to the successive 
expansions and contractions of the lead by atmospheric temperature. 
He explains the influence of the slope of the roof and of the measure 
of friction upon the motion with his customary precision and clear- 
ness* He also finds for the probable measure of the efifcct or creep- 
ing motion of the lead, a quantity which, considering the imperfect 
nature of the data with regard to temperature, agrees sufficiently 
wcD with observation. 

In the latter and shorter part of the paper is a transition to the 



413 


case of glaciers, whose motion over their beds may, he thinks, be 
accounted for in the same way, namely, by the alternate contraction 
and expansion of the ice by diurnal changes of temperature, and he 
then enters into certain calculations founded principally on data 
contained in my ‘ Travels in the Alps of Savoy' in confirmation of 
this view. 

Entertaining as I do the highest respect for Mr. Moseley’s emi- 
nent attainments as a theoretical mechanician, it is with extreme 
regret that I find it necessary, in maintenance of the views regarding 
glacier motion which I have elsewhere advanced, and in the interest 
of scientific truth, to show (as I believe I can) that Mr. Moseley 
has been led, apparently by a sudden inadvertency, to uphold an 
opinion completely indefensible. 

I must first object to Mr. Moseley's description or definition of 
a glacier, as calculated to mislead the inquirer : he says (p. 339), 

glaciers ore, on an increased scale" [compared to the sheet lead 
covering of a roof], “ sheets of ice placed upon the slopes of moun- 
tains." There are certainly some inconsiderable glaciers of the 
second order to which this description might possibly apply, with 
the exception of the small thickness inferred by the word ** sheet 
but the true glaciers, whose theory has been so often discussed 
(which theory must evidently likewise include that of glaciers of the 
second order), cannot fairly be called either sheets oi ice nor be 
accurately described as lying on the slopes of mountains. They are 
vast icy accumulations whose depth bears a considerable proportion 
to their breadth, and which fill mountain ravines or valleys. 

Glaciers are very generally hemmed in by precipitoue rocks which 
determine their contour or ground plan ; they have often to make 
their Way through contracted gorges where the ice occupies (as in 
the case of the Mer de Olace of Chamouni), within a short distance, 
a channel but half as wide as it did before. Yet the glacier, pre- 
serving its continuity as a whole, expands or contracts in conformity 
with the irregularities, not only of its lateral walls, but of its bed, 
forcing itself over obstacles, or even occasionally allowing itself to 
be cleft into two branches by them, and closing again into a united 
muM after the insular obstruction has been past. To speak of such 
i^esistances of the channel to the progress of the ice as mere friction, 
or of a glacier considered as a solid body and in its whole extent 

2 r2 



414 


(or in any oon»tderable part of it) as having an angle of repote^ as in 
the case of a substance with a dat base resting on an inoHned plane, 
is evidently inadmissible and tends to mislead. The valley of the 
Mer de Glace might have almost any possible inclination before the 
ioe would tend to dide out of it en maeae, for it is moulded to every 
sinuosity or protuberance of the bed, whether vertical or horizontal. 
Let Mr. Moseley imagine a sheet of lead having the ground plan of 
the Mer de Glace and confined by margins of wood accurately 
adapted to it, and he will see that unless lead were so ductile as to 
be entitled to the appellation of a semifluid, no motion could possibly 
result, however great might be the slope on which it lay. 

I am sorry to find that Mr. Moseley denies entirely (p, S41) the 
viscous or plastic structure of a glacier as not consistent with the 
fact that no viscosity can be traced in its parts when separated.” 
The answer to this objection seems to be merely this; that the 
viscosity, though it canpot be ** traced ” in the parts, ^ very miiwfe, 
nevertheless emfs there, as unequivocally proved by expeiiment on 
the large scale, or even on spaces several yards or fathoms in extent 
The plastic condition of a glacier is. as i have repeatedly stated, no 
longer an hypothesis, but a fact, since 1 have in many places demon- 
strated that, account for it as we may, diflPerent portions d the same 
continuous mass of ice are moving at the same moment with dif- 
ferent velocities. That a small piece of ioe is not sensibly plastic, is 
not more strange than that the fine blue colour so perceptible in the 
glacier totally vanidbes in its constituent firagraents. That ductility 
oxidfragUity ore not incompatible qualities, is shown by the fact, that 
sealing-wax at moderate atmospheric temperatures will mould itself 
(imTA rime) to the most delicate inequalities of the sudaoe on which 
it rests, under a pressure of not more than half an inch of its sub- 
stanoe, but may at the same time be shivered to atoms by a blow 
with a hammer. 

The question of plasticity, however, affects only mcdiaUly Mr. 
Moseley *s theory of the primary cause >of mo^n by dikttatkm and 
oontraotion. According to the views I sujqxnrt, the diktatioa and 
contraction of the ice of glaciers (assuming it to exist) would be in- 
effk>tent to move the mass unless it moved |dastioaUy; and it 
moves plasticatty, the supposition of its thermal eipanston is» at aU 
^ flse Phil Turn. 184fi, p. 162, and Phil. Msgsshie (1B46), xxvl p. 414. 



415 


events, superfluous, since ^vity is in that case a sufficient moving 
force. 

But, it will be argued, if the ice be really acted on by heat and 
cold as Mr. Moeolcy supposes, it in a vera cauta of motion and can- 
not be neglected. And here we join issue respecting the physical 
theory proposed. 

Mr. Moseley's explanation of the descent of the lead on a roof at 
an angle much below that at which motion could take place by 
gravity, friction being allowed for (the angle of repose), amounts 
to this, that every increase of temperature of the mass by the heat 
of the day expanding it, pushes the lower end downwards more than 
it pushes the upper end upwards ; whilst the cold of the night re- 
tracts a little the lower end, but (being favoured by the slope) it 
pulls down the upper end more than it had been pushed up during 
the heat of the day, and thus by a species of vermicular motion im- 
pels the body down the inclined plane. Tlie motion is calculated 
from a formula including the absolute expansibility of lead, the slope 
of the roof, the angle of repose, and the diurnal range of tempera- 
ture, Taking then corresponding data for the Mer de Glace of 
Chamouni, assuming 30° to be the angle of repose of a glacier upon 
its bed, taking the expansion of ice to be nearly double that of lead 
(according to experiments made at St. Petersburgh), and the daily 
range of temi>erature of the ice to be the same as that of the air ob- 
served by De Saussure on the Col du Gdant in the mouth of July, 
Mr. Moseley calculates the daily descent of the glacier opposite the 
Montanvert and compares it witii my observations. 

Waiving for the moment all other objections, can we possibly attru 
bate to the ice of the entire mass of this vast glacier an average daily 
range of temperature of 4^^ of Reaumur or 9^° of Fahrenheit ? The 
idea seems to me to be perfectly untenable. 

The expansion and contraction of ice by heat and cold can of 
course only take place below the freezing-point, or 32*^. Let it be 
percolated by water as it may, it cannot rise above that temperature 
nor expand in the smallest degree. But it is a matter perfectly 
notorious, that, at least in summer, and throughout the whole extent 
of the Glacier Proper, and even far into the region of the nM, the 
glacier is charged with percolating water derived from superficial 
fusion. Mr, Moseley admits this, and even attributes the diurnal 



416 


oscillation of temperature which he assumes, to the action of water, 
as in the following passage : ** Glaciers arc, on an increased scale, 
sheets of ice placed upon the slopes of mountains, and subjected to 
atmospheric variations of temperature throughout their masses by 
variations in the quantity and the temperature of the water, which 
flowing from the surface everywhere percolates them** (p. 339). 
This action therefore clearly brings the temperature of the ice up 
to 32® during the day. But how is the cold of the night to operate 
in reducing the temperature of a mass of ice certainly from 300 to 
600 or more feet in thickness through the enormous average depres- 
sion of 91 degrees ? The water so efficient by its percolation in 
raising the temperature (if necessary) to 32®, being frozen, is now 
powerless. Cold can be conveyed downwards, or to speak more 
correctly, Heat can be transmitted upwards through the ice only by 
the slow process of conduction, and this on the supposition that the 
depression of superficial temperature is all that the theory might 
require. But how stam/s the fact? Mr. Moseley quotes from De 
Saussure the following daily ranges of the temperature of the air in 
the month' of July at the Col du G^ant and at Chamouni, between 
which points the glacier lies. 

At the Col du Gdant 4®*257 Reaumur. 

At Chamouni ...... 10°'092 Reaumur. 

And he assumes ** the same mean daily variation of temperature to 
obtain throughout the length” [and depth?] “of the Glacier du 
Gdant which De Saussure observed in July at the Col du Gdant,” 
But between what limits does the temperature of the air oscillate ? 
We find, by referring to the third volume of De Baussure's Travels, 
that the mean temperature of the coldest hour* (4 a.m.) during his 
stay at the Col du Gdant was 0®’457 Reaumur, or 33®*03 Fahrenheit, 
and of the warmest (2 p.m.) 4®'714 Reaumur, or 42®'61 Fahrenheitf. 
So that even u]/on that exposed ridge, between 2000 and 3000 feet 
above where the glacier can be properly said to commence, the 
air does not, on an average of the month of July, reach the freemng- 
point at any hour of the night. Consequently the range of tempera^ 
iure allridvted to th glacier is between limits absolutely incapable of 

* The observationi were made every two hours day and night. 

t The oorrasponding extremes at Chamouni are 53''*25 and 75®»96 Fabr. 



417 


effecting ike e^ansion of the ice in the amalleet degree* This would 
of course be still more applicable if we take the mean of the tempe- 
ratures at Chamouni and the Col du G6ant to present the general 
atmospheric conditions to which the glacier is exposed. 

It is in summer that the glacier moves fastest : it is with my 
observations of motion in July that Mr. Moseley compares the results 
of his theory : and therefore it is of no avail to say that there are 
periods of the year when congelation penetrates at night some inches, 
or even it may be some feet into the ice, and when therefore the 
sensible heat of the glacier may be considered to vary, though, if 
regard be had to its vast thickness, it must be on an average and in 
the most extreme circumstances to an absolutely inappreciable 
degree. 

Lastly, Mr. Moseley, whilst condemning in the following passage 
the theory of glacier motion by the dilatation of water in the inter- 
stices of the ice, clearly passes sentence on his own, which could not 
come into action until the other had already produced its effects : 

The theory of Charpentier, which attributes the descent of the gla- 
cier to the doily congelation of the water which percolates it, and 
the expansion of its mass consequent thereon, whilst it assigns a 
cause which, so far as it operates, cannot, as I have shown, but 
cause a glacier to descend, appears to me to assign one inadequate 
to the result ; for the congelation of the water which percolates the 
glacier does not, according to the observations of Professor Forbes, 
take place at all in summer more than a few inches from the sur- 
face. Nevertheless it is in summer that the daily motion of the 
glacier is greatest/* (Moseley, Proc. R.S. vol. vii. p. 341.) 


11. Researches on the Foraminifera. — Part I. General Intro- 
duction, and Monograph of the Genus Orbitolites,^* By 
WitLiAM B. Carpenter, M.D., F.R.S., F.G.S. See. 
Received May 21, 1855. 

The group of Foraminfera being one as to the structure and 
physiology of which our knowledge is confessedly very imperfect. 



41B 


and for tike natural clarification of which there is consequently no 
safe basis, the author has undertaken a careful study of some of its 
chief typical forms, in order to elucidate (so far as may be pos- 
sible) their history as living beings, and to determine the value of 
the characters which they present to the systematist. In the pre- 
sent memoir, he details the structure of one of the lowest of these 
types, Orhitolite$^ with great minuteness; his object having been, 
not merely to present the results of his investigations, but also to 
exhibit the method by which they have been attained ; that method 
essentially consisting in the minute examination and comparison of 
a large number of specimens. 

llie Orbitolite has been chiefly known, until recently, through the 
abundance of its fossil remains in the Eocene beds of the Paris 
basin ; but the author, having been fortunate enough to obtain an 
extensive series of recent specimens, chiefly from the coast of 
Australia, has applied himself father to these as his sources of in- 
formation : especially as the animals of some of them have been suf- 
ficiently well preserved by immersion in spirits, to permit their cha- 
racters to be well made out. 

As might have been anticipated from our knowledge of their con* 
genera, these animals belong to the Rhisopodous type ; the soft body 
contisting of sarcode, without digestive cavity or organs of any kind ; 
and being made up of a number of segments, equal and similar to 
each other, which are arranged in concentric zones round a central 
nucleus. This body is invested by a calcareous shell, in the sub- 
stance of which no minute structure can be discerned, but which 
has the form of a circular disk, marked on the surface by concentiic 
zones of closed cells, and having minute pores at the margin. 
Starting from the central nucleus, — which consists of a pear-shaped 
mass of sarcode, nearly surrounded by a larger mass connected with 
it by a peduncle,— the development of the Orbitolite may take place 
either upon a simple, or upon a complete type. In the former (which 
is indicated by the circular or oval form of the cells which show 
themselves at the surfaces of the disk, and by the of the 

row of marginal pores), each zone consisto of but a single layer of 
segments, connected together by a single annular stolon of sarcode ; 
and the nucleus is connected with the first zone, and each zone with 
that which surrounds it, by radiating peduncles proceeding from this 



419 


annul UB, which, when isBuing from the peripheral zone> will pass out- 
wards through the marginal pores, probably in the form of pseudo- 
podia, In the comples! type, on the other hand (which is indicated 
by the narrow and straighUsided form of the superEcial cells, and 
by the multiplication of the horizontal rows of marginal poros), the 
segments of the concentric zones are elongated into vertical columns 
with impexfect constrictions at intervfds ; instead of a single annular 
stolon, there are two, one at either end of these columns, between 
which, moreover, there are usually other lateral communications ; 
whilst the radiating peduncles, which connect one zone with another, 
are also multiplied, so as to lie in several planes. Moreover, be- 
tween each annular stolon and the neighbouring surface of the disk, 
there is a layer of superficial segments, distinct from the vertical 
columns, but connected with the annular stolons ; these occupy the 
narrow elongated cells just mentioned, which constitute two super- 
ficial layers in the disks of this type, between which is the interme- 
diate layer occupied by the columnar segments. 

These two types seem to be so completely dissimilar, that they 
could scarcely have been supposed to belong to the same species ; 
but the examination of a large number of specimens shows, that 
although one is often developed to a considerable size upon the 
simple type, whilst another commences even from the centre upon 
the complex type, yet that many individuals which begin life, and 
form an indefinite number of annuli, upon the simple type, then take 
on the more complex mode of development. 

The author then points out what may be gathered from observa- 
tion and from deduction respecting the Nutrition and mode of 
Growth of these creatures. He shows that the former is probably 
accomplished, as in other Hhizopods, by the entanglement and draw- 
ing in of minute vegetable particles, through the instrumentality of 
the pseudopodia ; and that the addition of new zones probably takes 
place by the extension of the sarcode through the marginal pores, 
so as to form a complete annulus, thickened at intervals into seg- 
ments, and narrowed between these into connecting stolons, the 
shell being probably produced by the calcification of their outer por- 
tions. And this view he supports by the results of the examination 
of a number of specimens, in which reporaiion of wyaries has token 
place. Regarding the Reproduction of Orbitolites, he is only able 



420 


to suggest that certain minute spherical masses of saroode, with 
which some of the cells are filled, may be pemma/es ; and that other 
bodies, enclosed in firm envelopes, which he has more rarely met 
with, but which seem to break their way out of the superficial cells, 
may be ova. But on this part of the inquiry, nothing save observa- 
tion of the animals in their living state can give satisfactory results. 

The regular type of structure just described is subject to nume- 
rous variations, into a minute description of which the author next 
enters ; the general results being, that neither the shape nor dimen- 
sions of the entire disk, the size of the nucleus or of the cells form- 
ing the concentric zones, the surface-markings indicating the shape 
of the superficial cells, nor the early mode of growth (which, though 
typically cyclical, sometimes approximates to a spiral), can serve as 
distinctive characters of species ; since, whilst they arc all found to 
present most remarkable differences, these differences, being strictly 
gradational, can only be considered as distinguishing individuals. 
It thus follows that a very wide range of variation exists in this 
type : so that numerous forms which would be unhesitatingly 
accounted specifically different, if only the most divergent examples 
were brought into comparison, are found, by the discovery of those 
intermediate links which a large collection can alone supply, to be- 
long to one and the same specific type. 

After noticing some curious momtrosities, resulting from an un- 
usual outgrowth of the central nucleus, the author proceeds to in- 
quire into the essential c4arac/er of the Orbitolite, and its relations 
to other types of structure. He places it among the very lowest 
forms of Foraminifera ; and considers that it approximates closely 
to sponges, some of which have skeletons not very unlike the cal- 
careous net- work which intervenes between its fleshy segments. Of 
the species which the genua has been reputed to include, he states 
that a large proportion really belong to the genus Orbiioides, whilst 
others are but varieties of the ordinary type. This last is the light 
in which he would regard the Orhitolites complanata of the Palis 
basin; which differs from the fully- developed Orbitolite of the 
Australian coast in some very peculiar features (marking a less com*- 
plete evolution), which are occasionally met with among recent 
forms, and which ore sometimes distinctly transitional towards the 
perfect type. 



421 


The author concludes by calling attention to some general prin- 
ciples, which arise out of the present inquiry, but which are appli- 
cable to fill departments of Natural History', regarding the kind and 
extent of comparison on which alone specific distinctions can be 
securely based. 


June 21, 1855. 

The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

A, Follett Osier, Esq., Charles Vincent Walker, Esq., and Robert 
Wight, M.D., were admitted into the Society. 

The following gentlemen were elected Foreign Members of tlie 
Society 

Gustav Lejeunc Dirichlet. 

Julius Pliicker. 

Heinrich Uathke. 

Carl Riimker. 

Pursuant to notice given at last Ordinary Meeting, the question 
of the readmission of Edward Tuson, Esq., was put, and, the ballot 
having been token, decided in the negative. 

The following communications were read : — 

I. On a supposed Aerolite or Meteorite found in the Trunk of 
an old Willow Tree in the Battersea Fields.^^ By Sir Eo- 
DEuicK Impey Murchison, F.R.S,, Director-General of 
the Geological Survey of Great Britain. Received June 
21, 1855. 

In bringing this notice before the Royal Society, it is unnecessary to 
recite, however briefly, the history of the fall of aerolites or meteorites, 
as recorded for upwards of three thousand years, though I may be 



m 


pardoned for reminding my Associates, that the phenomenon vras 
repudiated by the most learned academies of Europe up to the close 
of the last century, llie merit of having first endeavoured to de- 
monstrate the true character of these extraneous bodies is mainly 
due to the German Chladni (1794), but his efforts were at first 
viewed with incredulity. According to Vauquelin and otlier men 
of eminence who have reasoned on the phenomena, it was in 1802 
only that meteorites obtained a due degree of consideration and some- 
thing like a definite place in science through the studies of Howard, 
as shown in his memoir published in the Philosophical Transactions. 

Vauquelin, Klaproth, and other distinguished chemists, including 
Berzelius and Rammelsberg, have successively analysed these bodies, 
and the result of their labours, as ably brought together in the work 
of the last-mentioned author, is, that whilst they have a great gene- 
ral resemblance and are distinguishable on the whole by their com- 
position from any bodies foupd in the crust of the earth, each of 
their component substances is individually found in our planet. 
They are also peculiarly marked by the small number of minerals 
which have collectively been detected in any one of them ; nickel 
and cobalt, in certain relations to iron, being the chief characteristics 
of the metallic meteorites. 

Of the various theories propounded to account for the origin of these 
singular bodies, it would indeed ill become a geologist like myself to 
speak ; and referring in the sequel to some of the various works in 
which the subject has been brought within formula, I will at once 
detail the facte connected with the discovery of this metalliferous 
body in the heart of a tree, as now placed before the Members of 
our Society, feeling assured that, whatever be their \iltimate deci- 
sion, my contemporaries will approve of the efforts that have been 
made to account for this singular and mysterious phenomenon. 

On the 2nd of June, a timber merchant, residing at North Brix- 
ton, named Clement Poole, brought the specimen now exhibited to 
the Museum of Praerical Gkology, when it occurred to Mr. Trenham 
Reeks, our Curator, that it might be a meteorite, and on inspecting 
its position in the mass of wood, and having heard all the evidence 
connected with it, I was disposed to form the same conclusion. On 
submitting a small portion of the metallic part to a qualitative test 
in the metallurgical iaboratory of our establishment, the presence of 



428 


nickel, cobalt and manganese was detected in the iron included in 
the mass, and as the surface was scorified, indented, uneven, and 
partially coated with a peculiar substance, the surmise as to the 
meteoric nature of the imbedded material seemed to be rendered 
much more probable. Again, in looking at the wood which imme* 
diately surrounded that portion of the mass which remained, as it is 
now, firmly inserted in the tree, a blackened substance was observed 
to be interpolated between the supposed meteorite and the sur- 
rounding sound wood. On the outside of this substance (which had 
somewhat a charred aspect) we observed a true bark, which follows 
the sinuosities of the wood wherever the latter appears to have been 
influenced by tlie intrusion of the foreign mineral matter. [The spe- 
cimen is represented in the annexed wood -cut.] 



Seeing thus enough to satisfy our conjecture, if sanctioned by 
other evidence, I desired Mr, Poole to bring ail the fragments df the 
wood he had not destroyed which surrounded this body. On placing 
the ends of some of these (also now exhibited) on the parts ftom 
which ^ey had been savred off, they indicated that the space be- 
tween the mineral substance and the surrounding sound wood 
widened upwards; the decayed wood passing into brown earthy 


424 


matter with an opening or cavity into which rootlets extended. On 
interrogating Mr. Poole, who cut down the tree and superintended 
the breaking up of its timber, I learnt from him all requisite parti- 
culars respecting its dimensions, the position of the ferruginous 
moss, the quantity of wood above and below it, a description of the 
{)lace where the stool of the tree was still to be seen, and of the 
parties who, living on the spot, were acquainted with every circum- 
stance which could throw light on the case. 

At this period of the inquiry, the Museum in Jermyn Street was > 
visited by Dr. Shepard, Professor in the University College, Am- 
herst, United States, whose researches on raeteoritcH are widely 
known, and who has furnished an able classification of them by 
which they are divided into the two great clasacs of stony and me- 
tallic. Having carefully examined the specimen, Dr. She])ard ex- 
pressed his decided belief that it was a true meteorite, and the next 
day wrote to me the following account of it ; at the same time re- 
ferring me most obligingly to a series of interesting publications on 
the subject as printed in America and Europe*? — 

** Concerning the highly interesting mineral mass, lately found 
enclosed in the trunk of a tree, and of which you have done me the 
honour to ask my opinion, 1 beg leave to observe, that I have no 
hesitation in pronouncing it to be a true meteoric stone. 

Aside from the difficulty of otherwise accounting for it, under 
the circumstances in which it is found, the mass presents those 

* Dr. Shepard's ^mnerout memoirs on meteorites are all to be found in the 
volumes of the American Journal of Science and Art, and in the same work the 
reader will find not only the general classification of these bodies by this author, 
who posseuGs a collection horn 103 localities, hut also essays on the same subject 
by his countrymen Dr, Troost, Professor SilUman, jun,, and Dr, Clark, 

In our own country, Mr, Brayley published some years ago a comprehensive 
view of this subject in the Philosophical Magazine, and recently Mr. Greg has in 
the same publication put together all the previous and additional materials, with 
tables showing the geographical distribution of meteorites. Among the well- 
recorded examples of the fall of metalliferous meteorites, no one is more remark- 
able than that which happened in the year Id&l, about sixteen leagues S.G. of 
Barcelona in Spain. In describing that phenomenon, Dr. Joaqultu Baleelts, Pro- 
fessor of Natural Sciences at Barcelona, has illustrated the subject wHh much 
erudition, whilst his theoretical views are ingenious in hU endeavour to explain 
how meteorites are derived fimm the moon. 



425 


peculiar traits that are regarded as characteristic of meteorites. It 
has, for example, a fused, vitrified black coating, which is quite con- 
tinuous over a considerable part of the mass, and contains several 
grains and imbedded nodular and vein-like portions of metallic iron, 
in which I understand nickel and col>alt have been detected. 

** The general character of the body of the stone is indeed pecu- 
liar ; and as a whole, unlike any one I have yet seen ; it being prin- 
cii)ally made up of a dull greyish yellow, peridotic mineral, which 1 
have nowhere met with among these productions, except in the 
Hommoney Creek meteoric iron mass, and which exists in it only in 
a very limited quantity. It is singular to remark also, that the 
stone under notice strikingly resembles in size, shape and surface, 
the iron above alluded to. 

** llie absence of the black, slaggy coating on one of the brbad 
surfaces of the atone, may arise from its having been broken away, 
by the violence to which it must have been subjected in entering 
the tree.; for it appears to have buried itself completely at its con- 
tact, an operation which would probably have been impossible, in 
the case of a stone, but for its wedge-shaped configuration, and the 
coincidence of one of its edges with the vertical fibres of the wood." 

In reply to a question I subsequently put to Dr. Shepard as to 
whether he knew of any examples of meteorites having struck trees 
in America, he replied as follows ; — 

“ I think you will find in the volume I left with Mr. Reeks at the 
Museum, an account of the foil of Little Piney, Missouri, February 
13th, 1839; in which it is stated that the stone struck a tree and 
was shattered to fragments, it being one of a brittle character. In 
the interior of the Cabarras county, N. Carolina, a stone (October 
31, 1849) I know struck a tree, and I found it was difficult, indeed 
impossible, to separate completely the adhering woody fibres from 
the rough hard crust of the meteorite. The stone in this case is a 
peculiarly tough one, having a decidedly trappean character, render- 
ing it as nearly infragile as cast iron." 

Aware that some time must elapse before the precise analysis, 
which I v^ished to be made in the laboratory of Dr. Percy, could be 
completed, and that the last meeting of the Royal Society was to be 
held this evening, I announced the notice I am now communicating. 
At the same time I resolved to visit the locality where the tree 6tood> 



426 


and to obtain on the Bi>ot all the details required. Having done so, 
aooompafnied by Mr* Robert Brown, Sir Philip Grey Egerton, Pro- 
fessor J. Nicol, and Mr. Trenham Reeks, the information ultimately 
obtained was as follows 

The man who helped to cut down the tree confirmed in every re- 
spect the evidence of Mr. Poole as to its position» height, and dimen- 
sions, and pointed out to us the stump or stool we were in search of, 
which is to be seen at nearly 200 yards to the east of the St. George’s 
Chapel, Lower Road, Battersea Fields, and at the eastern end of a 
nursery garden, between the railway and the road, occupied by 
Mr, Henry Shailer. 

The tree was a large willow, probably about sixty years of age, 
which stood immediately to the east of the old parsonage house re- 
cently palled down. Its stem measured about 10 feet in circum- 
ference at 3 feet above the ground, and had a length of between 9 
and 10 feet ; from its summit three main branches extended, one of 
which, pointing to the 8,W. (or W.S.W., had been for many years 
blighted, and was rotten to near its junction with the top of the 
main trunk; a portion of this blighted miun branch is exhibited. 
The other two main branches, which rose to a height of 50 or 60 
feet, were quite sound ; a part of one of these offsets is also exhi- 
bited. 

The stool of the tree was visibly perfect and without a flaw, and 
at the wish of Mr. R. Brown, a section of it has been obtained since 
our visit, which is abo here, and the rings of which seem to confirm 
the supposition as to the age of the tree. 

Mr. Poole having conveyed the tree to Brixton, cut the trunk into 
two nearly equal parts, intending to make orioket-bats out of each. 
In doing so, he perceived that the upper portion of the lower of the 
two segments was in a shaky or imperfect condition, and hence he 
resolved to saw off the upper part of it, intending thereby to obtain 
wood large enough for the pods " of his cricket-bats, bat not such 
entire bats as he was making out of tkt upper segment. 

In dividing the tree, the saw was stopped at about 6 inches from 
the surface on one side (or the breadth of a large saw) by a very 
hard, impenetrable substance, which was supposed to be a nail, and 
hence Mr. Poole resolved to break up the portion of the wood he 
had previously ocmdemned as of inferior quality, and hewing it down 



427 


from the aides he uncovered, to his astonishment, the great lump of 
metalliferous matter, as now seen. Attaching little value to it, 
much of the surrounding urood was thrown away or used up before 
the specimen was brought to Jermyn Street ; but enough has been 
obtained to throw light on the probable or possible origin of the 
included mass. 

On interrogating Henry Shailer, a market gardener, who has long 
lived on the spot and managed the ground where the tree grew, 
when it was part of the garden of the former clergyman (Mr. Wed- 
dell), I learnt from him that he had known the spot for sixty years, 
that in bis days of boyhood it was a fellmonger’s yard, before it was 
attached to the garden. He had observed that the tree was blighted 
in one of its main branches for many years, and had always sup- 
posed that it was struck by lightning in one of two storms, the 
first of which happened about 1838 or 1839, the other about nine 
years ago. 

So far the evidence obtained might be supposed to favour the 
theory that this ferruginous mass * had been discharged near to the 
blighted branch, and had penetrated downwards into the tree, to the 
position in which we now see it, charring and warping the wood 
immediately around it in its downward progress ; whilst in the six- 
teen years which have elapsed, the wood renovating itself, produced 
the appearance which has so much interested the eminent botanists 
who have examined it, viz. Mr. li. Brown, Dr. Lindley, Professor 
Henfrey, Dr, J. Hooker, and Mr. Bennett. 

On the other hand, I must now point out some features of this 
extraordinary case which check the belief in the included mass being 
a meteorite. 

We found lying near the root of the tree two fragments, one of 
which is similar to the substance included in the tree, while the 
other is decidedly an iron slag. On bringing these fragments, 
weighing several pounds, to Jermyn Street, and on breaking one of 
them, it was found, like the supposed meteorite, to contain certain 
small portions of metallic iron, in which both nickel and cobalt were 
also present ; and hence the scepticism which had prevailed from 

* The ferrqgioous mass is, It is supposed, about thirty pounds in weight ; but as 
one of its extremities is still imbedded in the wood, the precise weight cannot be 
stated. 

2 s 


VOL. vir. 



428 


the beginniug of the inquiry in the minds of some of my friends, 
was worked up into a definite shape. 

ITie occurrence of stones enclosed in wood is not a tiovel pheno- . 
menon. Mr. Robert Brown has called my attention to two cases 
as recorded in the following works : — 

“ De lapide in trunco betulse reperto. G.F. Richter in Acta Pliys. 
Med. Acad. Nat. Curios, volume 3, page 66*.*' 

** Descriptio Saxi in Quercu invent!. Kellander, Acta Literaria 
et Scientice Sheciae.” 1739, pp. 502, 503. 

Since the Battersea phenomenon was announced, Professor Hens- 
low, to whom I had applied, wrote to me saying, that he possessed 
a remarkable example of a stone which was found imbedded in the 
heart of a tree, in sawing it up in Plymouth Dockyard ; and he has 
obligingly sent uj) the specimen, which is now also exhibited. In 
this case, judging from the mineral character of the rock, and its 
being slightly magnetic^ Professor Henslow supposed that it was 
perhaps a volcanic bomb. 6n referring it to Dr. Shepard, tha^ 
gentleman entertains the opinion that it is also a meteorite, and 
states that it resembles certain meteoric stones with which he is ac- 
quainted j suspicions of which hsid also been entertained by Professor 
Henslow, From the examination of "k minute fragment which 1 de- 
tached from this atone, it appears to be composed of a base of fel- 
spathic matter, with minute crystals of felspar and of magnetic iron 
pyrites. Externally it has a trachytic aspect, though, when frac- 
tured, it more resembles, in the opinion of Mr. Warington Smyth, 
a pale Cornish elvan or porphyry than any other British rock with 
which it can be compared. Whatever may have been tJie origin of 
this stone, which is of the size of a child's head, it is essentially dif- 
ferent from the metalliferous mass from Battersea, to which atten- 
tion has been specially invited, and its position in the heart of an 
oak is equally remarkable. Like the Battersea specimen, the seg- 
ment of wood from Plymouth Dockyard is characterized by an inte- 
rior bark which folds round the sinuosities of the included stone. 

In respect to the envelopment of manufiictured materials in trees, 

* ** Lapis prsedurus subalbioans et mauifeste siliceus pruni ferme aut jug^dis 
miuoria magnitudine. Nidus ad figuram lapidSa non plane aeoomxnodatas, 
sed quadrangulus, et bine iUinc in mediocres rimaa desinens, cortieeque imprhnis 
notabUi, non multum ab exteiiorl cute diverso, maximam partem vestitus," 



429 


Qiy friend, Mr. H. Brooke, the distinguished mineralogist, tells me 
that he perfectly remembers the cose of an iron chain which had 
been enclosed* in the heart of a tree, the wood of wliich was sound 
around the whole of the included metallic body. This specimen 
was to l>e seen some years ago in the British Museum. Again, he 
informs me that at Stoke Newington he recollects to have seen a 
tree, the trunk of which had grown over and completely enclosed a 
scythe, except on the sides where its ends protruded*. 

Whatever may have been the origin of the metalliferous mass from 
Battersea, its discovery has at all events served to develope certain 
peculiarities in the growth of plants which appear to be of high in^ 
teres t to the eminent botanists who have examined the parts of this 
tree which surrounded the supposed meteorite. Unwilling to endea- 
vour to anticipate the final decision as to the origin of the body in 
question, I may be permitted to feel a satisfaction that its discoverer 
brought it to the Establishment of which I am the Director, and 
which numbers among its officers a Fellow of this Society, who is so 
well calculated, by his analytical researches, to settle the question on 
a permanent basis. Should the metallurgical analyses now under the 
conduct of Dr. Percy lead to the inevitable conclusion that the com- 
position of this body is different from that of well- authenticated 
meteorites, and is similar to that of undoubted iron slags, we shall 
then have obtained proofs of the great circumspection required be- 
fore we assign a meteoric origin to some of these crystalline iron 
masses, which though not seen to fall, have, from their containing 
nickel, cobalt and other elements, been supposed to Jbe formed by 
causes extraneous to our planet. 


Postscript, 80th June 1855. — ^Thc following are the analyses above 
referred to, which have been given to me by Dr. Percy since the 
preceding notice was read ; — 

**The slag-like matter {V) attached to the metal in the tree, as well 
as the similar matter (2) with adherent metal which was found by 

* Many other examples of extraneous bodies found endoaed in the heart of 
trees have been brought to my notice since this account was written. The most 
carious of these is perhaps that of an image of the Virgin, which having been 
placed in a niche had become imbedded by the growth of the tree around it. 

2s2 



430 


Mr Reeks in the vicinity of the tree, has been analysed. The results 
are as follow : — 



No. >. 

No. 2. 

Silica 

68-70 

C3-62 

Protoxide of iron 

85'46 

32*80 

Lime 

0*30 

0*59 

Magnesia 

0’74 

0*21 

Protoxide of manganese 

trace 

trace 

Alumina 

3*40 

2*85 

Phosphoric acid 

0*43 

0*57 

Sulphur as sulphide 

trace 

trace 


99^03 

100*04 


** No. 1. was analysed by Mr. Spiller, and No. 2. by Mr. A. Dick, 
chemists who have been incessantly engaged at the Museum during 
the last two years and a half in the analyses of the iron ores of this 
country, and whose great experience renders their results worthy of 
entire confidence. Cobalt and nickel were not sought for in either 
case, but the metallic iron enveloped in both specimens contained a 
minute quantity of cobalt and nickel. Another piece of slag-like 
matter, which was found on the ground near the tree, and which 
from its external characters 1 have no hesitation in pronouncing to 
be a slag, was examined for cobalt and nickel, and gave unequivocal 
evidence of the former in minute quantity, though not satisfactorily 
of the latter. 

The metal previously mentioned ia malleable iron. That which 
was detached from the slag-like matter, found outside the tree, was 
Bled and polished, and then treated with dilute sulphuric acid. 
After this treatment , the surface presented small, confused, irregu- 
larly-defined crystalline plates, and was identical in appearance with 
the surface of a piece of malleable iron similarly treated after fusion 
in a crucible.’* 



4S1 


II. the Magnetism of Iron Ships^ and its accordance 

with Theory, as determined externally, in recent Experi- 
ments/^ By the Rev. W. Scoubsby, D.D., F.R.S., Corr. 
Memb. Inst. France, &c. Received June 21, 1855. 

The magnetic condition of iron ships is a subject of so much im- 
portance, practically and scientifically, that I have been induced to 
submit to the Society a few characteristic facta (hastily indeed 
brought together) derived from recent experiments. 

In a work in the Society's library, entitled * Magnetical Investi- 
gatioDs/ it was shown, by deductions from an elaborate series of 
experiments on plates and bars of malleable iron, that the magnetic 
condition of iron ships should, theoretically, be conformable to the 
direction of terrestrial induction whilst on the stocks ; and the re- 
tentive quality, which is so highly developed by virtue of the ham- 
mering and other mechanical action during the building, should be 
so far fixed in the same direction, as to remain after the ships might 
be launched, until disturbed by fresh mechanical action in new posi- 
tions of their head or keel. In this view, taking, for instance, the 
condition of the middle, or the main breadth section of a ship on 
the stocks, the magnetic polar axis should assume the direction of 
the dipping-needle (with an equatorial plane, or plane of no-attrac- 
tion at right angles to it), passing through or proximate to the 
centre of gravity of the iron material in such section. Thus every 
ship should have a characteristic magnetic distribution, primarily, 
dependent on her position whilst on tlie stocks ; so that, being built 
with the head north or south, the equatorial plane should appear 
externally on the same horizontal level, the polar axis only being 
inclined from the vertical, in correspondence with the direction of 
the axis of terrestrial magnetism (Magnetical Investigations, vol. ii. 
pp. 331, 332). 

It was also inferred, that whilst such individuality of the mag- 
netic distribution would be rendered retentive on the same principles 
as this quality of magnerism is developed in bars or plates of iron 
by mechanical action, so the axial direction of the ship's magnetism 
would be lia^e to ckanqe, under mechanical action, in new positions 
of the ship's head, or under new relations of terrestrial magnetism, 



432 


just as the retentive magnetism is liable to change in bars or plates 
of iron if hammered, vibrated, or bent whilst held in new po- 
sitions. 

And it was further inferred, that the analogy with plates and bars 
might be expected to hold, notwithstanding the numerous pieces of 
which the ship's hull might be composed, because, in experiments 
on combining short magnets into long series, or submitting piles of 
short bars of iron to terrestrial induction, it was found that no ma- 
terial difference in the effects occurred betwixt a single steel magnet 
of a given length, or a single bar of iron, and tlie same substance 
and dimensions combined in short or small pieces in contact. Hence 
it was considered that an iron ship should exhibit in its general 
fabric the characteristic phenomena of one undivided mass, or a 
unity as a magnetic body. 

These anticipations, it will be seen (published betwixt three and 
four years ago), have, so far we have now time to elucidate them, 
had verifications, in actual experiments on iron ships, as beautiful as 
they are conclusive. 

In the case of the ‘Elba,' an iron ship of 200 feet in length, built 
recently on the Tyne, the magnetic condition before launching, 
which I was invited to investigate by Mr. Robert Newall, the owner, 
was found satisfactorily accordant with theory. Her head pointed 
south a few degrees westerly, and her lines of no -deviation (indica- 
tive of the position of the magnetic equatorial plane) were at a small 
distance in elevation different on the two sides, that of the starboard 
side being the highest. Proceeding in a direction at right angles to 
the dip. and passing through, or near to, the ship's general centre 
of gravity, the lines of no-attraction (descending forward) came out 
near the junction of the stem with the keel. And there, it was re- 
markable, as I had suggested as probable to Mr, James Napier of 
Glasgow, before making any experiment, there was found a depart- 
ure from the ordinary regularity of the lines of no-attraction in a 
considerable downward bend. 

Towards the stern, the equatorial lines rose out of and came above 
the iron plating of the /op-sides, about 40 feet from the tafrail ; 
thus giving to the after^peirt of the ship a uniform northern polarity. 
The ship, consequently, had become a huge simple magnet**-the 
north pole at the stern and the south at the head. The attractive 



438 


puwer^ as was expected, was highly energetic* At the distance of 
50 feet, a compass on the level of the keel, at right angles to it 
abreast of the stem, was deviated to an extent of above 10^ ; at 100 
feet distance tlie ship's magnetism caused a deflection of about half 
a point ; and at 150 and even 200 feet there was a very sensible 
disturbance ! 

In the case of the ' Fiery Cross/ built at Glasgow and launched 
in January last (a case which I have elsewhere referred to), the lines 
of no*deviatioD, as taken for me by Mr. James Napier, were still 
more rigidly in accordance with theory, — the difference of elevation 
of the observed lines of no*deviation at the main-breadth section 
agreeing with calculation, theoretically, to within an inch or two. 
In the other case, that of the ‘ Elba,' a slight discrepancy as to the 
comparative level of the lines of no-attraction on the two sides, might, 
perhaps, be satisfactorily explained by the proximity and somewhat 
disturbing influence of another iron ship (advanced only to the 
frames or angle irons) on the port side of her. 

In the case of the * Elizabeth Harrison,’ a large iron ship built at 
Liverpool, the first I had carefully examined, the correspondence of 
the magnetic polar axis and equatorial plane with those of terres* 
trial action was equally characteristic and conclusive. 

Hence we may perceive a suflicient reason for some of the pecu- 
liar phenomena in iron ships of the compass disturbances and their 
changes. We may see why a ship built with her head easterly or 
westerly, and having the polar axis inclined over 18° or 20° to the 
starboard or port side, should be particularly liable to compass 
changes^ if severely strained or struck by the sea with her head in 
an opposite direction. We see why the compasses of the ‘Tayleur’ 
should have been exposed to such a change os appears to have taken 
place in her lamentable case. We see in the case of the ^Ottawa’*^’ 
(one I have elsewhere referred to), why a heavy blow of the sea, with 
the ship heeling and her head pointing eastward, would be likely to 
produce a change in her magnetism, when her previous magnetic 
distribution was solicited by terrestrial action in an angle of 30° or 40° 
of difference. And we see why the deviations of the compass in iron 
ships should, differently from those of wooden ships, be sometimes 
westerly and sometimes easterly in ships built and trading in home 
• Where the oonIpSM suddenly changed two points. 



434 


latitudes ; for here, whilst in wooden ships, where the iron work is 
in detached masses, the ship can have but little, externally, of the 
character of a true magnet, > and can possess but small comparative 
differences from the position of her head whilst building ; in iron 
ships, on the converse, where the ship is rendered by percussive 
action a powerful and, retentively, true magnet, her deviating action 
must be expected to be different, as the polarity of the head or stern 
may differ in denomination, or as the ship*s magnetic polar axis may 
happen to lie over to starboard or port. 

As an objection might be made to deductions from exj^eriments on 
simple individual bars or plates of iron being applied to the case of 
iron ships built up of thousands of pieces, I have repeated the expe- 
riments, substituting for an entire plate or bar of iron a plate about 
18 inches long and 3 broad, made up of numerous separate plates, 
and combined in the manner of the plating of iron ships. The 
compound or combined platq of some eighteen or twenty pieces 
yielded, under percussion, vibration or bending, results precisely 
similar to those obtained by the use of single plates or bars. 


IlL Extract of a Letter from Professor Langbxro of Christi- 
auia to Colonel Sabins^ dated June lOtb, 1855. Com- 
municated by Colonel Sabins, V.P. and Treas, R.S, 

** Of all the important results from the discussions of the British 
Colonial Observatory, the discovery of the direct action of the sun 
on the magnetism of the earth is certainly a fact of the highest in- 
terest, in opening quite a new field for investigation; and few modem 
discoveries in this branch of scienoe have mterested me more than 
yours of the annual variation of the diurnal variation of declination. 
It seems that M. Becchi of Rome has nearly touched at the same 
discovery, and 1 am mdeed glad that the enormous quantity of cal- 
culations, which you are superintending, did not prevent you from 
publishing your results before the ripening fruit was plucked by an- 
other. The first beautiful result of this annual variation is the ex- 
planation of the fact, which you have deduced from the observations 
at St Helena and the Cape of Good Hope, that the horary variation 



435 


of declination does mt vanish in passing from the northern to the 
southern magnetic hemisphere, but only changes signs at the equi- 
noxes. I think every physicist will agree with you, that no thermic 
hypothesis will be able to explain this annual variation, but as you 
say (Toronto, ii. p. xix), it is 'obviously connected with, and de- 
pendent on, the earth’s position in its orbit relatively to the sun, 
around which it revolves, as the diurnal variation is connected with 
the rotation of the earth on its axis/ But you have given no hint 
how this different position in its orbit can affect the magnetic condi- 
tion of the earth, except so far as you suppose that the excentricity 
of the orbit is the reason that the total magnetic force is about 
greater at the perihelion than at the aphelion (page xciii) ; but even 
granted that this variation is tlie effect of the excentricity, it cannot 
be the cause of the annual variation of the declination, os this is of 
contrary signs in the two semiannual periods. 

**1 have thought that this annual variation might possibly be ex- 
plained by the following considerations, which 1 (although with 
extreme diffidence) shall venture to lay before you. 

" As the recent magnetic observations have proved without doubt 
the direct magnetic action of the sun, or that the sun itself is u 
magnet, the sun must accordingly have magnetic polarity or mag- 
netic poles. Now in our ignorance of the causes of the magnetic 
condition of the heavenly bodies, I think it reasonable to connect it 
in some way with their rotation on their axes, and to assume that 
generally their magnetic axis will nearly coincide with the axis of 
rotation ; at all events, if these do not coincide, but include a small 
acute angle, the sum of the magnetic influences on a distant mag- 
netic body during a whole rotation, will be nearly the same as if the 
magnetic poles were placed in the axis of rotation. If we suppose 
a magnet E revolving about another S, the magnetic axis of E re- 
maining parallel vilth itself, but not parallel with the axis of S (as 
the earth around the sun), then the magnetic induction of B on £ 
will depend on the relative position of both magnetic axes. More- 
over, if we only regard the mean of the magnetic induction of the sun 
on the earth daring several rotations of both on their axes, we may 
approximately assume that the magnetic axis of both coincides with 
the axis of rotation, and compare their relative position during a 
whole revolution or annual period, with the magnetic variation in 



436 


question* Now, if a plane is laid through the sun's axis parallel 
with the axis of the earth, this plane intersects the ecliptic in two 
points, whose longitudes are 286° and 106°, and has an inclination 
of 83°*2, both axes forming an angle of 25°*8. Accordingly, the 
northerly prolongation of both axes will converge (as in 1 and 2) 



when the longitude is 286°, or about seventeen days after the summer 
solstice, and the southerly prolongation (as in 2 and 3) when the 
longitude of the earth is 106°, or sixteen days after the winter 
solstice. About sixteen days after the equinoxes the axes are in the 
position 2, and the radius vector forms the greatest angle with the 
above-named plane, viz. 83°‘2. It is therefore evident, that the 
greatest magnetic induction takes place at the two solstices, but of 
opposite character, as the north poles converge in one, and the south 
poles in the other semiannual period : the change takes place six^ 
teen days after the equinoxes, exactly os you have found by observa- 
tion, and I regard this circumstance as very important evidence for 
my hypothesis, although you have shown that it could also be ac- 
counted for by the fact, that all magnetic induction takes some time 
ere it attains its maximum. 

If the sun's magnetic axis does not coincide writh the axis of ro- 
tation, then 1 suppose we shall find, by more minute examination of 
the observations, that there exists also a small magnetic variation 
corresponding to the sun's geocentric rotation, or 27'68 days. 

*' There seems also to be strong reason to suppose that Hansteen's 
discovery about the annual periodic frequency of the aurora borealis, 
which has a marked maximum at the equinoxes, and even a more 
marked maximum at the solstices, is connected with the same cause." 



487 


IV. '^Anatomical Noticcs*^^ By Professor Andrew Rbtzius, 
of Stockholm. Extracted from a Letter to Dr. Sharpey, 
dated 10th May, 1855. Communicated by Dr, Shaepey, 
Sec. R.S. [TVamlation.) 

** 1 . On the Form of the Cranium the Embryo, 

So far as I am aware, due attention hap not hitherto been given 
to the ditiferent forms presented by tlic cranium in its earlier stages 
of growth. In the skeletons of early human embryos to be seen in 
most museums, the imperfectly ossified cranium is for the most part 
shrunk up and disfigured. To obtain a correct view of the form of the 
cranial cavity, I first remove the skin, fascia and muscles ; I then, by 
injecting w’uter through the vertebral canal, thoroughly wash out 
the soft brain and spinal cord; and lastly, fill the cerebro-spinal 
cavity with quicksilver or with melted tallow, taking care not to 
distend it over-much. The opening in the vertebral canal is to be 
stopped with a little plug of wood, and the preparation allowed 
to dry. 

In the skeleton of a human embryo of the fourth month, pre- 
pared in this way, the occipital bone was found to have the form of 
a funnel, the narrow part of which passed into the vertebral canal, 
as represented in the accompanying figure 1 . 

** It thus appears that the human occipital bone, in its early con- 
dition, approaches in form to the vertebral canal, and in this respect 
also it resembles the occipital bone in several quadrupeds, which so 
obviously represents the first cephalic vertebra. 

“ For the sake of comparison, 1 divided the skull of another em- 
bryo of the same age into two halves by a vertical median section, 
washed out the brain and examined the preparation while it lay im- 
mersed in weak spirit of wine in a shallow glass capsule. The 
occipital bone had the same funnel-shape as in the former case. As 
development advances, the funnel-like form is gradually lost, whilst, 
on the other hand, the bone appears more deepened or tubular the 
earlier the embryo to which it belongs. The same is true of 
quadrupeds. 

** In the beautiful figure of the embryo-skull, given in Kcilliker's 
' Microscopische Anatomic,* B. II, taf. 3. fig, 2, the downward pro- 



438 


longation of the occipital bone appears much less, but whether less 
than it ought to be I cannot venture to say, as I happen to have no 
specimen of that age (one month older than the one 1 have given) 
with which to compare the figure. 


Fig. 1. 



The early form of the occipital bone I have here described be- 
comes easily intelligible when we remember that the shape of the 
skull is regulated by that of the brain ; and that as the latter is at 
hrst greatly elongated, and its ganglia imperfectly covered, the cra^ 
nium must then also have a correspondingly elongated form. 

** 2, On the Antrum Pylori, 

** I have now for some time directed my attention to the determi- 
nation of the true form of the stomach, and have become more and 
more convinced that the antrum pylori of the older anatomists 
(' Pfdrtnerhdhle * of the Germane) is really a special compartment 
of the general cavity. 1 have had occasion to make numerous ex- 
aminations of the stomach in the bodies of middle aged women who 
died in the hospital, and found the form to be nearly as represented 
in figure 2. where d d, //indicate the antrum pylori, Hiis part is also 
distinguished by greater thickness of its muscular coat, more strongly 



489 


developed glands, and the presence of the well-known plicre fimbriatae. 
The commencement of the duodenum also forms a special’ rounded 
cavity, which I should propose to name the Antrum Duodeni, and 
which is characterized internally by the absence of valvulae conni- 

Fig. 2. 



ventes, and by the dense array of Brunner's glands beneath its 
mucous membrane. This part constitutes what has been called the 
fourth stomach of the Porpoise, and some other Cetaceans. I may 
observe that the so-called ligaments of the pylorus are connected 
with the formation of the antrum pylori. 

"3. On the Fascia Superficialis. 

** The accounts usually given of the fascia superficialis are for the 
roost part very imperfect. As far as I can judge, this fascia is in 
many parts of the body a constant membrane, and really appertains to 
the skin, as may be particularly well seen in the integuments of the 
back* The cutaneous muscle of quadrupeds, in most cases, probably 
arises out of this fascia ; the muscular fibres being deposited, as 1 
conceive, in the midst of its substance, and finally becoming covered 
by it as their perimysium. In this way too, I imagine the platysma 
myoides and epicraniua to be formed.** 



440 


V. Oil the Bfifect of Local Attraction upon the Plumb-line at 
stations on the English Arc of the Meridian, between Dun- 
nose and Burleigh Moor ; and a Method of computing its 
Amount,” By the Venerable Archdeacon Pratt. Com- 
municated by the Rev. J, Chalws, F.R.S. Received June 
5, 1865, 

The author states that in a former communication he had pointed 
out a method for calculating the deflection of the plumb-line at sta- 
tions on the Indian arc, caused by the attraction of the Himalayas 
and of the vast regions beyond, with a view to the correction of the 
astronomical amplitudes of the measured subdivisions of the arc 
before they are applied to the determination of the ellipticity of the 
earth. 

The same subject is taken up ha the present paper, but in refer- 
ence to the English arc between Dunnose and Burleigh Moor ; and 
a different method of calculating the attraction is given. 

ITie paper consists of three parts. In the first, the ellipticity of 
the English arc is calculated without taking account of attraction. 
The arc is divided into five parts, and the lengths and amplitudes 
assigned to them in Mudge'e Trigonometrical Survey of England, 
vols. ii. and iii., are made the basis of the calculation. These por- 
tions of the arc are compared two and two, and ten values of the 

ellipticity thence deduced ; the mean of which is — The 

4p*o687 

ten values, of which this is the mean, differ considerably among each 
other, indicating that there is some disturbing cause, like local at* 
traction, affecting the plumb-line, and therefore the apparent lati- 
tudes. The variations of tlm observed amplitudes are then dis- 
cussed ; and the necessity of calculating the local attraction pointed 
out. 

In the second part a formula is obtained for calculating the at- 
traction. The method is different from that given by the author in bis 
first communication. The curvature of the earth is neglected, as 
this would have no sensible effect on the results in the British Isles, 
The attracting mass is divided into a number of smaller masses 
standing on rectangular bases at the sea-level, and the height of each 



441 


is taken equal to the average height of the surfeu^e above the »ea* 
leveh The ditnensions of the bases may differ hrom each other, and 
are determined by the contour of the surface in such a way that the 
average height in each mass may not depart materially from the 
height of any part of it. The investigation leads to the following 
Rule for determining the horizontal attraction deflection of the plumb- 
line caused by any one of these Tabular Masses (as the author calls 
them) : — 

RtjLB . — Take the origin of coordinates at the station where the 
plumb-line is. Let the plane of xy be horisontal^ and the axis of x in 
the vertical plane in which the amount of deflection is to be found. 

Write down the coordinates XY xy of the furthest and nearest angles 
of the Tabular Mass from the origin ; Y is always to be considered 
and y 4-^“ or — accordingly. 

Form four ratios, by first dividing each ordinate by the abscissa not 
belonging to it, and then by dividing each ordinate by its own abscissa, 
viz. Y y y y 

X X X X 

Look in a Table of Tangents for the four angles of which the tan- 
gents equal the above ratios. 

Form four more angles by adding {subtracting if they be negative) 
half of each of these angles just found to {or from) 45®. 

JFVow the sum of the log-tangents of the first two of these angles 
subtract the sum of the log-tangents of the second two. 

V* 

This result, multiplied by H feet and by , will give the required 

od9 

deflection of the plumb-line in seconds of a degree — H being the height 
of the Tabular Mass above the sea-level, and its density being token 
equal to half the mean density of the earth, which is that of 
granite. 

The only restriction to be attended to in the application of this 
Rule is, that the ratio of the height of the attracted station above 
the sea to each of the horizontal coordinates of the nearest angle 
of tlie Tabular Mass, must be so small that its square may be 


neglected. 

If any part of the attracting mass is nearer to the station than 
this, it must be divided into vertical prisms and the attraction of each 
found ; for which the author gives a formula in a note. 



442 


In the third part the Rule » applied, for the purpose of illustra- 
tion, to obtain an approximate value of the deflectiou of the plumb- 
line at Burleigh Moor, the nortliLatation of the arc under considera- 
tion, situated on the north coast of Yorkshire* The deflection is 
found to be 3''* 644 to the south. The data upon which this calcula- 
tion is based are gathered by the author fmm the Map which accom- 
panies General Mudge's account of the English Survey, and the 
heights marked down on that map. 

The deflection at several other stations is deduced from this result 
of calculation, by using the amplitudes given in Mudge'e work, and 
also in Captain Yolland's ' Astronomical Observations made with 
Airy's Zenith Sector/ published in 1852, and by supposing the cur- 
vature of the meridian to be the mean curvature of the whole globe 
as laid down by Mr. Airy in his article on the Figure of the Earth. 
Thus the deflection at Black Down on the Dorsetshire coast (one of 
the places mentioned in Cai^tain Yolland’s volume), the author finds 
to be 5 ^^'886 to the north, a quantity which tallies well with the de- 
flection assigned to Burleigh Moor on the Yorkshire coast, if the re- 
lative heights of the two coasts are compared. This affords a satis- 
factory evidence of the correctness of the principles laid down in the 
paper ; and, as the author thinks, makes the subject well worthy the 
attention of those who are interested in the English Survey, and 
who have it in their power to furnish the most accurate data for the 
application of the Rule he lays down. The subject is also no less 
important to the mathematician in his investigation of the figure of 
the earth. 

In a Postscript the author makes the following remarks upon the 
Astronomer Royal’s method of accounting for the large amount of 
deflection on the Indian arc deduced by the author in his former 
communication : — 

Since the above was written, I have had the opportunity of see- 
ing a notice of the communication of the Astronomer Royal on the 
Density of Table-lands supposed to be supported by a dense fluid or 
semi-fluid mass ; and the use he makes of his suggestions to remove 
the discrepancy, pointed out in my first communication, between the 
values of the deflection of the plumb-line in India, as determined by 
calculating the attraction of the Himalayas, and as indicated by the 
results of the Great Trigonometrical Survey. The following diffi- 



culties occur to me in the way of this highly ingenious and philoao* 
phical method of removing the discrepancy 

L It assumes that the hard dfhsi of the earth is sensibly lighter 
than the fluid or semi^duid mass, imagined to be a few miles below 
the surface. But I know of no law, except the unique law of water 
and ice, which would lead us to suppose that the fluid mass in con- 
solidating Would expand and become lighter. One would rather 
expect it to become denser, by loss of heat and mutual approxima- 
tion of its particles. 

*‘2. There is, moreover, every reason to suppose, that the crust 
of the earth has long been so thick, that the position of its parts 
relatively to a mean level cannot be any longer subject to the laws 
of floatation. # If the elevations and depressions of the earth’s surface 
have always remained exactly what they were at the time when the 
laws of floatation ceased to have an uncontrolled effect, then the 
same reasoning would no doubt apply in our case, as if they still had 
their full sway. But geology shows that other laws are in constant 
operation (arising most probably, as Mr. Babbage has suggested, 
from the expansion and contraction of the solid materials of tlu* 
crust), which change the relative levels of the various parts of the 
earth’s surface, quite irrespectively of the laws of floatation. If 
Mr. Hopkins’s estimate of the thickness of the crust be correct, viz. 
at least 1000 miles, these laws of change in the surface must have 
been in operation for such an enormous interval of time, as quite to 
obliterate any traces of the form of surface which the simple prin- 
ciples of hydrostatics would occasion. Indeed, it seems to me highly 
probable that the elevation of the Himalayas and the vast regions 
beyond may have arisen altogether from the slow upheaving force 
arising from Uiis cause. 

I am inclined to think that the only explanation of the discre- 
pancy between my calculations and the results of the Indian Survey, 
is to be found in the greater curvature of the Indian Arc.” 



4f44 


VI. Contributions to the History of Aniline, Azobcnzole and 
Benzidine/^ By A. W. Hofmann, Ph,D., F.E.S. Re- 
ceived May 30, 1855. ^ 

The transformation of nitrobenzole into aniline by the action of 
sulphuretted hydrogen is attended with such difficulties and requires 
especially so much time, that chemists hitherto have generally pre- 
ferred to prepare this base from indigo. Lately a new modification 
of Zinin's process has been adopted by M. A. B6champ*, which 
consists in submitting nitrobenzole to the reducing action of acetate 
of protoxide of iron. This process — M. B6champ simply uses a 
mixture of iron and acetic acid — is applicable to all nitro-compounds, 
and has been extensively tried with the most perfect success in the 
laboratory of the Royal College of Chemistry. The facility of the 
process, its rapidity, and the large amount of product it yields in 
post cases, cannot fail materially to assist the study of the volatile 
organic bases. 

During these experiments several observations were made, which 
1 beg leave to bring under the notice of the Society. 

When employing about double the amount of iron which is recom- 
mended by M. B^champ (2*5 instead of 1*2 of iron to 1 part of 
nitrobenzole), Mr. Alfred Noble found that the latter portion of the 
distillate solidified partly in the receiver and partly in the condenser. 
Washed with hydrochloric acid from adhering aniline, and once or 
twice recrystallized from boiling alcohol, the solid matter was ob- 
tmned in fine crystals of a yellowish- red colour, and fusing below 
the boiling-point of water. 'Lhese crystals possessed all the proper- 
ties of azobenzole, which was moreover identified by combustion. 

0*260 gramme of substance gave 0*755 grm. of carbonic acid 
end 0*134 grm. of water. 

The well-established formula of azobenzole, C,s N, requires the 


following values : — 

Theory. 


Carbon . . . , 

Equivalents. Fer-centage. 

. .. 12 79*12 

Experiment. 

79*12 

Hydrogen . . 

-- 5 6*49 

5*76 

Nitrogen. . . 

. . . 1 15*39 



100 00 


* Annslei de Cbimie et de Physique, (3) 

1 

1 



445 


The azobenzale obtaiaed ia thU maaaer U &o reatlily purified that 
this process is greatly preferable to the action of alcoholic potassa 
upon nitrubenzole, since the lattH^ process simultaneously produces 
several substances which can be separated only with difficulty from 
the azobenzole. 

A portion of the azobenzole obtained in the above process was 
converted by means of sulphuretted hydrogen into benzidine. Of 
the beautifully crystallized compound, a platinum salt was made 
which was analysed by Mr. Noble. 

0*268 grm. of the salt left 0*088 grm. =32*88 per cent, of 
platinum. The formula TI<, N, HCl; Pt Cl^ requires 33*09 per 
cent, of platinum. 

Benzidine exhibits a very interesting deportment with nitrous 
acid; gently warmed in the gas of this acid, obtained by ti*eatment 
of starch with nitric acid, it gives rise to a powerful reaction. The 
substance assumes an orange-red colour, an'd exhibits, after treatment 
wdth water, when recryatallized from alcohol, all the properties of 
azobeazole. 

The reproduction of this body from benzidine was moreover fixed 
in the following numbers : — 

0*215 grm. of substance gave 0*623 grm. of carbonic acid, and 
0*112 grm. of water. 

Theory. Experiment. 

Carbon 79*12 79*02 

' Hydrogen 5*49 5*78 

Nitrogen .... 15*39 

100*00 

The simplest formulae of azobenzole and benzidine only diflfer by 
one equivalent of hydrogen, — 

Azobenzole C ,3 N 

Benzidine CjaH^N, 

a relation which sufficiently explains the transformation and repro- 
duction of azobenzole. 


2t2 



446 


VII. On the Formation and some of the Properties of Cymi* 
dine, the Organic Base of the Cymol Series/^ By the Rev, 
John Baklow, F.R.S., Sec. R, Inst, Received June 14, 
1855. 

The object of this memoir is to detail the process by which un 
organic base, provisionally named Cymidme, was obtained from the 
hydrocarbon, cymol, and to describe some of its properties, and 
certain phenomena attending its prodnetion. 

The substitution-product, nitrocymol, was procured by acting on 
cymol by strong nitric acid, both liquids being kept at the tempera- 
ture --17 J^Cent, (O^Falir.). From nitrocymol, cyraidino was ob- 
tained by Bechamp's modification of Zinin's process, and results of 
analyses, made by combustion of the platinum salt, and likewise by 
a silver determination of the Hydrochlorate, were found to coincide 
with the formula N, In the formation of cymidine a neutral 

oil occurred, having the same boiling-point with cymol. From this 
hydrocarbon a substitution compound was derived, apparently iso- 
meric witli, but possessing a less specific gravity than nitrocymol. 
This nitro-compound was also subjected to the process of reduction 
already described, and a basic substance was formed from it, which 
was identified by a platinum determination with cymidine. Some 
qualitative experiments, made with cymidine, were also described, 
and the memoir concluded with the following synoptical table of the 
bomologues of tlie benzol series. 

Hydrocarbons. Nitro-substances. Batiea. 

Benzol Nitrobenzol NO4 Aniline Cjjj Hy N 

Toluol Cj4 Hg Nitrotoluol 0 ^^ Hy NO4 Toluidine C14 Hg N 

Xylol Cjp, Hjjj Nitroxylol Cj^H^ NO4 Xylidine CjgHjjN 

Cumol Cjg Nitrocumol Hu NO4 Cumidine Cjg N 
Cymol CsoHj 4 Nitrocymol CaoHjgN04 Cymidine C.^HijN. 



447 


VIII. Letter from Dr, Hkeapath to Professor Stokes, ''On 
the Compounds of Iodine and Strychnine.^^ Communi- 
cated by Professor Stokes, Sec. R.S. Received June 21, 
1855 . 


June 20, 1855. 

My dear Sir, — Will you do me the favour to announce to the 
Royal Society, that I have been engaged, during some months past, 
in investigating the optical and chemical properties of some crystalline 
compounds of iodine and strychnine which appear to be strongly 
indicative and peculiar ? One of these bodies, from the analysis 
hitherto made, would seem to have a formula not very different from 
the following, viz. C’*’^ O'* -h P, and crystallizes in hexagonal 

prisms, passing by the ordinary replacement planes to the acute 
rhombohedron and other forms, all apparently derived from the 
rhombohcdric system; some of these crystalline forms are very strange 
and unusual. This substance possesses ** double absorption” in a 
very evident degree, and when examined by vertically plane polar- 
ized light, the hexahedral prisms are all obstructive of the polarized 
beam when the length of the prisms lies parallel to the plane of the 
incident ray; in this position they appear dark sienna-brown in 
colour ; when the long axis of the prisms lies perpendicular to the 
plane of primitive polarization the crystals transmit a lemon-yellow 
tint, passing through greenish yellow to sherry-brown. 

The other substance appears to be the sulphate of iodo- strychnia, 
and has a decidedly metallic green reflexion, crystallizes in stellate 
aggregations of prisms, brilliantly green by reflected light, but 
having a deep blood- colour by transmission ; these also possess double 
absorption and are very peculiar, as a sliglit increase in thickness 
renders them wholly impervious to light. 

When these matters have been more carefully worked out, I hope 
to have the pleasure of communicating the results to the Society: in 
the mean time the present notice will be sufficient for the object in 
view. 

I remain, my dear Sir, 

Yours very truly, 

W. Bird Hbrapatb. 


Pro/wor Stokes, FM.8. 



448 


IX. *‘0n the Existence of a Magnetic Medium.” By T. A. 
Hiest, Esq. Communicated by Dr. Tyndall, IMl.S. 
Received April 14, 1855. 

In a note on the above subject, communicated to the Royal So- 
ciety on March 16, 1855, Professor Williamson objects to a certain 
conclusion deduced by Professor Tyndall in a letter addressed by the 
latter to Mr. Faraday and recently published in the Philosophicnl 
Magazine. Professor Tyndall’s conclusion was that, according to 
tlie hypothesis of the existence of a magnetic medium in space and 
of the identity of magnetism and diamagnetism, a compressed dia- 
magnetic cube ought to be lees repelled when the magnetic force 
acts on the line of compression than when it acts at right angles to 
that line ; a result which his own experiments have contradicted. 
Against the legitimacy of tl^s conclusion Professor Williamson 
urges that ** Dr. Tyndall seems to have assumed, that on the com- 
pression of an aggregate of particles of a diamagnetic substance, the 
medium is not displaced by the particles in their change of posi- 
tion.” We shall be better able to estimate the value of this objec- 
tion by recalling the steps of Professor TyndalPs argument. 

A magnetic cube was taken which had already been compressed : 
its deportment before a magnet w'as experimentally examined, and 
deductions drawn concerning the changes tlmt would occur in that 
deportment by merely conceiving the magnetic capacity of the ma- 
terial particles to be diminished, without in any way altering the 
distances between those particles, and consequently without in any 
way displacing the magnetio medium in the interstices of the body. 

Instead of the assumption attributed to Dr. I'yndall, he might, 
with greater justice, be accused of having disregarded the possible 
presence of the medium within the body ; but in his own defence he 
may with perfect justice reply, that in Mr. Faraday’s experiments, 
which originally gave rise to the discussion, no such interpenetration 
of two media existed. 

Admitting, however, that the interstices of a body are occupied 
by the medium, it may be interesting to inquire whether, from an 
argument similar to Professor Tyndall's, the same decided conclu- 
sion could, with equal accuracy, be deduced. To answer the in- 



449 


qniry, it mufit be remembered that the force of the argument in 
question depends essentially upon the justness of the supposition, 
that a diamagnetic cube may, theoretically, be produced from a 
magnetic one by conceiving the magnetic capacity of the particles 
of the latter to be sufficiently diminished. It is evident that the 
total attraction of the cube by a magnet will be equal to the sum of 
the attractions of the material particles, and of the medium con- 
tained in its interstices. If this sum be greater than the attracting 
force upon the quantity of medium which the cube and its contents 
displace, the substance is called magnetic, for it will be drawn 
towards the magnet ; if less, it is called diamagnetic, for it will be 
repelled from the magnet. But in our present knowledge of the 
properties of the medium there is nothing incompatible with the 
supposition that the density of the internal medium may so far ex- 
ceed that of the external, that the attraction of the former by the 
magnet is itself greater than the attraction of the medium displaced 
by the cube and its contents. If so, however, no conceivable dimi- 
nution of the magnetic capacity of the material particles could pos- 
sibly render such a cube diamagnetic. 

This is sufficient to show that, admitting the presence of the me- 
dium within the cube, the method of argument adopted by Professor 
Tyndall would not be strictly applicable, unless rtie density of the 
internal medium were subjected to limits which the advocates of its 
existence might possibly be unwilling to grant. 

But it may be asked, if, whilst admitting that the medium may 
exist in the interstices of the body, it be granted that a diamagnetic 
may be produced from a magnetic cube in the manner assumed by 
Professor Tyndall, does it still follow, necesarily, that attraction is 
always greatest — repulsion least— when the force acta in the line of 
compression? In other words, can a conclusion contradictory to 
experimental facts be then legitimately deduced ? 

In attempting a reply to this question, it will, perhaps, be best to 
employ the following symbols. Let W represent the attracting 
force of the magnet upon the medium displaced by the cube and its 
contents. The value of W will, of course, be unaltered, no matter 
whether the force acts in, or at right angles to the line of compres- 
sion, When the force acts in the line of compression, let Pj repre- 
sent the attracting force upon the particles, Wj the attracting force 



4450 

upon the internal medium, and let Fj he proportional to the resultant 
attraction of the cubical mass towards the magnet. Let 
and Fg have similar significations when the force acts at right angles 
to the line of compression. Then we may put 

F,=rP, + M,-W, 

R,=:P,-hM.^-W. 

Now, in a compressed magnetic cube, experiment proves that 

or Pj+.'Mj:>P^-hM^, 

i.e. P,-Pa 

As long as we are ignorant of the properties of the medium within 
the body, we will, for the sake of coinpleteness, consider the follow- 
ing three distinct cases. 

I. The attracting force upon the medium within the cube is the 
some when the force acts in either the one or the other of the two 
directions, with respect to the line of compression. Here 

hence Pj 

II. In whichever of the two directions of the force the attraction 
of the particles may be greatest, the attraction of the internal me- 
dium is also greatest in tlie same direction. Here, according as P| 
is greater or less than P^, Mj is greater or less than M, ; hence, 
inasmuch as 

Pi>Pj and 

III. In whichever of the two directions of the force the attraction 
of the particles may be greatest, the attraction of the internal me- 
dium is greatest in the direction perpendicular to the same. Here, 
According as Pj is greater or less than Pj, Mj is less or greater than 
Mj. so that the two hypotheses 

( 1 ) Pi>P2 and MjcMg, and 

( 2 ) P,<P3 and Mi>M2 

are both compatible with the sole condition, 



451 


In order to test the applicability of Professor TyndalPs method of 
argument in each of these cases, let us conceive, with him, that die 
magnetic capacity of the particles is so far diminished that their 
attractions Pj and are reduced to pj andp^. This may evidently 
be done by making p,=:<rP| and where a represents a posi- 

tive fraction whose magnitude can be diminished indefinitely. If, 
under this supposition, the resultant attractions Fj and F.^ become 
/j and/jj, then it can easily be proved that, however small the value 
of a may be, we shall always have 

fi 

in the cases I., 11. and III. (1). That is to say, with the distribu- 
tions of the internal medium assumed in these cases, the resultant 
attraction of the cubical mass will always be greatest, or repulsion 
least, when the force acts in the line of compression, no matter how 
diamagnetic the cube may have become by diminishing the magnetic 
capacity of its particles. 1 1 may just as easily be proved, however, that 
in case 111. (2) a value of a may bo chosen sufficiently small to make 

that is to say, with the distribution and properties of the internal 
medium here supposed, it is quite possible so far to diminish the 
magnetic capacity of the particles as to obtain a cube which will be 
attracted least, or repelled most strongly when the force acts in the 
line of compression. This conclusion involves nothing contradictory 
to experimental facts, whereas the former one does. 

I will not here enter into the question of the relative probability 
of these three cases, supposing the medium to exist. My sole ob- 
ject has been to show that, although the method of argument adopted 
by Professor Tyndall is strictly applicable in a great number of 
cases, even when the medium is supposed to fill the interstices of 
the body, yet it is possible to attribute properties to this medium of 
such a nature as to avoid the conclusion, contradictory to fact, which 
he has deduced. This may be done in two ways. Firsts the den- 
sity of the internal medium may be such as to render it impossible 
to produce a diamj^netic from a magnetic cube in the manner 
assumed, t. e. by diminishing the magnetic capacity of the material 
imrtioks. Secondly, granting that a diamagnetic cube may be so 



452 


produced, the distribution and properties of the internal medium 
may still be such as to cause the cube to be attracted least, or repelled 
most strongly when the force acts on the line of compression, and 
thus, if the substance be diamagnetic, to cause it to agree, in its 
deportment, with experimental results. On the other hand, if these 
hypothetical properties of the internal medium be discarded as arti* 
hcial or inadmissible, then at present I see no way of escaping the 
conclusion of Professor Tyndall’s argument. 

With regard to the explanation given by Professor Williamson, it 
will be observed that he pursues a path quite different from that of 
Professor Tyndall, when he considers the effects produced by com- 
pressing a number of particles surrounded by a magnetic medium, 
lliis compression, he states, may alter the attraction of the mass 
by a magnet in two ways ; — ** first, by altering the density of the 
matter ; secondly, by altering the density of the medium.” By the 
term * density of matter* is usually understood the relation which 
exists between the quantity ol matter which e body contains, and 
the volume of the space enclosed by its external surface. But in 
the present case, where a comparison is instituted between the 
matter of the body and the medium which is supposed to fill all its 
pores, tve must, I imagine, understand by the term ‘density of 
mutter,’ the relation which exists between the sum of the masses of 
the particles, and the sum of their volumes ; but if so, then, the par- 
ticles themselves being incompressible, it is clear that compression 
could not alter the ‘ density of matter,* 

As to the second effect of compression, viz. an alteration of the 
density of the medium, it may be quite conceivable, although I do 
not find that Professor Williamson has any where taken it into con- 
sideration. The effects of compression may, therefore, be more cor- 
rectly described as either— a diminution of the interstices of 
a body, without altering the density of the medium which fills 
them ; or secondly, a diminution of the interstices, accompanied by 
an alteration of the density of the medium within them. 

Let us assume, as Professor Williamson has virtually done, that 
the first of these effects takes place ; then, if wc admit that “ in a 
cubical mass of carbonate of iron the material particles are more 
magnetic than the medium which they displace, and the force with 
which it is attracted is proportional to this excess,'* we can by no 



458 


meana admit that, because ** it becomes more ma^etio by compres* 
aion, we must conclude tliat the loss of magnetic medium from its 
interstices ia more than supplied by the magnetic matter which takes 
its place for. according to what has already been advanced, the 
excess of the attraction of the material particles above that of the 
medium they displace is the same after, as it was before compression ; 
inasmuch as compression jnerely changes the relative situations of 
the particles, by bringing them closer together, but does not in the 
least alter their volume, and consequently does not in the least alter 
the quantity of medium they displace. 

With respect to carbonate of lime, Professor Williamson's con- 
clusion is, of course, untenable, because it is based upon the fore- 
going one. He says, **when these* particles are brought closer 
together by pressure, with diminution of the intervening spaces oc- 
cupied by the medium, the mass becomes more diamagnetic, because 
a certain quantity of the magnetic medium is thus replaced by the 
less magnetic matter,” It is, however, manifest that exactly the 
same quantity of magnetic medium is displaced by the Ices magnetic 
matter after, as there was before compression. Why, then, should 
diamagnetic action be increased by compression ? 

Lastly, with respect to the crystals of carbonate of iron and car- 
bonate of lime. Professor Williamson’s explanation, although inge- 
nious, is liable to the same objections as those already mentioned. 
It cannot, in fact, be said that the functions of matter predomi- 
nate most strongly over those of the medium they displace in any 
one direction, merely because the particles may be closer together in 
that direction ; for, as long as each particle is surrounded by the 
medium, the predominance of that function of the particles with 
which we are concerned, ». e. their attraction, over that of the me- 
dium they displace will be the same, whatever may be the distances 
of the particles asunder. 

From the foregoing remarks, therefore, it is manifest that, if Pro^ 
fessor Tyndall has not yet succeeded in demonstrating that the 
hypothesis of the existence of a magnetic medium and of the iden- 
tity of magnetism and diamagnetism is necessarily at variance with 
experimental facts, neither has Professor Williamson succeeded in 
proving that this hypothesis is in accordance with those facts, Tlie 
question of the existence of a magnetic medium is still an open one, 



454 


and will continue to l>e eo until the many important principles which 
It involves, but which have not been introduced into the present 
discussion, have been further elucidated by new investigations and 
new thoughts. 


X. On the ultimate arrangement of the Biliary Ducts, and on 
some other points in the Anatomy of the Liver of Verte- 
brate Animals/^ By Lionel S. Beale, M.B., Professor of 
Physiology and Morbid Anatomy in King’s College, Lon- 
don. Communicated by F. Kikenan, Esq., F.tt.S. Re- 
ceived June 14, 1855. 


In his valuable communication to the Ro 3 ral Society in 183.3, 
Mr. Kieraan describes and figures anastomoses between branches 
of the biliary ducts in the left triangular ligament of the human 
liver. Tlie same author considered that the interlobular ducts ana- 
stomosed with each other, and communicated with a lobular biliary 
plexus, although he had never succeeded in injecting this plexus to 
the extent shown in his figure, neither had he directly observed the 
anastomoses between interlobular ducts. It must be borne in mind 
that these observations were made before the liver- cells had been 
dcsciibed. 

Since the appearance of Mr. Kieman*s paper, various hypothetical 
views have been advanced by different observers, with reference to 
the arrangement of the minute biliary ducts and the relation which 
the liver-cells bear to them. These points, however, have not yet 
been decided by actual observation. 

Miillei: considered that the ducts terminated in blind extremities. 
Weber showed that the right and left hepatic ducts anastomosed by 
the intervention of branches in the transverse fissure of the liver, 
which he described under the name of Vasa aberrantia. 

Krukenberg, Schroder Van der Kolk, Retzius, Theile, Backer, 
Lcidy and others have adopted the view that the liver-cclls lie Witiiin 
a network of basement membrane, ^On the other hand, Handfield 
Jones and Kollikcr describe the liver-cells as forming a solid net^ 



455 


work, against the marginal nells of which Kiilliker believes the ex- 
tremities of the ducts impinge, while Handheld Jones holds that the 
ducts terminate by blind extremities, 

Heule, Gerlach, Hyrtl and Natalis Guillot look upon tlm finest 
gall ducts as communicating with intercellular passages. 

J3r. Handheld Jones looks upon the small cells in the extremities 
of the ducts as the chief agents in the formation of bile, and to the 
liver-cells he assigns an office totally distinct from this. Busk arid 
Huxley concur in this view, which would place the liver in the cate- 
gory of vascular glands, spleen, suprarenal capsules, &c. 

The observations of the author have been made upon the livers 
of several different animals examined under various circumstances. 
The results of the examination of injected preparations precisely 
accord with the observations made upon uninjected specimens some 
months before. The points which he hopes to establish arc as 
follows : — 

1 . That the hepatic cells lie within on exceedingly delicate tubu- 
hir network of basement membrane. 

2. That the smallest biliary ducts ore directly continuous with 
this network. 

3. That at the point where the excretory duct joins the tubes 
which contain the secreting cells, it is very much constricted, 
being many times narrower than the tube into which it becomes 
dilated. 

Lohules ^ — ^With reference to the nature of the lobules of the liver, 
the author offers some remarks. The only liver in which he has 
been able to detect distbet lobules, consisting of peifectly cir- 
cumscribed portions of hepatic structure and separated from each 
other by fibrous tissue,^ is that of the pig. In this liver each lobule 
has a distinct fibrous capsule of its own, and is separated from 
its neighbours by the branches of the vessels and duct for their 
supply. 

The lobules of the liver of other animals ore not thus separated 
(rom each other, but the capillary network and the cell-containing 
network of one lobule are respectively connected with those of the 
adjacent lobules at certain points between the fissures in which the 
vessels and duct lie. In livers there is not a trace of fibrous 
tissue between the lobules. 



456 


The exceptional liver of the pig, with its distinct lobules, seems 
to bear in structural peculiarity the same relation to the livers of 
other animals, as the much- divided kidney of the porpoise bears to 
the more solid organ of most mammalian animals. 

In a physiological sense the livers of all vertebrate animals may 
be said to be composed of lobules ; but in a strictly anatomical sense 
this term can only be used with reference to the liver of the pig, and, 
according to Muller, that of the polar bear. The vessels and duct, 
at their entrance into the liver, are invested with much areolar 
tissue, which is continued for a considerable distance along the 
portal canals ; but it gradually ceases as the vessels become smaller, 
and, with the exception of the liver of the pig above referred to, the 
lobules are not separated from each other by any areolar tissue, or 
by any fibrous tissue whatever, neither is any prolonged into their 
substance. Hence the investment of areolar tissue round the vessels 
in the portal canals of the liver seems to present no peculiar charac** 
ters in its distribution. It must be borne in m^nd, that in the exa- 
mination of uniiijected specimens the small vessels and ducts are 
liable to be much stretched and tom in manipulation, and, in conse- 
quence, a striated appearance is produced which closely resembles 
fibrous tissue. 

Method of preparing specimens^ — In order to demonstrate the 
arrangement of the ducts described by the author, it is absolutely 
necessary to harden the liver previously. This hardening may be 
eflFected by soaking a portion of the liver for some time in strong 
syrup, or in alcohol, and afterwards rendering the section trans- 
parent by soda. The mixture of alcohol and acetic acid recom- 
mended by Mr. L. Clarke in his investigations upon the spinal cord, 
has also been employed, as well as many other solutions which are 
not described. The fluid to which the author gives the preference 
is alcohol, to which a few drops of solution of soda have been 
added. 

Method of iigecting the biliary ducts. — The following is the method 
by which, after numerous trials, the author succeeded in effecting 
this ol^ect. Lukewarm water is injected into the portal vein. 
After a time, when the liver has become fully distended, much 
bloody water will escape from the hepatic vein, but at the same 
time it will be remarked that bile escapes from the duet. This 



457 


bUe gradually becomes thinner, and at la»t nearly pure water flows 
from the duct, showing that the bile has been washed out* The 
liver is now placed in soft clothe to soak up the water, and after 
some hours it will be found to have diminished much in volume, and 
to have a clayey consistence. The ducts are now empty, and may 
be injected with a carefully prepared prussian-blue injection, to 
which a little alcohol has been previously added. The mixture is 
to be well stirred, and after having been carefully strained, it is 
slowly and cautiously injected into the duct. Plain clear size is 
next thrown into the portal vein, until the liver has become fully 
distended with it in every part. Lastly, a little plain size is in- 
jected into the duct, the vessels carefully tied, and the liver placed 
in cold water until the size has set, when very thin sections can be 
readily obtained with the aid of a sharp knife. The author has tried 
many other plans of injection, but the above has afforded the most 
satisfactory results. On one occasion a human liver was success- 
fully injected with four different colours ; the portal vein with flake* 
white, the artery with vermilion, the duct with prussian blue, and 
the hepatic vein with lake. 

Evidence of the ejcistence of a tubular basement membrane in which 
the liver -cells are contained. 

Not unfrequently liver-cells are set free with shreds of delicate 
membrane attached to them, and this can sometimes be seen to be 
prolonged either way in the form of a narrow tube. 

In certain specimens which have been exposed for some time to 
the action of dilute soda, the walls of the cells appear to be dis- 
solved and the tubes are seen to be occupied with a highly refractive 
mass, and their outline is rendered very distinct. 

When portions of the cell- containing network are placed in strong 
B3rrup or glycerine, exosmose of the water occurs, the diameter of 
the tubes is much diminished, and their outline becomes distinct, 
but uneven, in consequence of the shrunken state of the tubes of 
the network. 

At the edge of a very thin section of liver stretching between two 
capillary vessels, a very thin membrane, recognizable only by the 
granular matter adhering to it, can sometimes be seen. 

Ilie tubes of the network can be distended to a great extent by 



458 


ii^eotion, so that the walls of oontiguous tubes meet« while the 
capillary vessel between them becomes so compressed as not to be 
recognizable. 

TKe injection often forms a sharp line towards the capillary ves- 
sels on either side of the tube in which the cells lie, and gradually 
shades ofF towards the centre of the tube. 

The cells which escape into the surrounding fluid from injected 
specimens often have portions of injection adhering to them. 

If a section be made at right angles to the intralobular vein, the 
cells are seen to form lines radiating from the centre towards the 
circumference of the lobule, as authors have before described. 
These lines of cells are really tubes of basement membrane, com- 
municating with each other at intervals by narrow branches. In 
injected specimens the walls of the tube can bo demonstrated, and 
are seen to be distinct from the capillary vessels. 

In the fmtuB, the cells are^seen to be separated from the cavity of 
the vessels by two lines separated by a clear space. One of these 
lines is caused by the outline of the tube containing the cells, the 
other is that of the capillary wall. 

The author supposes that, originally, the liver U composed of u 
double network of tubes (cell-containing network and capillary net- 
work), the walls of which in moat situations become incorporated, 
so that the secreting cells are only separated from the blood by one 
thin layer of basement membrane, which is very permeable to water 
in both directions, but tlic greatest force which can be applied with- 
out causing rupture is incapable of forcing bile through it. 

Of /Ac contents of the tubular network of basement membrane, and of 
the arrangement of the cells within it. 

Within the tubular network lie the hepatic cells, with a certain 
quantity of granular matter and cell debris, and, in some instances, 
free oil-globules and granules of colouring matter. The cells are 
not arranged with any order or regularity. Some observers have 
endeavoured to show that the hepatic cells are arranged in a definite 
manner. Professor Lereboullet, one of the latest writers on this 
subject (1853), describes the ceils as forming double rows. The 
two rows of Cells may be separated by injection, and he gives tvro 
diagrams to illustrate their arrangement. The author has never 



459 


seen anything like this in any liver which has been examined by 
him. In Mammalia, according to hia obaervation, the cells are for 
the most part arranged in single rows (human subject, pig, dog, cat, 
rabbit, horse, seal, Guinea-pig and others), but in some situations 
two cells lie transversely across the tube, and they may be forced 
into this position by injection. The cells do not completely fill the 
tubes, and are not always placed quite close together, being sur- 
rounded with granular matter. Injection passes sometimes on one 
side of the tube, and sometimes upon the other ; often it entirely 
surrounds a cell. In the human foetus and in the fmtal calf there 
are two or three rows of cells within the tubes, and this is also the 
case in the livers of most adult reptiles and fishes which have fallen 
under the author’s observation, and in many parts of the network of 
the bird’s liver. 


Of the Ducts of tub Liveb. 

The duct, like the artery, lies close to the portal vein ; usually 
this vessel is accompanied by one branch of the artery and duct, but 
not unfrequcntly there arc two or three branches of these vessels 
with the vein. 

Anastomosis of the ducts near the trunk from which they conic off . — 
The author observes that the anastomoses between the larger ducts 
and between the larger branches of the interlobular ducts are pretty 
numerous in the human liver, but these communications take place 
only near the origin of the trunks by moans of intermediate branches. 
Different interlobular ducts do not anastomose with each other, but 
the branches resulting from the division of a small trunk are often 
connected together. 

In some animals these communications are so numerous, that a 
complete network is formed at the portal aspect of the lobule, or 
around a email branch of the portal vein. 

Not only are the right and left hepatic ducts connected together 
by intermediate branches in the transverse fissure of the liver, as 
B. H, Weber long ago demonstrated, but 4he branches coming off 
these communioate with each other as weH as with the trunks 
£rom wluch they come ofiP, These branches are very numerous, and 
finm an Intimate network of irregular branched ducts. Similar 
comniiiiiications occur between the branches Sn the portal canals, 
VOL. rxu 2 tr 



460 


but they are not ao numerous. This arrangement occurs to a less 
extent in the dog and in the calf, but it is not present in all animals. 
The author has not been able to demonstrate it in the pig, seal, rab- 
bit, horsei cat and monkey, although he is not prepared to say tliat, 
absolutely, no communications take place between the ducts near 
their origin, in these animals. 

Of the glands of the ducts , — ^The so-called glands are small cavi- 
ties of a rounded or oval form, or more or less branched, which com- 
municate with the cavity of the duct by a very constricted neck. 
The simple glands are for the most part situated in the coats of the 
ducts, so that, when injected, they scarcely project beyond the ex- 
ternal surface. These cavities or glands are most easily demon- 
strated in the pig. 

When a small duct from the human liver is laid open, two lines 
of orifices are seen opening upon the internal surface, as Kiernan 
described. The great majority of these, however, are not the open- 
ings of glands, but almost all of them are the orifices of branches of 
the duct which communicate with each other in its coats, or just at 
the point where they leave it. Very few of them are the openings 
of ceecal cavities, which are very rare in the smaller ducts of the 
human subject. 

Vasa aherrmtia . — lliere are many curious branches of communi- 
cation between the ducts in the transverse fissure of the liver^ which 
have been well named " vasa aberrautia** by Weber. Theile looks 
upon all these ducts as anastomosing xnuous-glands. The author 
has seen these ducts in the portal canals, down to those not more 
than one-eighth of an inch in diameter. They present the same 
characters as the branches in the transverse fissure, but are not so 
numerous. The coats of the vasa aberrantia are thinner than those 
of the ordinary ducts, and, like them, are lined with epithelium, 
principally of a subcolumnar form, llrese branches are always sur- 
rounded by areolar tissue, in which lymphatics are very numerous. 
The arrangement of the vessels about the vasa aberrantia is pecu- 
liar. arteries and v^ins form a network, and each small bi^ch 
of the ^artery lies between two branches of the vein, which com- 
munioate with each other at frequent intervals by numerous trans- 
verae branches, some of which pass over and some under the art^. 
The author observes that this beautiful arrangement of the vessels 



461 


oocura in the gall-bladder, in the transverse fissure, and in the portal 
canals. This disposition of the veins has the effect of ensuring free 
circulation tlirough them under dififerent conditions, as when they 
are stretched or compressed. 

The vasa aberrantia in the transverse fissure of the adults human 
liver are nearer to the branch of the portal. vein than to the hepatic 
substance, and can be readily removed without any of the latter. A 
few small straight branches are sometimes observed to come ofif from 
the vasa aberrantia and to enter the hepatic substance. In the foetus, 
on the other hand, the vasa aberrantia are fewer in number, their 
course generally is more direct, they lie so close to the hepatic tissue 
that they cannot be removed unless a portion of the latter is taken 
away with them, and very many of the branches can be traced into 
the hepatic substance. 

The author regards the vasa aberrantia in the adult liver in the 
light of altered secreting tubes, and believes that at one time they 
formed a part of the secreting structure of the liver. At the termi- 
nation of intrauterine life the portal vein increases in size, and the 
pressure time produced may account for the gradual wasting and 
partial disappearance of the hepatic substance closely surrounding 
it. In the very thin edge of a horse's liver, which consisted prin- 
cipally of areolar tissue, the gradual alteration of the ducts and 
ultimate complete disappearance of the secreting cells was traced. 
Upon the surface of the portal vein in the rabbit’s liver the trans- 
itional stages between the compact lobule of secreting structure and 
the branches of the vasa aberrantia have been well seen. 

Function of the glmde and va$a aberrantia . — It has always been 
considered that the office of the ducts was to secrete the mucus of 
the bile, and a similar function was assigned to the vasa aberrantia 
by Tlieile. It seems to the author that a cavity communicating 
with a tube by a neck of less than x^ftpyth of an inch in diameter, 
oaxmot be well adapted for pouring out a viscid, tenacious mucus. 
If these cavities contained mucus, the ixyection would not enter 
them so readily as it does, nor is it easy to conceive how the mucus 
poured out by these little glands would become thoroughly mixed 
with the bile as it passes along the ducts. Again, the bile of the 
pig, in which animiil these glands are very abundant, does not con* 
tain more mucus than the bile of the rabbit, in which they are few 

if,v2 



m 


in number and only found on the largest branches of the duct. The 
vaaa aberrantia do not possess any characters which, in the opinion 
of the author, justify the inference of their being mucus-glands. He 
regards the little cavities in the coats of the duct? (glands of the 
ducts) and the vasa aberrantia as reservoirs for containing bile, 
whilst it becomes inspissated and undergoes other changes. By 
these cavities in the ducts with thick walls, the bile is brought into 
close relation with the vessels which ramify so abundantly upon the 
external surface of the ducts. 

Of the finest branches of the duct^ and of their connea:ion mth the 
celhcontttining networks 

Mammalia . — In well-injected preparations the smallest branches 
of the duct can bo readily traced up to the secreting cells of the 
lobules. In most Mammalia, but not in the pig, a few of the finest 
branches of tlic duct can be followed for some distance beneath the 
surface of the lobule. These branches appear to lie amongst the 
secreting cells, but arc not connected with them. They become 
continuous with tubes of the oell-containing network at a deeper 
part, while those secreting tubes nearer the surface of the lobule are 
connected with branches of the duct which do not penetrate. 

In many animals, particularly in the rabbit, and to a less extent 
in man and in the dog, the smallest branches of the duct are con- 
nected together so as to form a network, which is continuous with 
that in which the secreting cell!^ lie. 

In the pig, the small ducts are, as it were, applied to the surface 
of the lobule ; from these smsdler branches come off, which pene- 
trate the lobule and are immediately connected with an intimate 
network, which lies partly iii the capsule of the lobule itself* This 
network is continuous with, and may be looked upon as the most 
superficial portion of, the cell-containing network. In a perfectly 
normal state it contmns only oihg^obules and granular matter t but 
when the liter is fatty, it is found to contain ltter*oeBs loaded with 
on. From such a liter the author has a eery beau^l preparation, 
ine^hlch the continuity of the very narrow duct with the wide tubes 
of the netwoidt, distended with laige cells containing oil, can be well 
seen. 'The duct and (he tubes in Which the secreting eeUs Ue> both 
contain a little injeotion. 



llie author has succeeded in demonstrtiting the eommunication 
between the ducts and celUcontaining network in several mauima- 
Uon animals, as well as in the human subject, by injecting the ducts 
in the manner described. Of these, the seal, hedgehog, rabbit and 
Guinea-pig have afforded the best specimens. 

In BirdBt the continuity in injected specimens Has been traced in 
the common fowl and in the turkey, llie quantity of epithelium in 
the ducts of birds forms a great obstacle to the passage of the injec* 
tion, and from their extreme tenuity, the capillaries do not bear the 
preliminary injection of much water, ‘ 

Eepiiles , — The author has seen the continuity between the ducts 
and cell-containing network, in an uninjected preparation of the 
newt*s liver, and in an injected liver of the adder. 

Fishes . — In consequence of the very fatty nature of the liver of 
fishes, it was found to be very diflicult to harden it sufficiently to 
cut thin sections. The frequent presence of entozoa and their ova, 
renders it difficult to inject the ducts. The author succeeded in 
injecting the ducts and part of the cell-containing network in the 
sturgeon and in the Lophius, and in one instance, those of the very 
fatty liver of the cod. live continuity was also traced in an unin- 
jocted liver of the common flounder. The injection often passes a 
certain distance into the finer ducts of fishes, but cannot be forced 
into the ceil -containing network. In this way the appearance of 
blind terminations to the ducts is produced, as the continuity of 
the tube cannot be traced beyond the point at which the injection 
stops. 

The continuity of the finest ducts with the cell-containing net- 
work has been demonstrated in all classes of Vertebrata, both in in- 
jected and also in uninjected specimens. In all the livers of verte- 
brate animals which have been examined, the duct becomes much 
narrowed at the point where it joins the network in which the cells 
lie. The arrangement of tdie small ducts varies somewhat in dif- 
ferent animals, Sometimee a network of minute ducts is formed, 
which is continuous with that in which the cells lie. In other in- 
stances the communications between these terminal ducts are very 
few in number, or are altogether absent. Upon the latter ix>int the 
author does not express himself positively, os he is sure that in the 
most perfect injection which he has been able to make, the whole of 



464 


the numerous branches of the minute ducts have not been injected ; 
and from observations upon these specimens alone, he feels that only 
a very imperfect idea can be formed of their number or of their 
arrangement. 

Diameter of the ducts . — A table is given, showing the thickness 
of the coats of the ducts in difierent parts of their course. The 
walls of the smallest ducts are composed entirely of basement mem- 
brane, and are often not more than the of an inch in diame- 

ter in the uninjected state. In the pig, the diameter of the smsdlest 
ducts containing injection Was about the y^ ^ th of an inch ; in the 
human subject, about the g - g t ^ ^ th ; in the seal, ga ^yth ; and in some 
fishes not more than the g - rf^fft h of an inch. It may be remarked, 
that this narrowing of the excretory duct, just before it becomes 
continuous with the secreting portion of the organ, is seen in the 
kidney and in other glands. 

Epithelium of the small duels . — ^The epithelium lining the small- 
est ducts presents very similar characters in different animals. The 
small cells are for the most port oval or circular in form ; sometimes 
they are angular, which probably results from pressure or stretch- 
ing of the ducts in the preparation of the specimen \ sometimes the 
smallest ducts appear to be entirely filled with epithelium ; in other 
instances the cells are very sparingly and irregularly scattered over 
the interior of the tube, while frequently no cells whatever can be 
distinguished. 

"rhe author believes that, in a perfectly normal state, the minute 
ducts are lined by a single layer of delicate epithelial cells. 

This ductal epithelium does not pass gradually into the secreting 
epithelium, but ceases at the point where the latter begins. Hepa- 
tic cells are sometimes seen in tubes lined with this ductal epithe- 
lium, but probably their presence is the result of accident. In these 
cases the ducts are of course much stretched or dilated *. 

With reference to the relation of the ductal epithelium to the 
secreting cells of the liver, the author observes that a very similar 
arrangement occurs in the gastric glands. The secreting epithe- 
Hutfi is alone found in the lower part of the gland (stomach tixhe), 
while the ductal portion of the gland is lined with columnar epi- 
thelium. 

Mr. Wharton Jones has also seen hepatic cells in the small ducts,*— PAW. TVona. 



*rhe secreting cells appear to occupy the entire cavity of the tube, 
and are not arranged in any order ; so that the secretion, having 
escaped from the cells, must pass off towards the duct by the slight 
interstices between them. A similar disposition of the secreting 
epithelial cells occurs, but in a less remarkable degree, in some other 
glands ; as the pancreas, lacteal, sebaceous, and sweat glands. 

The conclusions to which the author has arrived may be summed 
up as follows ; — 

1 . That the liver of vertebrate animals essentially consists of two 
solid tubular networks mutually adapted to each other. One of 
these networks contains the liver-cclls, and the otlier the blood. 

2. The cell-containing network is continuous with the ducts. 
The small delicate epithelial cells lining the latter channels contrast 
remarkably with the large secreting cells, which are not arranged 
in any definite manner within the tubes of the network. 

3. The duct is many times narrower than the tubular network at 
the point where it becomes continuous with it. 

4. Injection passes sometimes on one, and sometimes on the other 
side of the tube, or between the cells, when two or more lie acroi^s 
the tube. Often, a cell becomes completely surrounded with in- 
jection. As injection can thus be made to pass readily from the 
ducts into the network and around the cells, it follows that there 
can be no obstacle to the passage of the bile along the same chan- 
nels in the opposite (its natural) direction. 

5 . In some animals, the most minute ducts are directly connected 
with the tubes of the cell-containing network ; of these branches, 
some pass amongst tlie most superficial meshes to join the network 
at a deeper part. In other animals the finest ducts first form a net- 
work which is continuous with that containing the liver cells. 

6. The interlobular ducts do not anastomose, but the branches 
coming off from the trunk are often connected with each other, as 
well as with the parent trunk, near their origin from it. 

7. The walls of the smallest ducts are composed of basement 
membrane only. The thick complex coat of the larger ducts con- 
tains within it small cavities (the so-called glands of the ducts), by 
means of which the bile in these ducts would be brought into close 
proximity with the arteries, veins and lymphatics, which are very 
abundant wherever the ducts ramify. 



406 


8. I’he ofiice of the Viwn aberrantia, which are so numerous in 
the transverse fissure of the human liver and in the larger portal 
canals, appears to be similar to that of the cavities in the walls of 
the ducts. It is worthy of remark, that the network of vessels 
ramifying so abundantly in the coats of the gall -^bladder, in the 
transverse fissure, and in the larger portal canals, are arranged in a 
similar manner, each branch of artery being accompanied by two 
branches of the vein. 

9. The liver is therefore a true gland, consisting of a formative 
portion and a system of excretory ducts directly continuous with it, 
The secreting cells lie within a delicate tubular network of base- 
ment membrane, through the thin walls of which they draw from 
the blood the materials of their secretion. 


XL “ Kxperirnental Researches on the Movement of Atiiio- 
spheric Air in Tubes/^ By W. D. Chowne, M.D, Com- 
inuiiicatcd by John Bisiior, Esq., P.ll.S. Received June 
If, 1855. 

In the year 1847, the author of this paper mode numerous expe- 
riments for the purpose of ascertaining what are the conditions under 
which atmospheric air is placed with regard to motion or rest, when 
within a vertical tube having one extremity communicating within 
the interior of a building, and the other in the open atmosphere. 

The pa])er now submitted to the Royal Society contains the results 
of investigations undertaken in the year 1853 and continued to the 
present time, to ascertain whether the ordinary state of atmospheric 
air oontiuned in a vertical cylindrical tube, open at both ends, and 
placed in the still atmosphere of a closed room, is one of rest or of 
motion ; and if of motion, to investigate the influences of certain 
changes in the condition of the atmosphere which either produce, 
promote, retard, or arrest the movement. 

He demonstrates, by a series of experiments, that when a tube, 
open at both ends, is jdaced in a vertical position, every precaution 
being taken to exclude all extraneous causes of movement in the 
surrounding atmosphere, an upward current of air is almost imme- 



467 


diately established » and continued so loug^ as these conditions arc 
maintained. 

The exporiments were made in a room 12 feet square by 8 feet 
6 inches hi^h ; the windows and chimney being carefully secured* and 
all previccs closed, by pasting paper over them, the floor carpeted, 
the door double, and the inner door surrounded with list. The 
outer wall, having a north a8pect» was so sheltered by surrounding 
buildings that the direct rays of the sun never fell upon the window. 
Discs of delicate tissue-paper were suspended in several parts of the 
room, to indicate currents of air, if any existed, and observations 
were taken only when these were perfectly quiescent. 

Mason's hygrometer was first employed in these experiments, to 
test the presence of a current of air in the tube ; on the principle 
that as evaporation produces cold, and as evaporation is increased by 
a current of air, the wet-bulb thermometer would show a greater de- 
pression if any current existed, than if the air were perfectly quiescent 
within the tube. The tube was placed in the middle of the room, 
and isolated from the fiuor by a cylinder of thick gloss laid under it. 

It was found that in ninety-one observations of the hygrometer, 
suspended in the free air of the room, the mean depression of tlie 
wet-bulb thermometer was 3^' 9 Fahr., while in ninety corresponding 
Observations, with the hygrometer at the lower aperture of the tube, 
the mean depression was increased to 4^*9 Fahr., clearly indicating 
the existence of a current of air within the tube. 

Partial closure of the upper orifice of the tube, by placing a piece 
of fine muslin upon it, produced a sensible influence on the hygro- 
meter. In seventeen observations with the tube thus partially ob- 
structed, the mean depression was 2^*5 Fahr. ; but in an equal num- 
ber of comparative observations, with the tube perfectly free, the 
mean depression was increased to 3°T2 Falir, ; showing a consider- 
able diminution of the force of the current within the tube, as a 
result of the i>artial obstruction of its upper aperture. 

Similar eomparativc observations, with the hygrometer placed at 
the upper aperture of the tube, yielded similar results. 

In these experiments the lower extremity of the vertical tube was 
bent thrice at right angles*, for cqnvenienco in making the obser- 

* The tubes used in these experiments were bout either at their lower or upper 
extremities for oonvemunco merely. 



468 


vations, and. it appeared desirable to ascertain what influence tlie 
long branch of the eiphon-like tube had in the production of the cur- 
rent. For this purpose the long vertical tube was made moveable > 
so that the apparatus could be alternately converted into a siphon 
with equal limbs 4 inches in length, or one with a short leg, of 
4 inches^ and a long one of 96 inches. In twelve observations, when 
the long leg was inserted, the mean depression of the hygrometer 
was 2® *5 Fahr. ; when the limbs were of equal length, 2^*25 Fahr. 

Considering it possible that the current of air existing in the tube 
might have sufficient force to move a light body delicately suspended 
in its track, an elbow was inserted into the upper orifice of the tube, 
to which a piece of glass tube of the same diameter was adapted, 
6 inches in length, and a disc of tissue-paper, weighing one grain, 
which nearly occupied the area of the tube, was delicately suspended 
by a hair, at right angles to the axis of the tube. A slide valve was 
so adapted to the lower orifice, tliat this aperture could be opened or 
closed without entering the room. The air of the room being qui- 
escent, it was found that when the slide valve closed the lower orifice 
of the tube, the disc of tissue paper remained perfectly quiescent ; 
but that when the slide valve was withdrawn, leaving the lower 
orifice open, oscillations of the paper occurred, and it was projected 
at a small angle towards the upper orifice of the tube, demonstrating 
the existence of a feeble current of air through the apparatus. 

The preceding experiment having proved the existence of a cur- 
rent of air within the tube, of sufficient force to move a light body, 
the author next proceeded to ascertain the velpcity of the current 
by means of an anemometer, in the form of an horizontal fly-disc, 
suspended within the lower orifice df a tube, bent twice at right 
angles below. The revolving disc was made of a circular piece of 
stout writing-paper, cut into twenty-four equal segments, from the 
circumference to near the centre, each of the segments being after- 
wards inclined at an angle of twenty-five degrees*, like the vanes of a 
windmill ; so that when properly suspended, a current of air entering 
the lower orifice of the tube would cause the disc to revolve from 
right to left. The disc was suspended in the same manner as the 
needle of the mariner's compass, and by the same means. 

**■ A uesrer apftroach to an angle of 4S would have ciippled the paper, so that 
it would not have preserved the horizontal position. 



469 


When the apparatus was arranged^ the door of the room closed, 
and the atmosphere in a quiescent state, it was found that a con- 
stant regular rotation of the disc was established, and kept up by 
the upward current of air through the apparatus, and continued so 
long as the atmosphere of the room was quiet ; but that agitations 
of the surrounding air either rendered the rotation uncertain* or 
reversed it. 

Having thus ascertained that the current of air within the vertical 
tube possessed sufficient force to cause the rotation of a lightly 
suspended dy-disc, the question arose, what influence elongation or 
shortening of the tube would exert on the velocity of the current. 
For this purpose three tubes of precisely similar construction, but 
with long limbs of 12, 24, and 48 inches respectively, were fitted as 
before with fly-discs, and placed near each other in the centre of the 
room. 

In nineteen observations, the number of revolutions in the tube, 
with a long limb of 12 inches, varied from O’ 75 to 4'5 per minute; 
in that with a long limb of 24 inches, from 1 *5 to 9*0, and in that 
with the long limb of 48 inches, from 3*75 to 14*0 per minute. 
Hie gross number of revolutions in the three tubes, in the nineteen 
observations, were respectively 61-25, 111’25, and 199*75; and the 
mean revolutions per minute, 2*697, 5*855, 10*513, which, allow- 
ing for errors of observation, yield the ratios 1 , 2, 4 nearly ; so that 
it may be said that the velocity of tlie revolutions is in a direct ratio 
to the lengths of the vertical tubes. 

The influence of the conoidal form of the tube being suggested 
by Dr. Roget as worthy of investigation, a tube, 96 inches long by 
3 inches diameter below and 6 inches above, was fitted to a rec- 
tangular tube containing tlie rotating disc. Another tube of the 
same length, 3 inches in diameter throughout, was placed near the 
conical tube as a term of comparison. The revolutions of the disc 
in the conical tube were more rapid than in that of uniform diameter, 
in the proportion of 8*8 to 3*0, When the position of the cpne was 
reversed, and the entrance and exit orifices were equal, the revolu- 
tions still continued more rapid than in the tube of uniform 
diqmeter. 

To determine the influence of the area of the tube on the velocity 
of the current, four tubes, 96 inches in length in the long, and 



470 


4 inches in the short branch, but varying in diameter, were placed 
in the room near each other and simultaneously observed. 

In a tube of 3 inches uniform diameter, the revolutions were 3*0 
per minute; in one of 6 inchc89*15, and in one of 6*75 inches 13*16; 
their respective areas being 7*065, 15*708, and 21*205. In the 
conical tube on its base, whose area was 14*529, the revolutions 
were 8*8 per minute. It would seem, then, that the velocity has re- 
lation rather to the mean area of the tube than to that of the 
entrance and exit orifices, as the latter were the same in the tube of 
3 inches uniform diameter, and in the conical tube on its base, while 
the revolutions of the disc were 3*0 per minute in the former, and 
8*8 per minute in the latter. When the exit orifice of the tube of 
6*75 inches diameter was reduced to 3*5 inches, the rapidity of the 
revolutions was reduced only about 10 per cent. 

The influence of temperature in accelerating or retarding the cur- 
rents through the tubes next* engaged the author’s attention; but 
before entering into direct experiments, he found by very numerous 
observations, that on some occasions no appreciable difference could 
be observed in the temperature of tlie atmosphere of the room near 
the floor and the ceiling, while on otliers there was a mean excess 
of 0”* 1 7 Fahr. near the ceiling without causing any perceptible dif- 
ference in the velocity of the revolutions of the discs. In forty com- 
parative observations of the temperature of the external surface of 
the tube and of the surrounding air, that of the tube was 0*09 higher; 
in twenty- three it was equal, but in only five was it lower than the 
surrounding air. 

Of thirty- six comparative observations of the temperature of the 
air within, and external to the tube, by a delicate mercurial thermo- 
meter, it was found to be slightly higher within tlTe tube in twenty- 
seven, and in the remaining nine it was equal, but never lower than 
that of the external air. The greatest excess was 0®*4 Falir., and 
the mean excess 0^*14 Fahr* 

The accuracy of these results was tested by an extremely deliciate 
differential thermometer, which also indicated a minute excess of 
temperature within the tube ; the author is led however to infer, 
that in the thirty-six observations the mean of 0®*14 is rather above 
the true excess; taking this however to be the exact amount, and 
as the atmospheric air is increased only volume, for every 



471 


degree of Fahrenheit's thermometer, we shall have of for 
the increase of the whole bulk of that in the tube. 

'fhe disc continued to rotate while the thermometer indicated equal 
temperature in the tube and external to it, in eight of the cases, 
and was arrested by an accident in the ninth. 

In another experiment, when the lower orifice of the tube was 
alternately closed and opened by a valve, the temperature appeared 
under both circumstances to be the same ; hence, if we assume that 
a minute excess of temperature of the air within the tube, over that 
of the air external to it, exists, yet the experiment shows that it is 
not attributable to any heat being disengaged by the morement of 
the air itself. 

Increase and decrease of the temperature of the room exercised a 
considerable influence on the velocity of the rotations of the discs, 
which increased as the day advanced, and declined as the tempera- 
ture fell towards evening, although the direct rays of the sun never 
fell upon the window of the room. 

Partial exclusion of light, by a blind covering the whole window, 
produced a considerable reduction in the velocity of the rotations of 
the discs, but a screen of a foot in breadth, interposed between the 
window and an individual tube, merely reduced the velocity of the 
rotations from 12*5 to ll’O per minute. 

The influence of reduction of temperature of the long hrancli of 
the tube, by placing around it two coils of wet tape*, reduced the 
revolutions of the disc from 44) to 1*75 per minute ; a third reduced 
the revolutions to 1*0 ; a fourth to 0*5 ; and a fifth caused complete 
cessation. 

To ajsoeitain the influence of the abstraorion of aqueous vapour on 
the rotation of the discs, a shallow vessel, containing strong sulphuric 
acid, was placed, at the suggestion of the Rev, Dr. Booth, imme- 
diately below the disc in the short branch of the tube. After tbe 
lapse of thirty minutes, the rotation had ceased altogether ; at the 
commencement the disc was rotating at the usual rate. Hie same 
vessel, place4 iu the tube .rrithout the sulphuric acid, had no effect 
on the rotation. 

miotor experiment a bell-glaas lyas suspended over the short 
branch of the tube, so that the short branch projected into it, and a 

* Hilf/ati itah hmad, sad not to wet thst say of the water ran away flx>m ic 



478 


saucer, containing concentrated sulphuric acid, wasal so placed under 
the bell-glasB, on a level with the orifice of the tube. The rotations 
of the disc were accelerated by placing the warm hand for a few 
seconds in contact with the long branch of the tube ; but at the end 
of five minutes after it was withdrawn, and the room left and closed, 
the disc had ceased to rotate. 

To determine the influence of partial abstraction of aqueous 
vapour from the entire atmosphere of the room on the velocity of 
the rotations, the three tubes, with long limbs of 12, 24, and 48 
inches, employed in a previous experiment, were placed near each 
other, and three bushels of quicklime were spread in shallow Vessels 
on the floor and other parts of the room. Before the lime was placed, 
the disc in the 12-inch tube was revolving at the rate of 0*75 per 
minute; that in the 24-inch tube at 2*0; and that in the 48-inch 
tube at 4*0 per minute. At the end of fifty minutes the rotation had 
ceased in the 12-inch tube, and was reduced to 1*75, and 3*5 in' the 
24- and 48-inch tubes. After seventy minutes, rotation had ceased 
in the 24-inch tube, and was reduced to 8*75 in the 48-inch tube. 
Finally, after ninety minutes, the rotations in the 48-iuch tube were 
reduced to 2*75 per minute. 

Similar reductions in velocity were observed after the removal 
and reintroductioQ of the quicklime in a second and third series of 
observations. Thus in all these experiments the rotations in the 
12- and 24-inch tubes entirely ceased; and those in the 48-inch 
tube, although continued, were much diminished ; a result most pro- 
bably attributable to the greater quantity of aqueous vapour remain- 
ing in the upper strata of the air in the room. 

The mean depression of the wet-bulb thermometer, the hygro- 
meter being placed 48 inches above the floor, and the lime being 
absent, was 3*2 ; when the lime was present, 3*4. When the hygro- 
meter was on the floor the depression of the wet bulb woe 3*5, 

As the abstraction of aqueous vapour from the atmosphere dimi- 
nished and even abolished the currents of air within the tubes, it 
was to be expected that increase of vapour in the atmosphere would 
produce the contrary effect, and accelerate the currents and the cor- 
responding revolutions of the discs, and the following results coin- 
cide with that expectation. 

In the first experiment, the tube and bell-glass previously described 



478 


were employed, but substituting folds of damp linen for the sauet^ of 
sulphuric acid, so as fully to charge the air in the belhglass with 
vapour, the rotations rapidly rose from 4*0 to 17 or 18 per minute. 

But as tlie cold produced by the evaporation of the water in this 
experiment might be a source of fallacy, an arrangement was made 
to supply the bell-glass with air, previously charged with vapour, 
formed at a distance of 5 feet from the glass. The rapidity of the 
revolutions was however still considerably increased. 

Augmentation of the quantity of aqueous vapour, in the general 
atmosphere of the room, by spreading wet cloths on the floor and 
other parts, also produced increase in the rapidity of the rotations, 
though to a small extent. 

These experiments* would seem to demonstrate that the ordi- 
nary condition of atmospheric air within vertical tubes, open at both 
extremities, is one of continual upward movement. 

If the atmosphere were a strictly homogeneous elastic fluid, and 
in a state of perfect equilibrium; any portion of it contained in a 
vertical tube would of course be perfectly stationary unless some 
adventitious cause produced disturbance of its equilibrium. But 
our atmosphere being a mixed fluid, and the aqueous vapour being 
of a much lower specific gravity at all atmospheric temperatures 
than the compound of which it forms a part, it is constantly rising 
within a tube, as in the free air ; entering at the lower, and making 
its exit al the upper orifice of the tube. 

The experiments appear further to demonstrate, that the presence 
of aqueous vapour in the atmosphere is essential to the production 
of the current within the vertical tubes, since by the abstraction of 
vapour from the air by quicklime, the rotations of the discs were 
invariably either diminished or caused to cease j while on the other 
hand, when the proportion of aqueous vapour in the air was in- 
creased, the currents and the rotations of the discs were simulta- 
neously accelerated* 

* Throughout the entire aeries the results were carefiiUr observed during the 
night, when the atmosphere of the room was free from solar influences. The dry- 
end the wet-bulb thermometers yielded the seme relative diflferenoes, end the discs 
Rotated with the tame constancy. The night os well as the day observations were 
eonrimied through all the changes of temperature, from March 1853 to the present 
time. 



474 


In concluding the detaih of tbe&e experiments, the author considers 
that they all tend to prove the existence of an upward current, under 
the circumstances described in the commencement of this paper. 

They moreover peld a series of results which he hopes the Society 
will deem to be not without interest. 

These results show it to be probable, if not certain, that the ordi- 
nary temperature of air within tubes, under the circumstances in 
which these were placed, is higher than of that external to them, all 
other relations of the tubes and surrounding objects being the same ; 
they also show that in eight instances, when the thermometers in- 
dicated an equality of temperature, within and external to the tube, 
the rotations of the discs still continued ; and that when four coils 
of tape, moistened with water, were applied round the external sur- 
face of the tube, the rotations of the disc did not wholly cease. 

They also show, that when the atmosphere of the room, in which 
the tubes were immersed, coxftained a larger or smaller proportion of 
aqueous vapour, all other things being equal, the discs revolved with 
more or leas velocity \ but that when the atmosphere was deprived 
in a great degree of aqueous vapour by the presence of quicklime, 
the. thermometric state in all other respects remedniog the same, the 
revolutions of the discs ceased. 

Adverting to the indications cited above, of a minute excess of 
temperature in the interior of the tubes, and assuming that even 
that slight excess would be sufficient to rotate the discs, still the 
rotations diminished or ceased in proportion as the aqueous vapour 
was withdrawn. 

Any increase of temperature which might have been produced by 
the quicklime would have had a tendency rather to increase thair 
diminish the revolutions of the discsi but we have seen that the 
abstraction of the vapour enrirely arretted their rotation. 

With regard to the specific influence of each of the circumstances 
and agents most probably concerned in producing the phenomena 
described above^ such as protection of the air within the tube from 
lateral expanaioii and mechanical agitarions, to which the external 
air is exposed; gaseous diffusion; the unequal specific gravity of 
air and vapour; and the subtle opefrarions of temperature at all 
times, the author is fully conscious that he has not ascertained their 
respective values. 



475 


He is also conscious that the phenomena themselves are the chief 
ground on which he can rest a claim for originality, and that the 
explanation of them may be better treated by those who are more 
accustomed to deal with similar researches. 

In the course of these experiments the author has been especially 
indebted for many valuable suggestions to the Ilev, Dr. Booth, 
Dr. Roget, Professor Sharpey, and Mr. Bishop ; and he is also under 
obligations to Professor Stokes and to Mr. Brooke. 


XII. On the Constitution and Properties of Ozone.^' By 
Thomas Andukws, M.D., Professor of Chemistry 

in Queen^s College, Belfast, Received May 16, 1856. 

The conflicting views which have so long existed as to the true 
constitution of ozone, induced the author to undertake a careful in- 
vestigation of the subject, particularly as he had reason to doubt the 
accuracy of the only quantitative experiments which have yet been 
made to elucidate this difficult question. According to the experi- 
ments referred to, two substances have been confounded under the 
name of ozone, one a compound body having the formula HOj,, the 
other an allotropic variety of oxygen. To ascertain whether, in con- 
formity with this statement, ozone obtained in the electrol5"sis of 
water contains hydrogen os a constituent, the author made two 
series of experiments. In the first series, he followed nearly the 
same method of investigation by which its compound nature is sup- 
posed to have been established, but modified so as to qvoid a source 
of error, which, if neglected, vitiates altogether the results. Electro- 
lytic oxygen, unless very great precautions be taken, is always ac^ 
companied by a small but appreciable quantity of carbonic acid, 
which is liable to be partially absorbed by the potassa set free when 
a neutral solution of iodide of potassium is decomposed by ozone. 
By adding a little hydrochlo^ric acid to the solution of iodide of 
potassium before the commencement of each experiment, this error 
may be avoided. 

The method of performing the experiment was to conduct a stream 
of electrolytic oxygen through a compound apparatus previously 

VOL. m. 2x 



476 


weighed, which contained on one side an acid solution of iodide of 
potassium, and on the other sulphuric acid ; the former to decompose 
the ozone, the latter to prevent the escape of moisture. The increase 
in weight of this apparatus gave the entire weight of the ozone ; the 
iodine set free, when reduced to its equivalent in oxygen, the weight 
of the active oxygen. The precautions to be taken in conducting 
this experiment are fully described in the communioation. 

The following are the numerical results of five experiments per- 
formed according to the above method : — 


Volume of electrolytic 
oxygen. 

litres. 

10*20 

2*72 

2*86 

6*45 

6*80 


Increase in weight of 
compound apparatus. 

grm. 

0*0379 
0*0107 
0*0154 
' 0 0288 
00251 


Active oxygen deduced 
from iodine set free. 

grm. 

0*0386 

0*0100 

00138 

0*0281 

0*0273 

01178 


Total ...... 0*1179 


The agreement in these numbers proves that the active oxygen is 
exactly equal to the entire weight of the ozone, and is therefore iden- 
tical with it. 

In the next series of experiments the author shows that no water 
is produced in the decomposition of electrolytic ozone by heat. 
Large quantities of electrolytic oxygen, containing from 88 to 27 
milligrammes of ozone, were decomposed by heat, but no water was 
obtained in a weighed absorption apparatus, in which the gas was 
exposed, not only to the action of sulphuric acid, but was also pmed 
through a tube containing anhydrous phosphoric acid. 

Having confirmed by new experiments the fact that ozone is 
formed by the action of the electrical spark on pure and dry oxygen, 
the author proceeds to institute a comparison between the properties 
of ozone derived from different sources. These he finds to be in 
every respect the same. Tims ozone, however prepared, is de- 
stroyed, or rather converted into ordinary oxygen, by exposure to a 
temperature of about 237® C., and catalyticoUy, by being passed over 
peroxide of manganese, no water being formed in either case ; it is 
not absorb^ by water, but when sufficiently diluted vith other 



477 


gaaea, is destroyed by agitatiow with a large quantity of water ; it is 
contrary to the common statements, destroyed by being agi* 
tated with lime-water uod baryta- water, provided a suiHeient quan- 
tity of those solutions be used ; it has always the same peculiar 
odour ; it bleaches without producing previously an acid reaction ; 
it oxidizes in all cases the same bodies, dec. 

From the whole investigation the author draws the conclusion, 
that ozone, from whatever source derived, is one and the same 
substance, and is not a compound body, but oxygen in an altered or 
allotropic condition/' 


XIIL Eubian and its Products of Decomposition.’^-^ 

Part HI. By Edwahd Schunck, P.R.S. Received June 

18, 1855. 

Combined Action of Alkalies and Oxygen on Rubian. 

In the preceding part of this paper the author has shown that the 
action of alkalies is essentially the same as that of acids on rubian, 
the only difference being that the rubianine produced by acids is 
replaced by rubiadine when alkalies are employed. Now though 
this is in all cases the hnal result of the action of alkalies, there still 
remained a possibility of the existence of bodies intermediate between 
rubian and the final products of decomposition. Such bodies do in 
reality exist, but their formation is dependent, in part at least, on 
the simultaneous action of oxygen. 

When alkalies or alkaline earths, as potash, soda, ammonia, 
baryta or lime, or the bicarbonates of baryta or lime are added to a 
watery solution of rubian, and the solution is exposed to the air, 
oxygen is absorbed, and three distinct bodies are formed, to which 
the author has given the names of Acid^ Ruhidshydrun and 

Ruhihydran, The method of separating these bodies and obtaining 
them in a state of purity is fully detailed. Even oxide of lead is a 
suEciently strong base to cause rubian to undergo this process of 
decomposition in the presence of oxygen. From this cause the lead 
compound of rubian, after being exposed for some time to the atmo- 
sphere, no longer contains unchanged rubian, but products of its de- 
composition ; and hence also it follows that in the processes pro« 

2x2 



478 


posed by Kuhlmaxm, Berzelius and others for the preparation of the 
so-called xanthine, and in that of Rochleder for the preparation of 
his ruberythric acid, all of which depend on the use of alkaline earths 
or basic acetate of lead, products of decomposition of rubian must in 
every case be formed. Besides the substances just mentioned, a 
little acetic acid, and sometimes also rubiadine, and sugar in small 
quantities are formed. Whether the first is an essential product of 
decomposition or not, the author leaves undecided ; but the other two 
he considers as decidedly secondary products, resulting from the 
decbmposicioD of rubidehydran or rubihydran. 

Rubianic acid is soluble in water and alcohol, but not in ether. 
It crystallises in lemon-yellow silky needles. Its watery solution 
has a distinctly but not strongly bitter taste. When heated it yields 
a sublimate of alizarine. By the action of strong adds, os well as 
of caustic alkalies and of erythrozym, it is decomposed into alizonne 
and sugar. Its compounds wfth potash and ammonia crystallize in 
small puce-coloured needles. The soda salt is deposited from the 
watery solution as a mass of small red spherical grains, which are 
very sparingly soluble in water. These compounds possess very 
little stability. The batyta and lime salts are obtained by double 
decomposition os red precipitates. The acid is completely precipi- 
tated from its watery solution by basic acetate of lead, the precipi- 
tate being red, and resmbling that produced by the same salt in a 
solution of rubian. 

l^he composition of rubianic acid is expressed by the formula 

^63 ^29 

that of the potash salt by 

^82 ^28 

that of the neutral baryta salt by 

C,2H,,02eH-BaO + HO. 

The conversion of the acid into alizarine and sugar is symbolized by 
the following equation : — 

Cw + 5H0=:2C.4H, O 4 + O,,. 

In order to leave no doubt regarding the correctness of the formula, 
the author determmed the quantity of alizarine formed by the decom- 
position of the acid. According to calculation, 100 parts of acid 
should yield 43*44 parts of dry alizarine. In two experiment? the 
author obtained 42*47 and 45*17 per cent, of alizarine. 



479 


The presence of oxygen is necessary for the formation of this acid. 
If a watery solution of rubian made alkaline with soda or baryta be 
kept out of contact with the air, no rubianic acid is produced, 
whereas an abundance of the latter is obtained from the same solu* 
tion on exposure to the atmosphere. The manner in which it is 
formed from rubian may be represented by the following equation : — 

+ 100 = 4- 4CO, -f 5HO. 

The author considers this as the first known instance of a body, 
belonging to the class of glucosides, or conjugate compounds con- 
taining sugar, having been observed to form by a process of oxida- 
tion. 

l"he author thinks it probable that this acid and the ruberythric 
of Hochleder arc identical, but the description given of the latter by 
the discoverer is not sufficiently minute to enable him to come to a 
decision on this point. Rochleder has moreover given a very dif- 
ferent composition for his acid. Until the properties and composi- 
tion of the latter have been more accurately investigated, the author 
prefers considering the two acids as distinct. If they are identical, 
then Hochleder has merely committed the common error of mistaking 
a product for an educt. 

Hubidehydran and rubihydran have both properties very nearly 
resembling those of rubian, from which they can only with difficulty 
be distinguished. Neither of them however is capable of yielding 
rubianic acid when treated in the same way as rubian. The com- 
position of rubidehydran is expressed by the formula 

that of rubihydran by 

The former contains therefore the elements of 2 equivs. of water less 
the latter, the elements of 5 equivs. of water more than rubian. 
Both substances give, when decomposed by strong acids, the same 
products, viz. alizarine, rubiretine, verantine, rubiadine and sugar. 
The products formed by acids are therefore the some as those pro- 
duoed from rubian by alkalies, which renders it probable that the 
latter, when acted on by alkalies, is first converted into rubidehydran 
or rubihydran, or both. 

Hubiadine may be obtained from rubihydran in large quantities 



480 


a&d in a state of great purity* and the author bad thus an oppor- 
tunity of examining the properties and composition of this substance 
Indore accurately than heretofore. From the new analyses which he 
made he infers that its formula is 


which differs from 


^82 ^12 ^ 8 * 


the one formerly given, by 1 equiv. of water. 


Action of Chlorine on RuUan, 

When chlorine gas is passed through a watery solution of rubian, 
the solution deposits lemon-yellow or orange- colour flocks and be- 
comes colourless. The docks consist of a peculiar substance, which 
the author calls Chlororuhian. The liquid contains sugar. Chloro- 
rubian crystallizes from its solution in alcohol in small orange- 
coloured needles. It is soluble in boiling water, but not as easily 
as in alcohol. On being heated, however carefully, it is decomposed. 
It is dissolved by caustic and carbonated alkalies, forming blood -red 
solutions, llie baryta and lime compounds are red and insoluble. 
The watery solution produces with basic acetate of lead a light red 
precipitate. The author gives for the chlororuhian the formula 

Its formation from rubian is represented by tibe following equation : — 

0 ^ + 6HO H- 2C1«C44H3;C103, 4- + 2C1H. 

Chlororuhian is decomposed by strong acids and splits up into 
sugar and another body, which has the formula 

Ca^H^^ClO^, 

and which, in consequence of the relation in which it stands to 
rubiadine, the author calls Chlororubiadine. The manner in which 
this process of decomposition takes place will be seen from the 
following equation 

CIO, 4= C«2 C10«-h Cl, Hi, 012+ 3HO. 

Chlororubiadme is soluble in alcohol. The boiling sedution de- 
posits it on coding in yellow shining needles. It is insoluUe in 
boiling water. It is not decomposed by dilate nitric add or on 
boiling, but nitric acid of sp. gr. 1*52 dissolves, and on boiling 



481 


decomposea it» and nitrate of silver now gives a precipitate of chlo- 
ride of silver. Chlororubiadine dissolves in caustic and carbonated 
alkalies with a red colour. With baryta it gives a compound, crystal- 
lizing in long red needles. 'Fhe author did not succeed in convert- 
ing rubiadine into chlororubiadine, nor, on the other hand, was he 
able to substitute the chlorine of the latter by hydrogen, and thus 
form rubiadine. 

The sugar which is formed from chlororubian, together with chlo- 
rorubiadine, may be obtained in a crystallized state, when it has the 
properties and composition of crystallised grape-sugar. 

When chlororubian is treated with caustic soda, the chlorine is 
entirely separated, forming chloride of sodium. The other protlucts 
of decomposition are verantiiie, rubiretine, a body resembling rubia- 
dine, sugar, and a yellowish-brown substance insoluble in water, 
in alcohol, and even in alkalies, the probable formula of which is 

C44H.4O,,. 

and for which the author proposes the name of Os^yrubian, since it 
owes its formation to the chlorine of chlororubian being replaced by 
oxygen. 

By the continued action of chlorine chlororubian is converted 
into a white body, which the author calls Per chlororubian. This 
body is insoluble in water and caustic alkalies, but soluble in alcohol 
and ether. It crystallizes from the alcoholic solution in colourless, 
transparent, four- sided tables, exhibiting a beautiful iridescence. 
When carefully heated it may be entirely volatilized. It is not de- 
composed by nitric acid of sp. gr. r%52, even on boiling, but is 
merely dissolved. Its composition is expressed by the formula 

From these experiments it follows that chlororubian is a conju- 
gate body containing sugar. In this respect it resembles Piria’s 
chloTosalicine, 

In all processes of decomposition previously described rubian yields 
three series of compounds, just as if it consisted of three bodies. 
When acted on by chlorine, however, it yields only one series of pro- 
ducts, which corresponds exactly with one of the three series of the 
otiier processes, the bodies belonging to tlie two other series not 
making their appearance, even in the form of products of substitution. 



482 


XIV. ''On the Enumeration of a?-edra having an ])-gonal 
Face, and all their Summits Triedral/* Hy the llev. Tiio* 
MAS P, Kiukman, A*M., Rector of Croft-with-Southworth. 
Communicated by A. Caylky, Esq., F.R.S. Received 
June 13, 1855. 

The object of the paper is to enumerate the .r-edra which have an 
l)-gonal face, and all their summits triedral ; or, what is the 
same thing, to find the number of the j?“acra which have an (jf— 1)- 
edral summit, and all their faces triangular. 

Every ^-edron having an {x — l)-gonal face has at least two trian- 
gular faces. Let A be on j:’-edron having all its summits triedral, 
and having about its (j*— l)-gonal face k triangular faces. Suppose 
all these triangles to become infinitely small ; there arises an (a:— A)- 
edron B, having an (j:— A— l)fgonal face, and all its summits tri- 
edral. B will have triangular faces, being not less than two, 
nor greater than k. And there is no other (jf— 1^)-edron but B, 
which can arise from the vanishing of all the k triangles of A ; j. e. 
there is no (r-“A)-edron but B, from which A can be cut by re- 
moving k of the summits of B in such a way as to leave none of its 
k^ triangles untouched. 

If we next suppose the k^ triangles of B to vanish, there will arise 
an (.r—A— A')-edron C, having an (•«?“ A— P— l)-gonal face, all its 
summits triedral, and P' triangular faces, k*^ not c2, nor And 

thus we shall at last reduce our ^-edron, either to a tetraedron, or 
to a pentaedron having triedral summits. 

All r-edra here considered fall into six varieties, differing in the 
sequence of the r— 1 faces that are collateral with the (r““l)-gonal 
base. They are either irreveraibh, as the octaedron 6435443, the 
seven faces about the base reading differently both backwards and 
forwards from every face ; or doubly irreversible, as the heptaedtx)n 
543543, whose six faces about the base are a repetition of an irre- 
versible period of three ; or triply irreversible, as the decaedron 
643643643, whose faces exhibit a thrice- repeated irreversible period; 
or they are reversible, doubly reversible, or triply reversible, os the 
hexaedrou 53443, the enneaedron 63536353, or the heptaedron 
536358, exhibiting a single, double, or triple period, all reading 



488 


backwards and forwards the same. If P* be the number of .r-edra 
having an (j?»l)-gonal base, and all their summits triedral, 

p.=l+i!!+i"+r,+r!+r« 


the symbols on the right denoting the numbers of ir-edra of the six 
varieties that make up P^. 

Each variety is again subdivided according to the number of tri- 
angular faces. Thus, if k) denote the number of jp-edra on an 
(x’"-l)-gonal hose, having k triangular faces, and all their summits 
triedral, 


P(.r, k) = I(.r, k) -h \\x, k) + k) + R( A k) ^ k) + k\ 


(X*— ■ 1 

The number k is not <2, nor ^ and k), for all 

values of k. 

It is necessary to solve the following 

Problem , — To determine the number of (j?-f /:4-/)-edra, none of 
which shall be the reflected image of another,^ that can be made 
from any ^-edron having k triangular faces, by removing k-^l ol its 
base-summits, thus adding triangular faces, so that none of its 
k triangular faces shall remain uncut. 

Thejp-edron is supposed to have an (j?— l)‘gonal face, and all its 
summits triedral; no edge is to be removed, and A+f not 1, 

When the j?-edron, the subject of operation, is irreversible, all 
the resulting (jr-f A + /)-edra will bo irreversible. If it is reversible, 
some of them will be reversible and others irreversible ; if it is w«/- 
tiple, some of them will be, and others will not be, multiple. 

If the subject of o])eration is irreversible, the number required by 
the problem is 




1/-|“ I 






i * /7—a-f 1 


taken for all values of a not greater than the least of k and /; i. e. 
A— a not cO, 0 not >/—<!. 

The complete answer to the problem is expressed by the follow- 
ing equations, in which, of the capitals on the left, the first ex- 
presses the result, and the second the subject of operation. That is, 
IR®(^, k, /) denotes the number of irreversible A-f /)-edra having 
A-f / triangular faces about the (;p-f A-f Z- l)'goiial base, that can 



484 


be cut from any doubly reversible ir-edron having k triangles about 
its (x — l)-gonal base. 

Whenever A or / in the function «(«, k, 1) is not integer, the func- 
tion, by a geometrical necessity, is to be considered =0. 

11(3’, k, l)=ii(x, k, 1), 

IP(23-i- 1, 2*, /)= i {«(2’r+ 1. 2*, l)-iHx+l.k, iO}. 

IP(a3+ 1, 3A, l)=i{ii(3x+ 1, 3A, /)-ii(3-t- 1. A. iO}. 

I-’P(23’-t- 1, 2A, 0=i«(3’ + 1, k. il). 

FI’‘(33’-f 1, 3k. l)=ii(x+ l.k. ^0 ; 

RR(2x-|- 1, 2A, l)=:ii{x+ l.k.il), 

RK(23’-)- 1, 2A-f- 1, A, 2)). 

RR(23, 2A, l)~ii(x, k, + k, \(l— 1)) > 

IR(23’-h 1. 2A, 0 = H»i(23+ 1, 2*, /)-M(.r+ 1. A. iO}, 

IR(23’+ 1, 2A-H, /)=i{«i(23’jf l,2A-f- 1, /) -ii{x, A,i(/-2))}- 
IB(23’,2A./)=i{«(23’,2A,0-«V(3’.A, W-i»(x, A,l(/-1))} ; 

R»R'(4x+ 1 , 4A, /)= h(x-1- 1 , A. ^1). 

FR’'(4x-b 1 , 4A, 0=i{«»(2x-h 1, 2A, i/)-«(x+ 1, A, \l)\, 

RR*(4x4- 1, 4A, /)=fi(2x-l- 1, 2A, J/)— «(x4’ 1. A, \l), 

UV(4x+i,4k, /)=s:|[»V(4x-f 1, 4A, /)4-2»i(x-(- 1, A, |/) 

— 3M(2*+l,2A,i/)] ; 

R''R’(6x+ 1, CA, l)=ii(x+ 1. A, ^/), RW{7, 3, 3)=], 

FR»(6x-h 1, 6A, /)=i{«(2x+ 1, 2A,|/)-»(x-H, A,^/)}, 

RR*(6x + 1 , 6 A, 0 == «(3x -I- 1 , 3 A, iO - «(■' + 1 . A. iO . HR”(7, 3, 1 ) = 2, 
IR‘(6x+l, 6A, /)=^{ii(6x+l, 6A, /) -h 3<i(x + 1 , A, 

-h(2x+ 1, 2A, Jl)-3»i(3x-b 1, 3A, H)}. 

IK»(7, 3, 2)=IR»(7, 3, 1)=IR“(7, 3,0)=1 ; 

l“R“(x+l,A,x-A)=0. 

By the aid of the above, together with the following, equations, 
the (x+A-hO'®*^’^® having A +1 triangular faces, an (x-|-A-h/— 1)- 
gonal base and triedral summits, are successively found. 

I(x+A-|-/, A-l./)=S{I(x+ A') . H(x. V. A*) . Il»(x. V. P) 

+ 1*(*. A*) . II*(x, A'. r)-t-R(x, A') . IR(x, A*,/*) 

+ R’Cx, k!) . lR*(x, A*. P) + R.’(x, A') . IK»(x. A*. ^)} ; &c.&c. 

taken for all values of IP 4- P^k+l. 



486 


Similar equations are to be formed for the remaining five sub- 
divisions of P(x+A-f f, ft+l). 

Of the products under S, the first factors are found by the pre- 
ceding part of the process, and the second are given by the equa- 
tions above written as solutions of the problem. The factors will 
of course frequently be zeros. Finally, if x'=x+ft-)-/, 

2) + P{x'. 3) + .. . .-bP(x',i(x'-l))- 
Thus, to give an example, 

P„-P(ll,2) + P(11.3) + P(11.4)-bP(ll,5) 

= 1(11,2)-!- 1(11, 8) -)-I(11,4) + (I(11,5)=0) 

+ P(11,2) + P(11,4) 

+11(1 1,2) + R(ll,3) + R(ll,4)-Hl(l 1,5). 

1(11,2)= P(9, 2) . 1P(9, 2, 0) + 1(9, 2) . 11(9, 2. 0) ; 

1(11,3) = I(8,2).II(8,2,1) + R(8, 2).IR(8, 2,l) + f(8,3).l(8,3,0); 
1(1 1. 4)=P(7. 2) . 1P(7, 2. 2) + R(7. 2) . 1R(7, 2, 2) 

+ R»(7.3).1R'(7.3,1): 

P(11,2)=P(9,2).PP(9, 2,0): 

P(11,4)=P(7.2).PP(7,2,2): 

R(11,2)=R(9,2).RR(9.2,0): 

R(11,3)=R(8,2).UR(8,2,1): 

R(1 1, 4)=R(7, 2) . R(7, 2, 2)+R»(7. 3) . RR»(7, 3, 1 ) : 

B(ll, 5)=R(6, 2) . RR(6, 2, 3). 

The result is » 

Pn=lii + Ijj + Ri,=Cl + 7 + 12=80. 


XV. "Notes on British Foraminifera.” By J. Gwyn Jbf- 
FASYB, Ssq., F.R.S. Iloceived June 19, 1855. 

Having, daring a great many years, directed my attention to the 
recent Foraminifera which inhabit our own shores, I venture to offer 
a few observations on this carious group, as Dr. Carpenter, who has 
favoured the Society with an interesting and valuable memoir on 
the subject, seems not to have had many opportunities of studying 
the animals in the recent state. 



m 


Eatber more than twenty years ago I communicated to the lin- 
nean Society a paper on the subject, containing a diagnosis and 
figures of all the species. This paper was read atid ordered to be 
printed in the Transactions of that Society ; but it was withdrawn 
by me before publication, in consequence of my being dissatisfied 
with D^Orbigny's theory (which I had erroneously adopted), that 
the animals belonged to the Cephalopoda ; and my subsequent ob- 
servations were confirmed by the theory of Dujardin. I have since 
placed all my drawings and specimens at the disposal of Mr. Wil* 
liamson of Manchester, who has given such a good earnest of what 
he can do in elucidating the natural history of this group, by his 
papers on Lagena and the Foraminiferous mud of the Levant. 

The observations which I have made on many hundred recent and 
living specimens of various species, fully confirm Dr. Carpenter's 
view as to the simple and homogeneous nature of the animal. His 
idea of their reproduction \»y gemmation is also probably correct; 
although I cannot agree with him in considering the granules which 
are occasionally found in the cells as ova. These bodies I have fre- 
quently noticed, and especially in the Lagena ; but they appeared 
to constitute the entire mass, and not merely a part of the animal. 
I am inclined to think they are only desiccated portions of the ani- 
mal, separated from each other in consequence of the absence of any 
muscular or nervous structure. It may also be questionable if the 
term "ova*' is rightly applicable to an animal which has no distinct 
organs of any kind. Possibly the fry may pass through a metamor- 
phosis, as in the case of the Medusa. 

Most of the Foraminifera are free, or only adhere by their pseudo- 
podia to foreign substances. Such are the Lagena of Walker, Nodo^ 
sarm, Vorticialis and Tea^tularia, and the Miliola of Lamarck. The 
latter has some, although a very limited, power of locomotion ; which 
is effected by exserting its pseudopodia to their full length, attach- 
ing itself by them to a piece of seaweed, and then contracting them 
like india-rubber, so as to draw the shell along with them. Some 
of the acephalous moUusks do the same by means of their hyssus. 
This mode of progression is, however, exceedingly slow ; and 1 have 
never seen, in the course of twenty-four hours, a longer journey than 
a quarter of an inch accomplished by a MiUda» so that, in oompari- 
son with it, a snail travels at a railroad pace. 



487 


Some are fixed or sewiile» but not cemented at their base like the 
testaceous annelids. The oYdy mode of attachment appears to be a 
thin film of sarcose. The Lohatula of Fleming, and the Rosalia and 
Planorbulina of D*Orbigny belong to this division. 

Dr. Carpenter considers the Foraminifera to be phytophagous, in 
consequence of his having detected in some specimens, by the aid 
of the microscope, fragments of DiatomacetB and other simple forms 
of vegetable life. But as I have dredged them alive at a depth of 
108 fathoms (which is far below the Laminarian zone), and they are 
extremely abundant at from 40 to 70 fathoms, ten miles from land 
and beyond the range of any seaweed, it may be assumed without 
much difiiculty, that many, if not most of them, are zoophagous, and 
prey on microscopic animals, perhaps even of a simpler form and 
structure than themselves. They are in their turn the food of mol- 
lusca, and appear to be especially relished by Dentalium Entah, 

With respect to Dr. Carpenter’s idea that they are allied to 
sponges, I may remark that Polystomella crispa (an elegant and not 
uncommon species) has its periphery set round at each segment with 
siliceous spicula, like the rowels of a spur. But as there is only one 
terminal cell, which is connected with all the others in the interior 
by one or more openings for the pseudopodia, the analogy is not 
complete, this being a solitary, and the sponge a compound or 
aggregate animal. 

I believe the geographical range or distribution of species in this 
group to be regulated by the same laws as in the Mollusks and other 
marine animals. In the gulf of Genoa 1 have found (as might have 
been expected) species identical with those of our Hebridean coast, 
and vice vend. 

In common with Dr. Carpenter, I cannot help deploring the ex- 
cessive multiplication of species in the present day, and I would in- 
clude in this regret the unnecessary formation of genera. Another 
Linnaeus is sadly wanted to correct this pernicious habit, botli at 
home and abroad. 

The group now under consideration exhibits a great tendency to 
variation of form, some of the combinations (especially in the case of 
Marginulina) being as complicated and various as a Chinese puzzle. 
It is, I believe, undeniable, that the variability of form is in an in- 
verse ratio to the development of animals in the scale of Nature. 



488 


Having examined thousands (I may say myriads) of these elegant 
organisms, 1 am induced to suggest the following arrangement : — 

1. Lagem (Walker) and Entosolema (Williamson). 

2. Nodomria and MarginuUna (D*Orb.), &e. 

3. Vorticialia (D’Orb.), Rotalia (Lam.), Lob^tula (Flem.), Glohi* 
gerina (D’Orb.), &c. 

4. Textularia (Defiance), Uvigm^ina (D’Orb.), &c. 

5. Jlfi7io/a (Lam.), BilocuUna (D’Orb.), &c. 

This division must, however, be modified by a more extended and 
cosmopolitan view of the subject, as 1 only profess to treat of the 
British species. To illustrate MacLeay’s theory of a quinary and 
circular arrangement, the case may be put thus. 

Lsgsnsdffi. 



The first family is connected by the typical genus Lagena with'- 
the second, and by Entosolina with the fifth ; the second is united 
with the third through Margimlina', the third with the fourth 
through Glohig^rina ; and the fourth with the last through Uvige^ 
rina. 

Whether these singular and Uttle-known animals are Rhixopodes, 
or belong to the Amoeba, remains yet to be satisfactorily made out. 

London, June 18, 1855. 


XVI. Preliminary Research on the Magnetism developed in 
. Iron Bars by Electrical Currents.” By J, P. Joule, F*R.S. 
Received June 21, 1855, 

The author had, many years ojgo, found that the magnetism deve^ 
loped by electrp-magnetio coils in Iwrs of upward of Jxd of an inch 



489 


diameter* was nearly proportional to the stren^h of tbe current and 
the length of the wire, any alteration, within certain timita, of the 
diameter of a bar being attended with only triding edecta, so long 
as the point of saturation was not nearly approached. The Russian 
philosophers Lena and Jacobi had, however, stated that the mag- 
netism developed was, cceteria paribus, proportional to the diameter 
of the bar. The discrepancy between the above results is considered 
by the author to be owing rather to the different circumstances 
under which the experiments were tried than to any inaccuracies in 
the experiments themselves. Further, it appeared to him that in 
any case of induction by electric currents, carefpl distinction should 
be made between the several effects, which, compounded together, 
constitute the total magnetic action. Especially should a distinc- 
tion be made between the magnetism existing under the inductive 
influence of the current and that permanently developed so as to 
remain after the electrical circuit is broken, and therefore the first 
efforts of the author were directed to ascertain the laws which regu- 
late this permanent efifect, or, as he thinks it may be conveniently 
termed, the magnetic set. 

In his experiments the magnetism of any bar was ascertained, by 
placing it vertically with its lower end near a delicately suspended 
magnetic needle. This was a piece of sewing-needle ^ths of an 
inch long, furnished with an index of hue drawn glass tube tra- 
versing over a graduated circle six inches in diameter. It was sus- 
pended by a filament of silk. The tangent of the deflection of the 
needle was found to be the exact measure of the attraction of a bar. 
In working with this instrument, it was found that the resistance of 
the air prevented the needle firom swinging even once beyond the 
point of equilibrium to which it always arrived in less than ten 
seconds. This resistance of the air, so useful for bringing the 
needle rapidly to a state of rest, rendered it necessary to keep the 
entire ixutrument at a uniform temperature, for the slightest local 
application of heat produced currents of air within the glass case of 
sufi&cient strength to occasion considemble deflections. The cir- 
cumstance points to the possibility of constructmg a new and very 
sensitive thermometer which might be useful, particularly in experi- 
ments on the conduction of heat. 

The method of experimenting consisted in observing, — 1st. the 
magnetic attraction of any bar when a current circulated through 



490 


its spiral ; 2ad» the attraction still subsisting after the circuit >va8 
broken ; 3rd. the attraction of the other pole of the needle on the 
reversal of the current; and 4th. the attraction remaining after 
this reverse current was cut off. The sum of the lat and 3rd 
observations gives the total change in the magnetism of a bar by 
the reversal of the current. The sum of tlie 2nd and 4th gives the 
total permanent change of magnetism, or the magnetic set. 

The experiments were made with iron bars of the several dia- 
meters, t* i* length being in each 

case one yard; and also with iron bars 4^. i and one inch diame- 
ter, of the length of two yards. In all the bars of small diameter 
up to i of an inch, the magnetic set obtained by the use of feeble 
currents was found to be proportional to the square of the current 
employed in producing them. lliis law was found to subsist 
through a long series of electric intensities ; but when the current 
was increased to a certain atfiount, the set^ as observed in the bars 
of and of an inch diameter, increased in a much higher ratio, 
so as to vary, in some instances, with the 4th and 6th powers of 
the current. The point at which this phenomenon takes place is 
called the magnetic breaking point. A further increase of the cur- 
rent was attended with a rapid decrease of this ratio as the satura- 
tion of the bar was approached. 

The total change of magnetic condition by reversal of the cur- 
rent, minus the magnetic set, is found to be nearly proportional to 
the intensity of the current. 

Results of exactly similar character were obtained by the use of 
an electro-magnet, consisting of a bar of hard steel 4 of an inch in 
diameter and 7| inches long. 

In conclusion, the author points out the striking and instructive 
analogy which exists between the above phenomena and those of 
the set of materials as exhibited by Professor Hodgkinson, who, in 
his admirable researches, has proved that the set, or permanent 
change of figure, in any beam is proportional to the square of the 
pressure to which it has been exposed. 

Communications were read also from the Asthonoickr Royal 
and Mr. Maouvorn Eanxiitr'*'. 

* of these iHIl sppear in the next Number. 



June 21, 1856. (Continued.) 


The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

The following communications were read : — 

XVII. Discussion of the observed Deviations of the Compass 
in several Ships, Wood-built and Iron -built ; with General 
Tables for facilitating the examination of Compass- devia- 
tions/^ By G. B. Airy, Esq., F.R.S., Astronomer Royal. 
Received June 2, 1855, 

The author refers, in the first place, to his paper in the Philoso- 
phical Transactions for 1839, on the Disturbance of the Compass 
in Iron Ships, for a theory of the forces produced by the transient 
induced magnetism of iron. Using the term “ polar-magnet-devia- 
tion ** to express a deviation similar to that W'hich would be pro- 
duced by a magnetized steel bar partaking of the movements of the 
ship ; and using the term ** quadrantal deviation for a deviation 
following the law of the sine of double the azimuth, and thus 

having, if “positive,” the signs -j 1 — in the four successive 

quadrants of azimuth, or, -if '* negative.” the signs — H h in the 

four sueoessive quadrants : then it appears that the deviation pro- 
duced by the transient induced magnetism of a ship will consist of 
two ports; of which one will be a “polar-magnet-deviation,” such 
as would be produced by a magnetized steel bar whose axis is par- 
allel to the keel of the ship, and whose absolute intensity is propm*- 
tlonai to the terrestrial vertical fpree at the place; and the other 
will be a “ quadrantal deviation,” which, in angular deviation, will 
be absolutely the same in all magnetic latitudes and with all hiag* 
nitudes of terres^ial magnetic force, and will usually be “ posi- 
tive.” Now combining these forces w}th the force of the “ sub- 
permanent magnetism” of a ship, which in its nature is essentially 
similar to the magnetism of a steiil bar, and would therefore, if 

VOt. VIE. 2 V 



40 » 

isolated, produce ** polor-magnet-devuition ; " and remarking that 
the combination of two polar-magnet-forcee will produce a third 
polar^magnet-force. the resulting deviations of which will be 

poUur^magnet-deviations;** it is evident that the analysis of the 
observed deviations of the compass in any given instance will con- 
sist in resolving them into two systems, one of which follows the 
laws of '* polar- magnet-deviation/' and the other is u quadrantal 
deviation.'* 

The practical solution of this problem, without the assistance 
of tables, is troublesome. In order to diminish the di^culty. the 
author has prepared a Table of polar -magnet-deviations, for the 
whole circumference as regards azimuths, and for all values of 
** modulus " or proportiou of the disturbing force to the earth's 
horizontal force, up to 0*8. 

To discover the elements of " polar-magnet-deviation," that is, 
the neutral point and the laodulus, in any given case, it is neces- 
sary so to combine the observations that the quadrantal deviation" 
shall be eliminated. Simple rules are given for this ; and the pro- 
cess of investigating the elements, with the assistance of the Tables, 
is illustrated by exhibiting the work from beginning to end, in an 
actual instance. 

When the elements are found, the Tabular Polar- Magnet-Devia- 
tions are to be formed from those elements ; and the excess of the 
Observed Deviations over these Tabular Deviations ought to consist 
simply of Quadrantal Deviation and Errors of Observations 

From the neutral point and the modulus, with the absolute mea- 
sure of the terrestrial horizontal force, it is easy to form the abso- 
lute measures of the apparent perxdanent forces of the ship, in the 
directions of “ headward ” and •* starbolrd ” respectively. The star- 
bo|rd force (on the assumption of genenH symmetry) can arise from 
nothing but subpermanent magnetism ; the headward fbroe will eon- 
^aist of Sttbpermanent magnetism JLdded algebraically to a multiple of 
the terrestrial vertical force, the multiplier being an Unknown con- 
itsiit difimnt for each difbrent ship. 

Hie iMTocess is then applied by the author to four wood-built sail- 
irig ships, two wood-built steamers, and hve iron-built steamers, 
whose oompass-devia^bns haye been observed at twenty-nine sta- 
tions The results are as follows • 



I * In all natea« the ]>rincipal part of the deviation follows the law 
of polar^magnet-deviation. 

2. When tlm polar-magnet-deviahion is computed accurately from 
the Tables and subtracted from the observed deviation, the residual 
(piantity in tdl oases follows very closely the law of quadrantal 
deviation, leaving very little to be accounted for by errors of ob- 
servation. 

3. For each ship, the coefficient of quadrantal deviation is sen- 
sibly the same in all localities. The small deviations from exact 
equality cannot be referred to geographical position, and evidently 
depend on accidental changes in the distribution of the iron, espe- 
cially of that which is near to the compass. 

4. As the test of theory must reside in the comparison of residual 
quantities, and as it appears that these residual quantities obey with 
great exactness the law which theory assigns, it follows that the 
theory, ** that the deviation may in all cases be represented by a 
combination of two deviations, of which one ia a polar-magnet- 
deviation, and the other is a quadrantal deviation whose angular 
coefficient, for the same ship, is constant pnder all oircumstanoes.** 
is practically accurate. 

5. Consequently in every case the deviation at any locality may 
be perfectly corrected ; by the aiJpUcation of a steel magnet to neu- 
tralize the polar-magnet- force ; and of a mass of soft iron on one 
side of the compass, and at the same level, to correct the quadrantal 
deviation (as the author had previously explained). 

6. The mass of soft iron will not require to be changed, under 
any circumstances. It will depend on the variability or conskncy 
of tbe subpermanent force to determine whether the steel magnet 
must be or must not be changed in different localities or after the 
lapse of time, 

7. On forming the expressions for the absolute vdues of the head- 
ward and starboard polar-magnet«>fortie8, it appears that in some 
ship* the sul^^mnnanent magnetism is really (to sense) a permanrnit 
magnetism, but that in others there il a sensible change. In one 
instance the idumge was such that, suppottie^ the deviations to be 
aeeumtely corrected by magnets and soft ipn in England, there 

have been at the Csipe of Hope an error whose maxt- 

2t4 



ilium v«s tieurljr ; in nil other eases the error would be smaller, 
nbd in some pmcticnlly insensible. 

i ; proper way of counteracting these chnngca evidently is, 

to readjust the magnets ; and for this purpose the magnets should 
be so mounted as to admit of adjustment at any time* The re* 
adjustment can be eifected in a very short time when a ship i» in 
port, and can probably also be very easily effected at sea. in favour- 
able weather, when a compass of reference can be carried high up 
one of the masts. 

9. The author strongly condemns any system of navigating a ship 
by forming a table of compass -deviations from observations at one 
place, and using that table until observations have been obtained at 
some other place. It does not in the smallest degree guard against 
che effect of change in the ship's subpermanent magnetism ; and it 
introduces eirors which are purely gratuitous and unnecessary, and 
which are entirely avoided jf the compass is corrected by magnets 
and soft iron, lu elucidation of the amount of errors that may be 
introduced, if from any cause this system is carried to extremes, 
he remarks that in the jnstance of the * Trident,* sailing from the 
Thames to Kio Janeiro, the table of compass- deviations formed in 
the Thames would have been so erroneous when the ship arrived at 
Rio Janeiro, that on one course the error would have been 6^ or 7® 
in one direction, and on another course it would have been 8*^ or 
9° in the opposite direction : yet during this voyage the ship's sub- 
permanent magnetism had not changed at all ; and if the compasses 
had been corrected in the Thames by magnets and soft iron, there 
lirduid not have been an error of a single degree in any part of the 
voyage. In other cases, where there was a real change of subper* 
manbnt magnetism, the error would have been fully doubled by 
oanying on the original table of observed compaM-devmtions. 

The communication is closed by the Table of Polar- Magnet- 
Dfvlatiions. It is a table of double entry, one of the arguments 
being iixp azimuth of the lihip's head from the neutral point, the 
tither argument being the modidus or proportiem of the pdar-mag- 
net-force to the termitiial horizontal force. The azimuth is ex- 
pressed in points and decimals ofapoint, and is given lor every 01^*1 
from to the second half of the drcle being a repetition 



of the bat with sign ohanged. Tiie modalus it given for ev^ 
O'Ol from 0*00 to 0*00. The corretpondiiig devittioot are given in 
degrees and minutes. For each modulus there it also glve;^ th<;[ 
mean of all the deviations in the temicircumference, for diat modu- 
lus ; by use of which> in comparison with the mean in any given 
instance, the modulus in that instance is determined. 


XyilL On Axes of Elasticity and Crystalline Fonns/^ By 
W. J. Macquokn Rankinib, C.E., F.R.SS. L. & E. &c. 
Received June 14, 1855. 

An Axis OF Elasticity Is any direction with respect to which 
any kind of elastic force is symmetrical. 

In this paper the deviation of a molecule of a solid from that con- 
dition as to volume and figure which it preserves when free from the 
action of external forces, is denoted by the word ** and the 

corresponding effort of the molecule to recover its free volume and 
figure by the word ** Btreu'* 

In devising a nomenclature for quantities relating to the theory 
of elasticity, strain is denoted in composition by OXl^is, and stress 
by roV«. 

Every possible strain of a molecule, when referred to rectangular 
axes, may be resolved into six elementary strains ; three elongations 
or linear compressions, and three distortions. Every possible stress, 
when referred to rectangular axes, may be resolved into six eteinin* 
tary stresses ; three normal pressures, and three tangential pressures, 
which tend to diminish the corresponding elemmitary strains. > 

The elementary strains being in fact approximately linear lanc- 
tioos of the elementary stresses, are treated in this Investigation as 
exactly so. 

The sum of the six tntegrals of the elementary stresses, each t^eti 
with respect to the corresponding stLementary strain from its actual 
amount to eero, is the Fotential Energy of Elasticity t and is a homo- 
geneous function of the elementary strains of the second order, and 
of twenty-oiie terms, whose constant coefficients are here called the 
Sfbstnomic Co^cienU^ or coefficients of Elasticity, 



The piinciples of the Calculus of Fonns» and in particular the 
ITmhrai Notation of Mr. Sylveater, are applied to the Orthogonal 
Transformations of the Taainomic Coefficients. 

Several functions of these coefficients are determined, called Tam* 
"nomio Invariants, which are equal for all systems of orthogonal axes 
in the same solid* 

Certain functions of the Tasinomic Coefficients constitute the 
coefficients of two Tasinomic Ellipsoids, designated respectively as 
the Orthotatic and Heterotatic Ellipsoids, whose axes have the fol* 
lowing properties. 


Ohthotatio Axes. 

yit each point of an elastic solid there is one position in which a 
cubical molecule may be cut out, such, that a uniform dilatation or 
condensation of that molecule by equal elongations or compressions of 
its three axes, will produce f|0 tmigential stress at the faces of the 
molecule* 

The existence of orthotatic axes in a solid constituted of mutu- 
ally attracting and repelling physical points was first proved by 
Mr. Haughton; it is proved in this paper independently of any 
hypothesis as to molecular structure or action. 

Hktkbotatic Axes. 

Jt each point of an elastic solid there is one position in which a 
cubical molecule may be cut out, such, that if there be a distortion of 
that molecule round x (x being any one of its axes) and an equal dis* 
t&rti&n ^^i^ being either qf its other two axes), the normal stress 
m the fisim normal to x arising fnm the distortion round x, wUl be 
equal to the tangential stress around z arising from tie distortion 
round y. 

The sit coeffioients of the Heterotatic Ellipsoid represent parts of 
the elastimty of a solid which it is impossible to reduce to attrac* 
tions and repulsions between points. 

Fifteen eonstants called the Momotatic Oaefilcients, which are oonv* 
posed of Tasinomio Comments and diieir linear fusiotions so eon^ 
stitttted as to be independent of the Heterotatic Confidents, are the 
ooeffiemts of the fifteen terms of a homogeneous b^oadiotic fonctscm 
of the coordipatesi ?s^hich being equated to unity, chamaterizes tht 



m 


Bi^iidrutk TuMtnomc Surface, Tbi# «urface» for Bolids composed 
of physical points, was discovered by Mr, Haughtoi^ i it is here in* 
vestigated independently of all hypothesis. 

By rectangular linear transformations, three functions of the 
Homotatic Coefficients may be made to vanish. Three orthogonal 
aices are thus found, which are called the Principal Metatatic Aafes, 
and have the following projjerty ; there be a linear elongation 
along ang one of these ares, and an equal linear compression along 
any other, no tangential stress will result on planes normal to these 
two axes* 

In each of the three planes of the principal Metatatic Axes, there 
is a pair of Diagonal Metatatic Axes bisecting the right angles 
formed by the pair of principal axes in the same plane. 

In each plane in an elastic solid, there is a system of two pairs of 
metatatic axes, making with each other eight equal angles of 45^, 

Various kinds and degrees of symmetry are pointed out, which the 
tasinomic coefficients may have with respect to orthogonal axes. 

The Potential Energy of Elasticity may be expressed as a homo- 
geneous function of the second order of the Elementary Stresses. 
The twenty-one coefficients of this function are called ThUpsinomic 
Coefficients. 

The Thlipsiuomic and Tasinomic Coefficients are related to each 
other as Contragredient Systems. 

The Orthogonal and Diagonal Tasinomic and Thlipsiuomic Axes 
coincide. 

For the complete determination of the properties of the Homo*- 
tatic Coefficients, it is necessary to refer them to oblique axes of co- 
ordinates. 

The application of oblique co-ordinates to this pmpose is much 
facilitated by the employment along with them of three auxiliary 
variables called Co»/ra-crdmc/ea. The contm-ordinatsf of a point 
H are the projections of the radius-vector OE on the tiiree axes. 
For rectangular axes^ co-ordinates and contra- ordinates are identical. 
The co-ordinates y, a and contra-ordinates a, w of a point E 
arc connected hj the equation 

As there are sm indejmdenl directions of a 

system of l^uee axes of indeMte obliquity, there is a system of 



right ar oblique in every aolid for which six of the ooefiicieiita 
of the characteristic function of the Biquadratic surface disappear, 
reducing that function to its canonical form of nine terms. These 
three axes are called the 

PaiKczPAn Entuytatxo Axks. 

Every Enthytatic axis has this property, that o direct linear elonga- 
tion or compression along such an axis, produces a normal stress, and 
no oblique or tangential stress on a plane normal to the same axis. 

Every Enthytatic axis is normal to the Biquadratic Surface, and 
is a line along whicli the direct elasticity of the body is either a 
maximum or a minimum, or in that condition which combines the 
properties of maximum and minimum. 

It is probable that the faces or edges of jirimitive crystalline forms 
are normal to Enthytatic axes, and that the planes of cleavage in 
crystals are normal to Enthyntatic axes of minimum elasticity. 

It is also probable that the symmetrical summits of crystals cor- 
respond to Enthytatic axes. 

There are, in every solid, at least the three principal, Enthytatic 
Axes, which are normal to the faces of a hexahedron, right or oblique 
as the case may be. In certain cases of symmetry of these axes 
and of the Homotatic Coefficients, there are Secondary or Additional 
Enthytatic Axes, which are determined by the following principles : 

1. When the three principal axes and the Homotatic Cueflicients 
ave symmetrical round a central axis, that axis is an additional 
Enthytatic axis. 

2. lichen theire ai^ a pair of orthogonal Enthytaric as^s in a given 
plans, there may be, under certain conditions specified in the paper, 
a pair 6f additional or Secondary axes in that plane; making with 
each other a pair of angles bisected by the orthogonal axes. 

In tlie first column of a table, possible systems of Enthytatic 
axee tsed sagged according to a ckssification and nomsficlature of 
their dejpees and kinds of symmetry; and in the secoi^and third 
columns ststed the primitive crystalline forms to the faces and 
edgj^ of Vhich such systems of axes are respectively tu^mal, and 
wliicih embrace all the primitive forms known in crystallography. 

'file ^ Heterotatic Coefficients are independent of the fifteen 
Homotatic Coefficients which determine the Enthytatic axes. 



499 


llie paper concludes with observations on some real and alleged 
diflbrenoes between the laws of solid elasticity and those of the 
luminiferous ibrce, — on some hypotheses in connexion with the 
wave-theory of llght^---and on the refraction of light in crystals as 
connected with the symmetry of their Enthytatic axes. 


“ Report of a Committee appointed by the Council to examine 
the Calculating Machine of M. Schkutz.” Inserted for 
the information of the Fellows by order of the President 
and Council*. 

Ihe various applications of mathematics to physical questions, or 
to the transactions of common life, continually require the compu- 
tation of numerical results. At one time isolated results have to 
be calculated from j)articular formulae ; at another it is required to 
calculate a scries of values of the same analytical formula ; in other 
words, to tabulate a function. It is only in the latter cose that 
different instances have so much in common as to permit of the 
application of general methods irrespective of the particular function 
to be calculated. But even in the tabulating of functions one or 
other of two objects may be kept in view. At one time a result 
may be arrived at expressed in a coinpUcated, perhaps transcen- 
dental, formula, and the mathematician may desire to know merely 
the general progress of the function. In such a case it will be 
sufficient to pokulate vtluoa at rather wide intervals^ and the inode 
of calculation must depend upon the peculiar function. But at 
other times functions present themselves which are of common 
occurrenoeg or of such practical importance, that it is desiiuble to 
tabulate theth for values of the variable increasing by ssi^ll s^ps. 
in these ofMS general metiiods oi interpolation come mtC use : it is 
suHioient to |erf^m the calculations directly for oompamtively Vide 
intorvaJs of the variable, and tlie iuteiTcning values of the function 
can be supplied by the mere addition of differences. 

The Committee cotiftisted of Prof. Stokes, Sec. K.S., Prof, W. 11. MiJIer, Prof, 
Whestitone, aad the Ucv. Prof. WilUs. 



seo 


It ift well known thitt Mr* Babbage was the first person who cmx^ 
celVed the idea of performing all these systems of additions mechanic 
oally* and thereby saving both the mental labour and the risk of 
error attending their calculation in the ordinary way. This idea was 
actually carried out, and resulted in the invention of his Difference 
Engine. The engine, so far as it has yet been executed, was constructed 
at the public expense, and is now deposited in the Museum of King's 
College, London. The part constructed contains 1 9 digits and 3 orders 
of differences ; and as all the essential movements are comprised in 
this part, a more extended engine would consist merely of the same 
members oftener repeated, and would not involve any additional 
di£&culty of construction. It was part of Mr. Babbage's original 
design that machinery for printing off the results calculated should 
be included in his engine, and some of the mechanism for this purpose 
was actually executed. The portion placed in King's College con- 
tains machinery for calculiiting only. It does not fall within the 
province of this report to do more than mention the Analytical 
Engine subsequently invented by Mr. Babbage, as the machine of 
M. Scheutz is a Difference Engine, and nothing more. 

A full account of the principles and action of Mr. Babbage's 
Difference Engine, but without any details of its mechanism, was 
published in the ‘ Edinburgh Review ' for April to July, 1834. It 
was, as we are informed, the perusal of this paper which induced 
M. Scheute to set about the Invention of modes of mechanically 
executing the necessaty changes. The result was the completion of 
the present engine, which has now for some time been in the apart- 
ments of the Royal Society, In this machine M. Scheutz has 
follbwed the general ideas of Mr. Babbage in the distribution of 
di^ts and differences, and in partioular in throwing back the dif- 
ferences at every alternate order one stage, firm whence results the 
ppssibiiitiy of acting simtdtaneouSly on all the odd and on tdl the 
even diffteitoces, and thereby making the machine ndvanoe one stage 
by tWo addition-motions only ; whereas otherwise as many separate 
addition^motions would have been necessary as there were orders of 
differences retained. But the mechanism which the ad<Htions 
and CBfrmges are effected in the machine of if . Hcheutz is different 
from that dr Mr, Babbage. The engine iS also provided with 



mediaitim hr priBtiftg, or tmther for fatnifthiiig stereotype plates of 
the calculated results. 

As M. Scheutz has takeu out a iwteut jfbr his eug;inei it will be 
uuneoessary to give a detailed description of the machinery, which 
may be obtained in the specification, a copy of which has been 
presented to the Royal Society. It will be sufficient to give an 
idea of its general construction and es:tent with a view of estimating 
its powers. 

The machine takes in the function to be tabulated and the first 
four orders of differences, each to fifteen digits. Of these only the 
first eight (in the case of the function itself) are printed, the others 
being reserved to guard against errors arising from decimal places 
left out, 

The places of the digits are represented by fifteen vertical spindles, 
around which, but not usually connected with which, are placed 
horizontal wheels in five separate tiers. Each wheel has its circum- 
ference divided into ten equal parts, and is marked with the digits 
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. In the normal state of the machine the 
numbers on the wheels of the highest tier represent the function 
(uj to be tabulated, and those on the tiers below represent respect- 
ively and In each case the digits 

by which these numbers are represented run from left to right, as in 
print. The mechanism is such, that by twiing a handle contmuously 
in one direction an indefinite successioiii'of movements is produced 
which are alternately backwards and forwards. The efiPeot of the 
forward motion is, that the numbers on the third and the fifrh tiers 
(or as they may oonveniently be called the A‘ and A^ tiers) add them* 
selves respeetively to those on the tiers above« altering thereby the 
positions ot the whe^ of the A* and A* tiers* whfib Ihe wheela.of 
the A* and A^ tiers remain at rest ; and 1^ badcwmrd motion does 
for the A^ and A* tiers what the forward motioxi does for tile A* and 
A^ tiers. Thus the numbers on the several tiers will be os follows : — 

Atfirst. AX-a 

Afterlihfi forward motion.. .. e, As^r aX-i A*Sj*^i 
A lter the complete motion . . 1 As, A*t<^ A\(»-. i AX« 

AX-i the last term being written instead of A\_,. which U 



dUowabte, since the fottrth differences are supposed to be constant. 
Hence the effect of the complete motion, consisting of one foru^ard 
nnd one backward motion, is to make all tdie numbers advance one 
stage ; and therefore by continuing to turn the handle the numbers 
be calculated in succession/ According 
as these numbers arc calculated they are impressed, by the action of 
the machine itself, on a plate of lead, by means of steel punches, while 
a numerator at the same time impresses beside them the values of 
the argument x. These plates are afterwards taken out, and stamped 
on an easily fusible alloy just on the point of solidifying, and thus 
are obtained stereotype plates of the calculated results, fit for 
printing from. 

In retaining a given number of decimals, it is usual to add one to 
the last figure if tlie first digit left out be 5 or a higher number. 
This is effected in the machine in the simplest possible manner, 
namely by placitig the cog which occasions the carriages from the 
ninth to the eighth ])lace in tUe highest tier in such a position that 
tlic carriage takes place ivhon the ninth wheel changes from 4 to 5, 
instead of from 9 to 0, 

The principle of the machine is not of course dependent upon the 
circumstance that the radix of the scale of notation commonly em- 
ployed has the ])articular value 10 ; and it would be as easy to con- 
struct a machine adapted to the senary or duodenary as to the denary 
scale. Not only so, but the machine actually constructed admits 
of being changed very readily from the denary to the senary scale, 
or rather to a mixture of the denary and senary scales, which is 
required in tabulating degrees, minutes, and seconds. For this 
purpose it is sufficient to take off the ordinary figure- wheels from 
those spindles which are to count by sixeSi and put on spare wheels 
which are provided, adapted to the senary scale. 

Ulie machine wOrks with the greatest ireedom and smoothness. 
The parts move with the utmost facility, in fSact, quite loosely. On 
this account no amount of dust which it would reasonably be 
ex})ected to receive in any moderate time seems likely to interfere 
with its aotion* Besides, it con easily be taken to pieces and 
examined, if need be. Those motions which are not the direct con^ 
sequences of the revolution of the handle acting through a train of 
rigid bodies are performed in consequence of gravity, no springe 



608 


lieing employed in the whole csonstrootion except two» the office of 
which ie qnite subordinate. When the parts are mo^ed. they remain 
in their new places either from their weight or from friction, there 
being nothing to disturb them. This circumstance, w^hich renders 
a wilful derangement of the machine exceedingly easy, permits of 
great simplicity and consequent cheapness of construction ; nor does 
the machine seem likely to get out of order if reasonable care be 
taken of it. 

The machine is competent to tabulate to any extent a function 
whose fourth differences are constant, so long as the expression of 
the numerical value of the function does not involve more than eight 
digits. The most general form of such a function is of course 

fl-f + (1) 

Were the machine restricted to such functions, its use would be 
limited indeed ; its utility must of course depend on its being aj> 
plicable to functions in general, which, except in singular cases, may 
be expressed within a limited range of values of the variable jr by a 
function of the above form. To estimate the capacities of the ma- 
chine, or rather of a difference engine in general, whatever may be 
its particular construction, it will be necessary to investigate how 
soon the quantities neglected begin to tell in the result. 

Now these quantities are of two kinds ; first, the fifth and higher 
differences; secondly, the decimals of the fifteenth place. The effect 
of these may be examined separately. We may always suppose the 
first spindle to represent the first place of decimals^ since it will 
only be necessary to multiply or divide by some power of 10 should 
that not be the case. 

Suppose tlie machine set for and its first four dififerences (or 
to speak more exactly, the differences 
AX-8)> worked n periods, so as to give what ought to be 
We have 

«,+,=«.+ I . . . (2); 

and since the machine would give exactly if the fourth differ- 
ences were constant, the error (E) will be 

B.irri.7zr2.irz~8.^4 «.;rri.~2.i;zr8.t34.i;;3-5 ^ 

1.2. a. 4. 3 1.2. a. 4. 3. 6 

* This expreskioa will not be ihiolutely exact, since it is 



mi 


The term in this expreesion will usually he the moet Impoilant ; 
and for practical ptirpoaes the expreaaion may be still further aimpli* 
tied, If a be tolerably large, the prijduot « . n — 1 . »— 2 , * a-*"4 

may be replaced without material error by the tifth power of the 
arithmetic mean of the factors, or by (« — 9)\ Again, if y be the 
variable of which « is a function, ^ being merely the numeral 
marking the number of increments of y, each equal to we shall 
have near enough 


BO that 




d^u 

df* 


120 ^ ^ 


d^u 

W‘ 


In expressing a number to eight decimal placi>«, W'C are always 
liable to an error which may amount to 5 in the ninth place. 
Hence 10^® X 6 maybe regarded as the greatest allowable error, 
though in truth the error ajiould not be allowed to amount to this, 
if we wish to have the last figure true to the nearest* decimal. 
Equating then E to lO*"** X 5, we find 


«= 24 ' 


•OOOOOOG\* 1 


£u 


(») 


which gives the greatest number n of times the machine may be 
worked without stopping and fresh setting, bo far as the limitation 
depends on the cause of error now under cousideration. The in- 
crement of y during the action of the machine, which ie equal to nk, 
or to (ft— 2)A nearly, n being large compared with 2, is therefore 
nearly independent of the closeness or wideness of the intervals for 
which the value of the function is required, a given range, so to 
speak, of the function being taken in. Hence, so far as this cause 
of limitation is concerned, the utility of the machine will be propor- 
tional to the Cldseneas of the intervals for which it is desired to tabu- 
late the funcrion. 

Let us now consider the effect of the decimals omitted, retaining 

^ ooirectly \ but 

the inaccuracy thus arising in the estimation of the error comtahted by leaving 
oat the fifth, &c, diffidences will phaaly he inslgnifioaiit. 



606 


only four orders of dUferenoes, sinoe the effect of omittinj^ the fifth 
and higher orders has been already investigated. Let £31 
be the errors left in the first> second, third, and fourth differences in 
setting the machine. Then in the same manner as before these may 
without sensible error be regarded as the errors in An,, 

although they are really the errors in &c., and we 

shall have for the error (J^) in 

E= ” Ei + " .:^E,+ ” e,; 

1 * 1.2 ^ 1.2.3 * 1.2. 3. 4 * 

or, replacing tlxe products as before, 

E=.E,+ i(.-yE. + i(.-l).li,+ i (-I)'e, . . (4) 

If each of the quantities Ei, £ 2 , £», 1% be liable to be as great as 
10""*® X 5, the last term in this expression will be the most im- 
portant if n be considerably greater than 4. Equating this term to 
10^® X 5, the greatest allowable error in E, we find 

II— £sk( 24 X 10")*i »r= 126 nearly, 

so that the machine may be worked about 100 times without fresh 
setting. 

In practice the limitation may be even less than this ; for it may 
happen that is smaller, perhaps much smaller, than 10 “*® x 5 , 
in which case the limitation will depend upon the absolute value of 
A^w^ or the possible value 10 “*® x 5 of £,. os the case maybe. 
Should the restriction arise from the latter cause, we get by equating 
the third term in the second member of (4) to I0“®x5, n=392 
nearly. * 

To illustrate tiiese limitations by an example, suppose that it was 
required to make a table of sines to every minute. In this case we 
have 

Putting for this last differential coefficient its greatest value unity, 
and substituting ia (3), we get «=:196 nearly. The fourth differ* 
enceis very nearly equal to — ^ siny, which may contain figures in 
the fifteenth place, so that it =126 is about the greatest allowable 
value of n in consequence of the restriction arising from decimals 



606 

left out» which in this example is what limits the worldng. Should 
the intervals be a good deal wider than as 5', it woxild then be 
the omission of fifth differences that would impose the limit, for 
tlie greatest allowable range on this account would be nearly the 
same as before, or about 3^, which would contain only thirty-six 
values to be calculated. Should it happen that both causes of error 
were about equally restrictive, it must be remembered that the cor- 
responding errors in would be comparable with one another, 
and might be added together; and in this case it may easily be 
shown that 126 x 2"”^, or 106 nearly, is somewhat inferior to the 
greatest allowable value of n. Should eight figures not be required 
to be retained, but seven, six, or five be sufficient, the last one, two, 
or three of the first eight spindles might he used for calculating 
instead of printing ; and since the greatest allowable value of », so 
far as depends on omission of decimals, varies nearly as the fourth 
root of the greatest allowable error in that value would be in- 
creased in the ratio of 1 tofihe fourth root of 10, or 100, or 1000, 
and from 126 would become 224, or 398, or 708. The greatest 
allowable value of n as regards the omission of fifth differences 
would increase in a somewhat slower ratio, since it varies nearly as 
the fifth root of the greatest allowable error in Uy If, for example, 
it were 196, it would become 311, or 492, or 780. 

The above is a fair specimen of the application of the machine. 
The particular function chosen is, it is true, a familiar one, which 
has been long since tabulated, but it is not the worse fitted for 
an example on that account. It may be seen at once how much 
mental labour and risk of error is saved by the use of such a machine, 
when tables have to .be calculated to close intervals. The whole 
exertion of mind is confined to calculating the function and its dif- 
ferences at wide intervals, say for every 100th or 60th number to be 
tabulated, and setting the machine. Even this exertion (except so 
far as relates to the setting, which is easy,) might be reduced to one 
half, if desired, by setting the machine to calculate backwards as 
well as forwards. In order to give in succession the numbers 
V ***+!* ... the machine has to be set to 

or to 

w, AT>'\ A*D-\ A>D-\ A‘D-V 



507 


D denoting os usunl the operation 1 4* In order to give in «uc* 
ceesion the numbers «^-8» • • • machine would simply 

have to be set to 

if D'w^ be used to denote and A^ to denote D'—l. But 

D'— D"**, and A'^D'— 1 — 1= — D'*A, so that the required 

numbers are 

% — Att, 

or 

-A«^ AX-i -“AX-i 

Hence the numbers on the top, A"*, and A^ tiers arc the same as for 
the forward calculation, while those on the A and A* tiers are the 
arithmetical complements of the numbers found on those tiers after 
the machine has made one complete movement in calculating for- 
wards from The printing part, however, is not adapted to 
such a change : the numbers would be printed off correctly, but in a 
wrong order ; so that unless some reversing movement were intro- 
duced into the printing part, the printed results would only serve to 
set types from. 

In the example chosen above, and in similar cases, the differences 
required for setting the machine would be calculated from their 
mathematical expressions. It might, however, be required to tabu- 
late for small intervals a function which had been given by observa- 
tion for larger ones, or to tabulate a mathematical function of so 
complicated a form that the differences could not be got directly 
without great trouble. In such a case there would be no difficulty ; 
the differences for the smaller intervals would first have to be calcu- 
lated from those for the larger ones by formulae in finite differences, 
and then the setting and working of the machine would proceed as 
before. 

It must be confessed, however, that except in the case of mathe- 
matical tables like those of sines, cosines, logarithms, &a, it is not 
ordinarily required to tabulate functions to intervals at all approach- 
ing, in closeness, to those in the example selected. Hence it is 
mainly, as it seems to us, in the computation of mathematical tables 
that the machine of M. Scheutz would come into use. The most 


vot, VII. 



508 


important of «uoh tables have long since been calculated; but 
various others could be suggested which it might be worth while to 
construct, could it be done with such ease and cheapness as would 
be afforded by the use of the machine. It has been suggested to 
too, and wc think with good reason, that the machine would be very 
useful even for the mere reprinting of old tables, because it could 
calculate and print more quickly than a good compositor could set 
the types, and that without risk of error. 

G. G. Stokes. 

W. H. MiLLRa. 

C. Wheatstone. 

R. Willis. 

P.S. Some time since, I received from Mr. Babbage, to whom I 
had written for information on one point connected with his machine, 
a letter, written subsequently to his first answer, in which he said 
that he had forgotten to men{:ion an addition to his machine which 
enabled it to calculate a functiofh when the last differences, instead 
of being constant, were dependent on the functions then under cal- 
culation in the other parts of the machine, provided the coefficients 
of the variable part were small enough to be expressed by a mode- 
rate number of digits. This was especially designed for the calcu- 
lation of astronomical tables, where a difficulty occurs in the appli- 
cation of a machine with constant differences, arising from the 
circumstance that in the case of functions of short period the omitted 
differences soon become sensible even though the coefficients be but 
small. Mr. Babbage did not then recollect that this contrivance 
was accessible to the public, but in a subsequent letter he pointed 
out that such was the case. The following is an extract from this 
letter : — 

1st. The portion at Somerset House contains axes specially 
prepared for what (at this instant) I recollect to have familiarly 
called * eating its own tail.’ 

** 2nd. The drawings contain the modes of governing those exes 
in the hnlshed engine. 

** These are public property, end open daily to public inspec- 
tion, which I suppose must be considered as publication. On refer- 
ring to the 9th Bridgewater Treatise, second edition, I find (p.S4) 



509 


that I have u«cd as an Illustration a series computed by that very 
machine. 

In the same letter Mr. Babbage refers to the following docu- 
ments : — 

Extract from a letter of Mr. Babbage to Sir H. Davy, 8 July, 
1822, printed by order of the House of Commons. No. 870, 
182S 

'* Another machine, whose plans are more advanced than several 
of those just named, is one for constructing tables which have no 
order of differences constant (p. 2). 

" I should be unwilling to terminate this letter without noticing 
another class of tables of the greatest importance, almost the whole 
of which are capable of being calculated by the method of dif- 
ferences. I refer to all astronomical tables for calculating the places 
of the sun and planets. It is scarcely necessary to observe that tlm 
constituent parts of these are of the form a sin d.” (p. 5.) 

He refers also to an extract from the Address of H. T. Colhroke, 
Esep. President of the Astronomical Society, on presenting to him 
the first medal given by the Society, 1824; and to a description of 
his machine by the late Mr. Baily, published in Schumachcr^s 
* AstronomischeNachrichten,* No. 46, and republished in the ' Phi- 
losophical Magazine ' for May 1824, p. 355. This last paper de- 
scribes fully what could be done by the new contrivance. 

I have ventured to insert this postscript without consulting my 
colleagues, as it is desirable not to delay the publication. 

G. G. Stokes. 

London, Oct. 5, 1855. 


Report mode to the President and Council of the Royal Society, 
of Experiments on the Friction of Discs revolving in 
Water/^ By James Thomson, Esq., C.E., Belfast. 

[A Committee of the British Association for the Advancement of 
Science, consisting of James Thomson, Esq., C.E., and William 
Fairbaim, Esq., C.E., F.R.S., having been appointed '' to make 
Experiments on the Friction of Discs revolving in water, with espe- 
cial reference to supplying data wanted in calculations relative to 

2x2 



510 


the action and efficiency of Turbine Water-Wheels in general, and 
of Centrifugal Pumps ; and also to make an experimental inves- 
tigation relative to the action and efficiency of Centrifugal Pumps 
in general, and the amount of improvement derivable in them by the 
employment of an exterior whirlpool ; ” a sum of £50 from the 
Government Grant of 1853 was allotted by the Council of the Royal 
Society in aid of the inquiry. The experiments, ns originally con- 
temj>lated, have been arranged and conducted by Mr. Thomson, 
and the present Report of his progress is here inserted by order of 
the President and Council for the information of the Fellows.] 

In lust year's Report of the Committee it was stated, that an appa- 
ratus for making experiments on the friction of discs revolving in 
water had been constructed, and that experiments had been com- 
menced with it. I have now further to state respecting the experi- 
ments for which that apparatus was adapted, that 1 have since got 
them completed and carefully arranged for the purpose of obtaining 
from them laws applicable fot practical use. 

I now beg to lay before the Royal Society, as a brief statement of 
the most essential results, the following general equation to show 
the relation between the velocity of revolution of the disc, the dia- 
meter of the disc, and the mechanical work consumed in friction ; — 


in which d 

y 

and z 

This equation is based on experiments which range for the most 
part between the limits ydssl92 and yd=5l8, and may be used 
with confidence, as sufficiently correct for most practical purposes, 
if the product of the number of revolutions per minute and the 
diameter of the disc in feet be between those limits. It is to be 
observed that the friction is slightly affected by the width of the 
water space within the case, and the coefficient 90,000 stated ia the 
formula above is, for simplicity in the present brief report, taken 
between the coefficients obtained by two sets of experiments with 
different widths. A full report on the experiments already made, 


z — 


yV 


‘90,660' 

“diameter of the disc in feet. 

r= number of revolutions of the disc per minute, 

= number of foot-pounds of mechanical work consumed 
per minute. 



511 


explaining the manner of conducting them and stating the detailed 
results, would be rather lengthened, and would require drawings 
and diagrams, for ell of which I have carefully preserved the requi- 
site data ; but before proceeding to put these in form suitable to be 
submitted to the Royal Society, I am desirous of prosecuting the 
remainder of the very interesting and important experiments which 
have been entrusted to me, — that portion of the whole, namely, 
which relates especially to centrifugal pumps. I have also to state, 
that if my engagements permit, I should be desirous of proceeding 
W'ith a renewed and more extended set of experiments on the fric- 
tion of discs, with an apparatus depending on the same leading 
principle as that which I have already used. — a principle which on 
trial has been found remarkably well suited for the desired purpose, 
For the attainment of greater accuracy and of a wider range of the 
experiments, it seems to me that no better method of procedure 
could be adopted, than to follow the same leading principles, with 
an apparatus of rather more refined construction, involving such 
improvements in details as have been suggested by the experience 
gained in the course of the experiments already made, and for the 
sake of greater steadiness of motion, worked by steam power instead 
of the hand of on operator. Should I have it in my power to con- 
duct this renewed set of experiments, a detailed account of them 
will be preferable to a detailed account of those already made. 

In respect to the experiments on Centrifugal Pumps, I have to 
say that I have prepared plans for an experimental apparatus on 
principles which | consider are peculiarl)' well suited for the attain- 
ment of useful and accurate results, and that 1 intend to proceed 
with the experiments as soon as my engagements shall permit. 

I have further to state, that from the Experimental Fund of £50 
granted by tlm Royal Society, the entire outlay as yet incurred has 
been £6 5s, 9d t leaving a balance of £43 I4s, for the more 
extended experiments yet remaining to be made. 

Jambs Thomsuat. 


Belfast. April 13, 1S55. 



512 


The following account of the appropriation of the sum of <€5000, 
placed by Her Majesty^s Government, in five annual sums 
of €1000 each, in the years 1850 to 1854 inclusive, at the 
disposal of the Iloyal Society, to be employed in aiding the 
promotion of Science in the United Kingdom, has been 
presented to the Treasury, and is here printed for the in- 
formation of the Fellows, by direction of the President and 
Council, 

A. Appropriation of the Government Grant of £1000 in the year 1850. 

1 . For the publication of the Observations made at the 
Armagh (private) Observatory for the re-observation of 
Bradley*8 Stars ; the work so published to be the property of 

Her Majesty's Government £350 

The printing of this work is still in progress, and will 
shortly be completed. * 

2. For the publication of VoL I. of the Catalogue of 

Ecliptic Stars observed at the Markree (jmvate) Observatory ; 
the work so published to be the property of Her Msyesty's 
Government , 150 

This work has been printed ; and the greater part of 
an impression of 500 copies presented, in the name of 
the British Government, to public institutions at home 
and abroad, and to individuals cultivating Astronomy 
in this and other countries, under the direction of a 
committee consisting of Sir John Herschel, the Astro- 
nomer Royal, and the Superintendent of the Nautical 
Almanack, The remainder of the impression is on sale 
at a low price; the proceeds to be credited to Her 
Majesty's Government. 

3. To Charles Brooke, Esq., to be employed in the con- 

struction of an instrument for the autographic registry of 
the variations of the terrestrial magnetic force corrected for 
temperature 100 

'This instrument was completed and exhibited in the 
Great Industrial Exhibition for 1851. 



018 


4 . To T. Wharton Jones, Esq., to be employed in assisting 

him in investigations on inflammation £100 

These investigations were in continuation of an inquiry 
in which Mr. Jones had been for some time engaged, 
and for which he had obtained, in 1850, the Triennial 
Prize of £300, founded by Sir Astley Cooj?cr. Tlieir 
continuation has led to further publications in the Phi- 
Iosoj)hical Transactions and in the Medico -Chirurgical 
Transactions, and is still in progress. 

5. To Professor Owen, to have drawings made of unde- 
scribed or unfigured parts of the skeleton of the Megatherium. 100 

The drawings have been made and are dej) 08 ited at 
the Iloyal Society, accompanied by a memoir drawn up 
by Professor Owen, part of which has been published 
in the Philosophical Transactions, and the remainder is 
now in course of publication. 

6. To Lieut.- Col. Sabine, for the purchase of mognetical 

and meteorological instruments of a new construction for 
trial of their merits at the Kew Observatory. The instru- 
ments to be the property of Her Majesty's Government . . , . 100 

These instruments were purchased and their merits 
examined at the Kew Observatory : the results of the 
examination have been published in the 'IVansuctions of 
the British Association. 

7. To Dr. Stenhouse, to assist his researches into the 

chemical rclationa subsisting amongst the vaxious genera of 
plants * 100 

This grant produced a valuable paper On the Ac- 
tion of Nitric Acid on various Vegetables,” which was 
published in the Philosophical Transactiems ; and the fall 
amount of the grant was subsequently placed again by 
Dr. Stenhouse at the disposal of the Committee, and be- 
came the subject of a fresh appropriation in 1853. — ' " 

Total sum a{ipropriatcd in 1850. , . . £1000 



514 


B. Appropriation of the Government Grant of £1000 m 1851. 

1 . To Dr. Tburnam, to assist In procuring exact drawings 

of crania of early British races . £50 

The drawings have been made, and are deposited 
with an accompanying memoir at the Royal Society. 

2. To Professor Stokes, for experiments to determine the 

index of friction in different gases 175 

These experiments are in progress at the Kew Obser- 
vatory under Professor Stokes's direction. 

3. To Dr. Hofmann, for a continuation of his investiga- 
tions respecting organic bases 100 

These investigations were in continuation of re- 
searches of which the results were published in the 
Philosophical Transactions, and for which a Royal Medal 
was awarded. They ar^ regarded by chemists as ex- 
tremely important, and are still in progress. 

4. To the Astronomer Royal, for the reduction and publi- 
cation of the late Rev. T. Catton’s Astronomical Observations. 50 

These observations, extending from 1791 to 1832, 
have been reduced, and the results published in the 
Transactions of the Royal Astronomical Society. 

5. To John F. Miller, Esq. of Whitehaven, to obtain ob- 
servations on the fail of rain, and on the minimum temperature 

in winter, at several stations in the Lake District of England. 50 

lliese observations have been communicated to the 
Royal Society, and tiie results have been published in 
Reports on the Meteorology of the Lake District,’* by 
Mi. Miller. 

6 . To Dr. W . B. Carpenter, for the execution of drawings 

of Foraminifera collected on the Australian coast during the 
Surveying Expedition of Her Majesty's Ship * Fly ’ 25 

These drawings have been deposited at the Royal 
Society, wid have served, together with similar drawings 
procured by grants in 1852 and 1854, as data hrom 
which Dr. Carpenter has drawn up an important mono- 



515 


graph oa tliia class of animals, which will be published in 
the forthcoming volume of the Philosophical IVans- 
actions. 

7. To Leonard Homer, Esq., for the analysis of specimens 
of the water of the Nile, and of the soil at different depths 
in the valley of the Nile, which had been procured by the aid 

of a grant from the Donation Fund of the Royal Society . . £50 

The results of this analysis have been published in 
the Philosophical Transactions. 

8. To William Hopkins, Esq. of Cambridge, for investi- 
gations on the effect of pressure on the temperature of fusion 

of certain substances 250 

These important experiments, in which Mr, Hopkins 
has been assisted by Messrs. Fairbairn and Joule of 
Manchester, arc still in progress. A report of the re- 
sults hitherto obtained is expected to be •presented to 
the Royal Society at its next session. 

9. To Dr. Miller, Mr. Gassiot, and Colonel Sabine, re- 

presenting the Kew Committee of the pritish Association, 
for the construction and verification of standard meteorolo- 
gical instrumentB 150 

By the aid of this and of a subsequent grant of equal 
amount in 1852, the Kew Committee have been enabled 
to meet satisfactorily the extensive applications which 
have been made to them by the Governments of our 
own country and of the United States, to provide and 
verify meteorological instruments required for the ma- 
rine meteorological researches undertaken by those 
governments with a view to the interests of trade and 
navigation, as well as to those of general science. 

10. To Professor Owen, to defray the coat of drawings of 

undescribed and unfigured fossils from South America and 
Australia 100 

These drawings have been executed, and are seventy- 
two in number. 


Total sum appropriated in 1851 ... . £1000 



516 


C. Appropriation of the Government Grant o/tllOOO in 1952# 

1 . To Profesaor WiJliam lliomaon of Glasgow^ for experi- 

mentid rci^earcheft ia several branches of electrical science, , £50 

This grant, as well as o subsequent one of £50 in 
1855, was designed to assist iu furnishing apparatus 
for various electrical researches in which Professor 
Thomson was engaged ; the results, as far us they have 
yet been obtained, have been communicated to the 
Royal Societies of London and of Edinburgh, and pub- 
lished in their Transactions and in other scientific 
joumab. The researches are still in progress. 

2. To Dr. Tyndall, for experimental researches on the 

diathermic and conductive capacities of crystalline and other 
bodies 50 

niis money has been expended in providing appa- 
ratus for the experiraenta*! researches referred to. The 
results, so far as they have been yet obtained, have 
been published in papers in the Philosophical Transac- 
tions, and the researches are still in progress. 

3. To Professor 'Williamson, for experimental investiga- 
tions into the law of the chemical action of masses 100 

The experiments ore in progress, and tlie results 
hitherto obtained wil) shortly be communicated to the 
Royal Society. 

4. To Mr. Joule of Manchester, for experiments on the 
effects of magnetism on the dimensions of iron and steel bars. 30 

These experiments are still in progress. 

5. To Mr. John A. Dale, of Balliol College, Oxford, for 
experiments on the relation of metals with each other, and 


with liquids in the vohnic circuit 50 

These experiments are still in progress. 

6. To Professor Owen, for obtaining anatomical drawings 

of undescribed existing and extinct animals 100 

Drawings, forty- three in number, have been executed, 
and port of the grant yet remains to be similarly applied. 



B17 


7. To Dr, Miller^ Mr* Qu»«lot, md Col. Babine* for the 

coti»tructioa and verification of standard meteorological in- 
struments £350 

See note to a similar appropriation in 1851, No. 9. 

8. To Henry Gray, Ksq., for investigations concerning 

the spleen 100 

The results of these investigations are published in an 


Essay on the Spleen, for which the triennial Astlcy 
Cooper Prize of £300 was awarded in 1853. 


9. To Professor Beale, for investigations into the che- 
mistry of morbid products 50 

This investigation is still in progress. 

10. To Dr. Carpenter, for the execution of drawings of 

Foraminifera 25 

See note to a similar appropriation in 1851, No. G* 

11. For the publication of Vol. II, of the Markrce Cata- 
logue of Ecli])tic Stars 130 

Vol. II. has been published, and the edition of 500 
copies disposed of as in the case of Vol. I. (1850, No. 2.) 


12. To Professor William Thomson and Mr. Joule, for 

experiments on the thermal eflfects experienced by fluids in 
passing through small apertures 100 

The experiments referred to in this and in subsequent 
grants of £100 in 1853, and of £200 in 1854, are still 
in progress. A memoir describing part of the results 
obtained, has been presented to the Royal Society, and 
printed in the Philosophical Transactious. 

13. To Dr. Prankland, for investigations into organo- me- 
tallic compounds 65 

The results of this investigation have been commu- 
nicated to the Royal Society in a memoir which will 
appear in the forthcoming volume of the Philosophical 
Transactions. 


Total sum appropriated in 1852. . . . £1000 



m 


D. Appropriation of the Governmmt Grant of £1000 in 1853. 

1 . To Dr, Waller, for investigating the results of the sec- 
tion of nerves. £100 

An interim report of the progress of this investigation 
has been received by the Royal Society. 

2. To Dr. James Thomson, C.E. of Glasgow, and Mr, 

Fairbairn of Manchester, for experiments on the friction 
of discs revolving in water, for the purpose of obtaining data 
required in calculations relating to turbine water-wheels and 
centrifugal pumps 50 

'rhe results already obtained have been communicated 
to the Royal Society, and preparations have been made 
for renewing the experiments on a more extended scale. 

3. To Captain Xicfroy, for the expenses of preparing for 

publication observations oi^ the Aurora Borealis made in 
North America 20 

The observations have been in great measure prepared 
for publication. 

4. To Warren De la Rue, Esq., for mounting the Huyge- 

niau object-glass of 123 feet focal length. «... 250 

This, with an appropriation of equal amount in 1854, 
was designed to meet an application made to the Royal 
Society by M. Struve of St. Petersburg, to compare 
the appearance of Saturn as shown by the Huygenian 
lens referred to with that of the planet as seen in tele- 
scopes of modem date; in consequence of Huygens's 
representation of the ring not according with its appear- 
ance as now observed. DifiSculties have been met with 
in carrying out this object in the method hrst proposed, 
which have occasioned delay; and the subject now 
stands for reconsideration . 

5. To Professor William Tliomson of Glasgow, for ex- 

periments on the thermal effects of electric currents in un- 
equally heated conductors 50 

See note to a similar appropriation in 1852, No. ]. 



519 


6. To Profe«aor Wilikm Thomfion and Mr. Joule, for 

continuing the experiments on the thermal effects ex- 
perienced byduide in passing through small apertures £100 0 0 

See note to a similar appropriation in 1852, 

No. 12. 

7. To Dr. Marcet, for expenses connected with his 

researches on the excretions of man and animals 50 0 0 

The results were communicated in a paper pre- 
sented to the Royal Society, and printed in the 

Philosophical Transactions. 

Total sum appropriated in 1853. . . . £G20 0 0 

Balance to credit in 1854 480 10 11 

Grant from Government £1000 0 0 

Replaced by Dr. Stenhouse 100 0 0 

Repaid from the Catton grant .... 070 

Repaid from the Ecliptic Stars' grant 0 3 11 

£1100 10 11 £1100 10 11 


E. Appropriaiion of the Government Grant o/£1000 in 1854, and of a 
balance carried from the preceding year of £480 lid. 

1, To Robert Mallet, Esq., C.E., Dublin, for experiments 

on earthquake waves £ 1 50 

The apparatus for these experiments was prepared 
by means of a grant from the British Association. The 
experiments are proposed to be made at Holyhead, when 
a fitting time is arrived in the progress of the harbour 
works at that station. 

2. To Dr. Marcet, for a continuation of his researches on 


the excretions of man and animab 50 

See note to a similar appropriation in 1853, No. 7. 

3. To Professor Eaton Hodgkinson, for experiments on the 
strength of materials 100 


This appropriation has been augmented by a gift of 
£200 from Robert Stephenson, Esq., C.E. The experi- 
ments are in progress. 



530 


4. To Dr. Tyndall, for exi)efimeotaI researchoB in boat 

and magnetism £100 

The results of a part of these researches have been , 
presented to the Royal Society, and will be published 
in the forthcoming volume of the Philosophical Trans- 
actions. 

5. To Dn Woods of Parsonstown in Ireland, for experi- 

mental researches on the heat developed in the oxidation of 
certain metals 20 

The experiments are in progress, and an interim report 
has been presented to the Royal Society. 

6. To Professor William Thomson of Glasgow and Mr. 

Joule of Manchester, for experimental researches on fluids 
in motion, and on the thermal eiFects experienced by fluids in 
passing through small apertures 200 

See note to an appropriation for the same purpose in 
1852, No. 12, and in 185S, No. 6. A memoir contain- 
ing the results of these researches, so far as they have 
yet been completed, has been presented to the Royal 
Society, and printed in the Philosophical Transactions. 

7. To Warren De la Rue, Esq., for mounting the Huyge- 


nian object-glass 250 

See note to a similar appropriation in 1 853, No. 4, 

8. ToT. H. Huxley, Esq., for the publication of his zoolo- 
gical researches 300 

Mr. Huxley was employed under the orders of the 


Admiralty in a Surveying Expedition under Captain 
Owen Stanley, during which these researches were made. 
On his return Mr. Huxley contributed two memoirs to 
the Royal Society, for which the Royal Medal was 
awarded him. They were printed in the Philosophical 
I'ransactions. The publication of the whole of his 
researches has been strongly recommended by the 
highest authorities in this branch of science, and will 
be accomplished by this grant. The work itself will be 
the property of Her Majesty's Govermnent, and will 



521 


be distributed in a manner analogous to that of the 
Markree and Armagh Star-Catalogues. 

9. For the publication of Vol. Ill, of the Markree 

Catalogue of Ecliptic Stare £132 1 7 

Vol, III. has been published, and the edition dis- 
posed of as already described in the cases of Vols, I. 
and II. 

10. To Dr. W, B. Carpenter, for completing the illus- 
trations of typical forms of Foramiuifera 50 0 0 

See note to an appropriation for the same pur- 
pose in 1851, No. 0. 

11. To Nevil Maskelyne,Esq., of Oxford, for chemical 

researches on the solid oils and waxes of the vegetable 
kingdom 100 0 0 

These researches are in progress. 

12. To Dr. Pavy, for continuing experimental re- 
searches on the physiology of the blood, of which a part 

has been recently communicated to the Royal Society . 50 0 0 

The researches are in progress. 

13. To Professor William Thomson, for experiments 
on the thermal effects of electric currents in unequally 


heated conductors 50 0 0 

The experiments are in progress , 

Total sum appropriated in 1854, . . . £1552 1 7 



622 


Totul CrfitliB and Appropriatixm, 

OEAMTe. . " APPROmATlONS. 



£ . 

8, 

d. 


£ 

8, 

d. 

1850 

1000 

0 

0 . . 

.* 1850.. . 

. . 1000 

0 

0 

1851 

1000 

0 

^0 .. 

. 1851... 

...1000 

0 

0 

1852 

1000 

^ 0 

0 .. 

. 1852... 

. . 1000 

0 

0 

1853 

1000 

0 

0 .. 

. 1853... 

. .. 620 

0 

0 

1854 

1000 

0 

0 .. 

. 1854. . . 

. ..1552 

1 

7 

Replaced by Dr. Sten- ' 
house 

): 100 

0 

0 





Small balance returned'^ 







from the Markree 

r 

10 

11 





and Catton grants. . 

J 







Totals £5100 

10 

11 


£5172 

1 

7 


The appropriations exceed the sums placed at the disposal of the 
Royal Society by £71 10/jj M . ; which it was the intention of the 
Council to have provided out of the expected grant of £1000 in 
1855. 

Edward Sabinb, 

V.P. and Treasurer R.S, 

Somerset House, July 20, 1855. 



523 


November 18^ l655. 

Colonel SABINE, R.A,, Treasurer atid V.P., in the Chair. 
William John Hamilton, Esq., was admitted into the Society, 


In accordance with the Statutes, notice was given of the ensuing 
Anniversary Meeting for the election of Council and Officers. 

The Chairman stated that Edward Blackett Beaumont, £sq., who 
at the late Anniversary Meeting ceased to be a Fellow of the Society 
in consequence of the non-payment of his subscription, had applied 
to the Council to be rebstated, alleging that he had inadvertently 
omitted to pay his subscription at the proper period.** Notice was 
therefore given that the question of Mr. Beaumont’s re-admission 
would be put to the ballot at the ensumg Meeting of the Society. 

A paper was in part read, entitled, — Experimental Re- 
searches in Electricity. Thirtieth Series.^^ By Michael 
Fakadav, Esq., D.C.L., F.B.S. &c. Received October 24, 
1856. 


November 22, 1865. 

Sir BENJAMIN BRODIE, Bart., V.P., in the Chair. 

George Fergnsson Wilson, Esq., was admitted into the Society. 

In accordance with the noUce given at the last Meeting of thei 
Society I the question of Mr. Beaumont’s re- admission into the 
Society was put to the ballot. 

VOL, VII. 8 a 



SM 


The ballot having been taken, Mr. Beaumont tvcui declared to be 
reoadmitted. 


la accordance with the Statutes, notice was given of the ensuing 
Anniversary Meeting; aitd the following names of noblemen and 
gentlemen proposed as Officers and Council for the ensuing year 
were read : — 

President . — The Lord Wrottesley, M.A. 

2V«wttref*— 'Colonel Edward Sabine, R.A. 


Secretaries, 



William Shorpey, M.D. 

George Gabriel Stokes, Esq., M.A. 


Foreign Secretary. — Rear-Admiral W. H. Smyth. 


Other Members of the Council, — The Duke of Argyll ; Neil 
Amott, M,D. ; Rear-Admiral F. W. Beechey ; Sir Benjamin 
Brodie, Bart. ; William Benjamin Carpenter, M.D, ; Arthur 
Cayley, Esq, ; Rev. James Challis, M.A. j Charles Darwin, Esq., 
M.A. ; Sir Philip de M. Grey Egerton, Bart. ; William Fair- 
baim, Esq. ; John Miers, Esq. ; William AUen Miller, M.D, ; 
William Hallows Miller, Esq., M.A. ; James Paget, Esq. ; John 
StenhouBC, LL.D. ; Rev. Robert Walker. 


I. The reading of Dr, Paraday^s paper, ^^Experimental Researches 
in Electricity — Thirtieth Series/^ was resumed and con- 
cluded. 

The following is an abstract : — 

* 4 38. Constancy of d^erential magnecrystallic force in different 
media.-— That a magnecrystal formed into a sphere (or some equiva- 
lent shape, so that mere length should have no influence) sets with 
the same force in the magnetic field, whatever the magnetic nature 
of the medium around it, has been shown generally, and for a few 
oases, on former occasions. The author was under the necessity of 
verifying and enlarging the old results ; and upon employing the 
following magnecrystols, namely bismuth, tourmaline, carbonate of 

* Series XXIX. U published la the Phil, Traai. for 1852, p. 137. 



&S5 


iron, red ferroprueeiate of potassa, and alio comprened biimuth, sur- 
rounded in Buticesaion by the following media^^phoaphoruSi alcohol, 
oil, camphine, water, air, and saturated solution of protoaulphate of 
iron, he found the result to be the stoe as before. The mode of 
estimating the set was as follows : — ^The i^jelected crystal being sus- 
pended in the magnetic held by a torsion* wire, right-handed force 
was then slowly applied by the revolutions of the torsion-head above, 
until the crystal being gradually carried round, attained that position 
at which any additional torsion-force would cause it to advance sud- 
denly and considerably ; this position was called the upsetting point ; 
then left-handed torsion was put on until the like point was attained 
*n the opposite side : the amount of the revolution of the torsion-index 
from one upsetting point to the other, minus the angle between the 
ujjsetting points, was considered as the measure of the set of the 
crystal under the constant magnetic force employed. 

As the setting force of a crystal remained constant for any sur- 
rounding medium, it was evidently possible to select a crystal and a 
medium such, that in one position the crystal would be attracted, 
and in another, at right angles to the first, be repelled in the 
same medium. This case was realized with the paramagnetic red 
ferroprussiate of potassa and a solution of sulphate of iron, and also 
with the diamagnetic crystal carbonate of lime and diluted alcohol, 

A crystal was sought for amongst the ferrocarbonates of lime having 
this relation to the assumed natural zero presented by a vacuum or 
carbonic acid j but this case was not realized. 

§ 39. Action of heat on magnecry stale , — When magnecrystals, 
subjected to the same constant magnetic force, were raised or lowered 
to different temperatures, it was found that the setting force was 
affected ; and at all temperatures from 0^ F. upwards the force 
diminished as the temperature became higher. Thus the torsion- 
force of a crystal of bismuth at 92^ being 175, was at 279^ dimi- 
nished to 82 ; that of a tourmaline, by passing firom the tem- 
perature of 79® to 289°, was so fox diminished ; that the power et 
the lower temperature was nearly double that at the higher. A 
like result occurred with carbonate of iron, and also with com- 
pressed bismuth. In all these cases the bodies resumed their first ^ 
fbll power on returning to lower temperatures, nor was there any^ " 
appearance of magnetic charge in any part of the range of observa- 

3 A 2 



m 


tions. Between and the force of bkmuth appeared to alter 
by regular equal degrees ; but with tourmaline and carbonate of iron 
the change was greatest for an equal number of degrees at the lower 
temperatures. At a full red heat, however, both tourmaline and 
ctdcareous spar retained a portion of their magnecryatallic force or 
conditioni and so did carbonate of iron up to that temperature at 
which it was decomposed. 

It is known that pare calcareous spar points with its optic axis 
equatorially, hut that calcareous spar containing a trace of iron 
points wiA its optic axis axially. Calcareous spar retains its mag- 
netic characters at very high temperatures, but carbonate of iron and 
oxide of iron lose almost the whole of their magnetic force at a dull 
red heat. It was therefore expected that a ferrocarbonate of lime 
crystal might become absolutely reversed in condition by change of 
temperature, and this was found to be the case : at low temperatures 
the optic axis pointed axially, qnd at high temperatures equatorially ; 
and that through any number of changes, as the temperature of the 
crystal was alternately lowered and raised. 

§ 40. Effect of heat upon the abeolute magnetic force of bodies.*-* 
Results were sought for, by which the magnetic force of bodies, 
already examined in the condition of magnecrystals, might be com- 
pared with the whole paramagnetic or diamagnetic force of the same 
bodies taken in the granular or amorphous state ; but they were not 
satisfactory. The carbonate of iron gave the most distinct results ; 
and in its case the change of power by change of temperature was 
not the same for the two conditions. An examination of the three 
metals, iron, nickel, and cobalt, at temperatures between 0® and 
300® F., gave a very interesting result, which the author is not 
aware has as yet been noticed. As the temperature rises, the force 
of the nickel diminishes, the force of the iron remains constant, the 
force of the cobalt increases ; these facts suggest that there is a 
temperature at which the magnetic force is a maximum, and above 
or below which it diminishes. The order with the three bodies 
accords perfectly with that in which they lose the chief amount of 
their magnetic power, for much loss occurs with nickel at the tem- 
perature of boiling oil, with iron at a dull red heat, and with cobalt 
at a temperature near that of melting copper. 



527 


The following communication was idao jnead 

II. Discussion of the observed Deviations of the Compass in 
several Ships, Wood-built and Iron-built; with General 
Tables for facilitating the examination of Compass-devia- 
tions.^^ By G. B. Aiky, Esq., F.R.S., Astronomer Royal. 
Received September 14, 1855. 

[A paper by the author, with the above title, was r^ad on the 
21 8t of June, 1855 ; it was subsequently withdrawn for the intro- 
duction of certain alterations, and, so altered, constitutes the present 
communication. An abstract is given under the above date, p. 491.] 


November 80 , 1865 . 


Anniversary. A Report of this Meeting will appear in a subse- 
quent Number. 


December 6 , 1866 . 

Sir BENJAMIN BRODIE, Bart., V.P., in the Chair. 

The Chairman announced that the President had appointed the 
following gentlemen Vice-Presidents ; — 

Colonel Edward Sabine, R.A. 

Rear-Admiral Beechey. 

Sir Benjamin Brodie, Bart. 

Charles Darwin, Esq. 

Sir Philip de M. G. Egertoa, Bart. 

WilUam Allen Miller, M.D. 



S2B 

Hie following oommunicationa wcte read ;~ 


L *^On the Determination of the Dew-point by means of the 
Dry- and Wet-Bulb Thermometers/' In a Letter of 
Lieut. Nob of Toronto;, to Charles R.Weld, Esq. 
Communicated by Professor Stokes, Sec. R.S. Received 
September 24, 1855, 


Toronto, September 10th, 1865. 

My nitAR Sj:r,— T he results of the accompanying table for com- 
puting the dew-point from readings of the dry- and wet-bulb thermo- 
meters, are, as I believe you know, derived from observations taken 
here during last winter by Mr. Campbell and myself: — 


IUblb for computing the Dm-point from Readings of the Dry* and 
WeUBulh Thermometers, 


Tempcnture 

m ur 
(t). 

Factor 

(/). 

Number 
of ob- 
Bcrva- 
tiona 
(m). 

Proba* 
ble error 
of a 
•ingle 
datum 
(»•). 

Mearare 
of prtsci- 
aion of 
■ingle 
datum 
(A). 

Probable 
error of the 
adopted 
factor 

Meaaure of 
preeiiioa 
of the 
adopted 
factor 

It li therefore an 
equal chM)ce thM 
tho-true Austor Uea 
between 

4^ to 

61 

8*3) 

21 

•30 

1-500 

•07 

7*887 

2*24 sad 

838 

46 ... 

47 

2-38 

18 

*26 

1'828 

*07 

6*669 

2*81 ... 

8*46 

42 ... 

45 

2*53 

41 

•40 

MB9 

*06 

7*613 

2*47 ... 

2*69 

40 ... 

41 

2*63 

17 

*41 

M68 

•10 

4*796 

2*63 ... 

>•78 

BH ... 

80 

8*83 

85 

*48 

O-OOO 

•00 

4*094 

274 ... 

8-92 

64 ... 

37 

8*02 

64 

*43 

M14 

•06 

8*918 

2*97 ... 

8'07 

82 ... 

83 

8*33 

25 

*63 

•767 

•12 

3*835 

3*21 ... 

8-45 

80 .»• 

31 

3-81 

82 

•61 

•776 

•16 

3*633 

3*66 ... 

3*97 

28 ... 

20 

4*40 

87 

•66 

'723 

■13 

3 766 

4*87 ... 

4-ia 

84 ... 

87 

6*46 

43 

•82 

! -577 

•13 

3*787 

6*33 ... 

S‘89 

82 ... 

88 

6*06 

15 

120 

*397 

•31 

1*635 

6 75 ... 

6*37 

20 ... 

81 

6-93 

6 

1-40 

•341 

•67 

•884 

«-86 ... 

7*50 

18 ... 

10 

7*13 

81 

1-44 

•331 

*31 

1-617 

6'82 ... 

7*44 

16 ... 

17 

7*60 

80 

1*76 

•871 

•39 

1-809 

7-21 ... 

799 

14 ... 

16 

8*97' 

17 

1 72 

•877 

•42 

M4l 

865 ... 

939 

18 ... 

18 

10*30 

80 

8*63 

•188 

*68 

•842 

9*74 ... 

l<h86 

10 ... 

11 

U*60 

H 

8*10 

‘ *818 

*66 

'788 

1084 ... 

18*16 

8 ... 

9 

13*06 

B ' 

4*63 

*108 

1*64 

■298 

11*48 ... 

14*70 

6 ... 

7 

16*30 

7 

8 66 

*180 

1*38 

•346 

18*92 ... 

16*68 

0 

6 

16*83 

14 

1*87 

•265 

•60 

‘965 

16*78 ... 

16-78 

-1 ... 

«4 

loar. 

10 

4-21 

•na 

1*30 

•367 

18*07 ... 

80^7 

1 -5 ...-10 

81*04 

6 

4*65 

•108 

1*90 

*851 

19-74 ... 

83*64 


-16 

87*68 

6 

10*96 

•044 

4*48 

■107 

88*35 ... 

48*81 





629 


These results will be obvious at a glaiioe; but a few reoudks 
upon the instruments employed, and upon the degree of reliance to 
be placed upon them, may not be uninteresting. 

The dry- and wet-bulb thermometers (for which we were indebted 
to the kindness of Prof. Cherriman, Director of the Magnetic Ob- 
servatory, Toronto) were made by Negretti and Zambra, and their 
index errors were ascertained, above 32° by Mr, Glaisher, and below 
32° by ourselves, by comparison with a Kew standard. The divi- 
sions upon these thermometers were too small to read 0°*1 with 
great accuracy ; and in discussing our observations at low tempera- 
tures, we were in consequence obliged to reject such as would, with 
an error of 0°' 1 in the reading, introduce a considerable error into 
the factor. 

You will observe that the table does not extend below —16®, 
although we have repeatedly every winter the mercury below —20°, 
and occasionally below —30°. The only thermometer, however, 
which we could trust as a wet-bulb in investigations so delicate was 
not graduated below — 1 6°. 

For obtaining the dew-point by direct observation, we used the 
condensing hygrometer invented by M. Rcgnault. 

We obtained dew with this beautiful instrument at all tempera- 
tures (limited only by the graduation of the thermometer —36°), 
the only requisites when the thermometer is very low being time 
and pure ether’*'. I can testify from experience that this hygro- 
meter obviates all the disadvantages of Danieirs, which M. Regnault 
enumerates in his hygrometrical researches. 

In order to show the reliance that may be placed upon our results, 
we have put opposite each factor in tlio table the probable error and 
measure of precision of the single data (from which the factor (/) was 
derived), and also the probable error, measure of precision, and limits 
of certainty of the adopted factor. The nomenclature and notatiou 
are thus employed by Encke in his Memoir on t^e Method of 
Least Squares. 

The measure of precision (A), as was indeed to have been ex- 
pected, decreases with the temperature. This fact is not however 
of so much importance as might at first appear. 

♦ The ether we employed below — 20®ws« the firet that patted over, resuHiag 
from the diatUUtiou of wathed ether with quicklime. 



680 


For the dew*pomt is given by the equation,*— 

where (T) i« the temperature of the dew-point, (0 that of the air, 
(f— •#') the ditFerence between the dry- and wet-bulb thermometers, 
and (/) the factor whose value is given in the table. 

Now taking the temperatures 42° and 22°, it appears from the 
table that the probable error of (/) for a single observation is at the 
latter temperature three times greater than at the former. But 
(f— is on an average aliout three times as great at 42° os at 22°. 
Hence the probable error of the dew-point at both temperatures is 
very nearly the same. 

We have extended our table to 51° for the purpose of comparison 
with the Greenwich factors.** 1 must however remark, that it is 
probable that the factors, which we have given above 40°, are rather 
greater than they would have been had the observations discussed 
extended through a longer space of time, the majority at these tem- 
peratures having been takenl last spring, when the air was very 
remarkably dry ; and experience shows that when (f— /') is un- 
usually great, the deduced factor, instead of being more accurate, is 
generally much too large. 

As on instance, I may cite an observation taken on April 29th, 
when the temperature of the air was 43°’ 6, that of evaporation was 
31°'6, and that of the dew-point 3°*2. The fraction of saturation 
19 

on this occasion was and the factor derived from this observa- 
tion was 3*36 ; this being much the largest deviation from the 
adopted mean 2*53. 

The cause of this discrepancy is doubtless owing to the heat that 
the wet-bulb thermometer derives from the radiation of surrounding 
objects ; and were observations sufficiently numerous, it might con- 
duce to accuracy were the factors calculated for every degree of 
difference in the value of (f— 

We purpose instituting a comparison between two wet-bulb ther- 
mometers placed in similar boxes, the one box coated with lamp- 
black, the other with a polished metallic surface. 

Below 32° our results do not appear to coincide with the factors 
deduced from the Greenwich observations ; and the causes of these 
discrepancies I must leave to time. 



531 


A», however, we have had oonuderable experienoe at these tempe* 
ratures, I may perhaps he doing service to observers in bringing 
before their notice two causes of error, to which we have found our- 
selves particularly liable when the thermometer is pear 32°. 

Ist. If the air is a little above, and has been below 32°, there will 
ftequently be a small button of ice at the foot of the wet-bulb ther- 
mometer, which is not easily perceived, and which will keep it at 
32° when the temperature of evaporation is really above that point. 

2ndly. It is well known tliat under certain circumstances water 
may be cooled below 32° without freezing ; and an example will 
perhaps best show the error which this fact may occasion. 

Let us suppose that the temperature of the air is 27^, and that 
when the thermometer is wetted it sinks to 26°, and then rises. 
Should it rise very slowly, or not at all, the probability is that 26° 
is the true temperature of evaporation, but if rapidly, the rise may 
be due to the conversion of the water into ice ; and it will be prudent 
to observe whether or not the thermometer again commences to sink- 

We have frequently observed this phenomenon, and I am quite at 
a loss to what to ascribe its uncertainty. 

It has occurred both in a high wind and a calm (the thermometers 
are protected from the full force of the wind), and it also appeared to 
be quite uncertain at what temperature the water might freeze. 

I am obliged to admit that the limits of certainty of the factors 
below zero arc not quite so close as could be desired. This is partly 
attributable to our being obliged to reject many observations made 
with a thermometer which was broken before its index- errors were 
fully ascertained ; but Mr. Campbell and I must claim the indul- 
gence of those who know the difficulty of taking observations 
requiring so much time and accuracy at such temperatures, and fre- 
quently at six o*clock in the morning. 

Believe me, &c., 

W, Noblk, 

R N, 

C. U. Weld, Eeq,, Aesiet, Sec, Royal Soc, 



5d2 


II. "On Chemical Affinity, and the Solubility of the Sulphate 
of Baryta in Acid Liquors/^ By F. Crack Cakvtcrt, Esq. 
Communicated by William Allen jVIilleh, M.l)., F.R.S. 
Received October 27, 1 855. 


Soluhilily of the Sulphate of Baryta. 

The author observes that sulphate of baryta is not an insoluble 
salt, as is generally admitted, for he has found that 1000 grs. of nitric 
acid, of spec. grav. I ' 167, are capable of dissolving 2 grs. of sulphate 
of baryta ; and what renders the knowledge of this fact still more 
useful in analytical chemistry is, that the insolubility of this salt is 
affected even by the weakest nitric or hydrochloric acids ; for whilst 
0‘0G2 gr. of sulphate of baryta only requires 1000 grs. of nitric acid, 
of spec. grav. 1*032, to hold it in solution, the same quantity of salt 
requires 50 ’000 grs. of pure distilled water to dissolve it. 

What is not less useful to know is, that the solubility of sulphate 
of baryta is affected in a higher degree by the bulk of the acid than 
by its strength. The two following tables, taken from amongst 
many others contained in the paper, will not only illustrate this fact, 
but will also give an insight into the way in which the experiments 
were conducted. The first table illustrates the influence which in- 
creasing bulks of the same nitric acid exert on the formation of sul- 
phate of baryta, and the second tabic the action which increasing 
strengths of acid have : — 


Table XVI. 


Order 

of 

Number of 
diviRions 
of the 
allutliinetcr 
of nitric 
acid, spec. 
gruv. riO;. 

Number 
of divi- 
Kiona of 
thetUhw- 
li meter 
of water 
added. 

spec, 
grav. 
of the 
hulk of 
acid. 

Sul- 
phate of 

pottunh 
dM- 
Nolved 
in the 
acid. 

Nitrate of 
baryta 
poured in, 
pn^viouMly 
di»HoIved 
in SO gr*. 
of water. 

Time re- 
quired 
for ft pre- 
cipitate 
to 

appear. 

Quantity 
of aulphate 
of baryta 
precipi- 
tated. 

Quantity 
of Nulpbate 
of baryta 
diaaolved. 

1 

20 

20 

Mo; 

3*34 

5*00 

3 min. 

4*28 

Average 

2 

20 

40 

M20 




4*34 

quantity 

3 

20 

60 

1085 





dis«olv^ 

4 

20 

80 

1067 





equal 

5 

20 

100 

1*057 




4*35 

OlOgt. 

6 

20 

120 

1050 




4-35 


7 

20 

140 

1*044 




4*36 


8 

20 

160 

1-039 






0 

20 

180 

1*035 






10 

20 

200 



1*032 




4*38 




533 


Tahlw IL 


Order 
of jar». 

Nuinhor of 
divisions 
of the iilkii- 
li meter. 

Correnponding 
veight of 
nitrii; arid, 
fip. gr. I -id;. 

Quantity 
of sul- 
phate of 
potash. 

Quantity 
of ni- 
tnitc of 
liuryta. 

Weight of 
sulphate 
of 

baryta, 

Timo required 
for a procipi- 
tato to appear. 

Quantity 
of aulphatA 
of baryta 
dtmaolved. 

1 

40 

400*8 

3*34 

500 

4-40 

Instantly 

0-02 


80 

0330 




20 n^inutes 

1-29 

3 

120 

1400 4 




2 liours 

234 

4 1 

100 

1807*2 i 




8i hours 

3‘60 

5 


2;W4*0 




24 hours 


6 

240 

2800-8 , 




No precift. 


7 

280 

3207-0 






8 

a2o 

3734-4 






U 

300 

4201-2 






10 

44H) 

4008 0 







These tables clearly show the influence which a given strength 
of nitric acid has on the solubility of the sulphate of baryta ; for 
there is a precipitate in three minutes in all the jars of the first 
table, whilst we have a precipitate only in the first four jars of 
Table 11. 

Another fact which is observed in these tables is, that whilst 240 
divisions of the alkalimeter of nitric acid, spec, grav. T167. are 
capable of dissolving, or preventing the formation of, 4*46 grs, of 
sulphate of baryta, 240 divisions of an acid, of spec. grav. 1*032, 
only retained in solution O'OSC gr. It follows from these facts, that 
in future the practice of rendering liquors acid with nitric or hydro- 
chloric acids, must be discontinued when sulphates are to be deter- 
mined, or separated from chromates, phosphates, &c. 


Influence of Mass on Chemical Affinity, 

The researches of the author, to iUustrate the influence which 
mass exerts on chemical affinity, are extensive ; a few of the results 
arrived at are here given. 

The following table will clearly show the marked influence which 
increasing volumes of nitric acid have in preventing the formation of 
sulphate of baryta 



584 


Table IV* 


Number 
uf jam. 

Numlwr of 
diviuoni of 
the alkali' 
meter. 

Correiipondiii^ 
weight of 

sp. gr. i-ifl;. 

Quantity 
of sul- 
phate of 
potash. 

Quantity 
of nitrate 
of baryta. 

Weight of 
sulphate 
of baryta. 

Time when procipitate 

appei^dt 

1 

40 

4608 

5-12 grs. 

8*00 

713 

Instantly 

2 

80 

933*6 



... 

2 minutes 

B 

120 

l4fK>*4 




14 minutes 

4 

100 

18672 




1 hour 

5 ! 

200 

233 1 0 




1 hour 15 minutes 

6 

240 

2800-8 




4 hours 

7 

280 

3267-6 




8 hours [cloud) 

« 

320 

3734-4 




21 hours (only a 

» 

300 

4201-2 




None 

10 

400 

4668-0 




None 


Thus in this table we perceive, that as the bulk of acid increases, 
more time is required for a precipitate to appear, although there is 
a large excess of substance employed on the quantity necessa^ to 
give an instantaneous precipitate ; and it is curious to observe how 
wide is the space of time in each successive jar for a precipitate to 
appear, and in jars numbers 9 and 10 no deposits were formed after 
twenty- four hours. As the quantity of precipitate decreased rapidly 
in each successive jar, they were gathered, and their amount deter- 
mined with due care ; and these are the facts observed : — 


Table V. 


Number of 
jars. 

Number of 
diriirions of 
the alkali- 
meter. 

Corrcijpontl- 
Ing weight of 
nltrie oetd, 
sp. gr. l‘l67. 

Quantity of 
sulphate of 
baryta preci- 
pitated. 

Quantity of 
sulphate of 
baryta dis- 
solved. 

Quantity of sul- 
phate baryta 
dissolved 
per 1000 grs. 

1 

40 

466-8 

6*86 

0*27 

0-591 

2 

80 

933-6 

5-03 

1-60 

1-616 

3 

120 

1400-4 

4*66 

2-47 

1*767 

4 

160 

1 1867*2 

3*22 

.3-91 

2*090 

5 

200 

1 2334 0 

233 

4*80 

2-059 

9 ; 

240 1 

1 2800-8 

1-10 

6*03 

2-155 

7 

280 

32676 

0*14 

699 

2*141 


The results contained in this table, especially those in the last 
column, clearly show the influence of mass on Chemical affinity, for 
there is no difference in any of the jars excepting the increasing bulk 
of the acid; and still we have in jar No. 1 only 0*591 of sulphate of 
baryta dissolved per 1000 grs. of acid, whilst we have 2*099 in 
No. 4 jar. 






585 


But the relative bulk of acid ie not the only influence which affects 
the aflinity of sulphuric acid for baryta, as the relative quantities of 
nitrate of baryta and sulphate of potash put in presence also exert 
an action. This fact is illustrated by the following results, taken 
from three different tables, in which the same quantities of acid were 
used, but different proportions of salts : — 


Taux.« IV. E. 


Number of 
tftble. 

QuuTttici(*« 
of wid, 

1-167. 

.Sulpliate of 

NitrAlf! of 
baryta. 

Sulphate of 
baryta. 

Time before a 
precipitate 
appeared. 

— 

No. 1 



0-753 

0-753 

M21 

M2l 

1*00 

l-OO 

12 hours 

None 

No. a ' 

J 


3-31 

5 m 

4 46 1 

Instantly 



334 

nm 

4-46 

2 huui*s 

No. 4 ! 

J 

r4m>8 

[ 93.3-0 ^ 

5- 12 1 

6- 12 

8*00 

H-m) 

7-13 

7-13 

Instantly 

2 minutes 


This point is again brought out in the following table, which is 
also taken from several series of experiments ; — 


Tablk IV. A. 


Number of 
table. 

Order of 
jar. 

Quantitlea 
of fluid. 

Total quantities 
of iuljibatc of 
baryta imBcepti- 
blr of hein^ 
produced. 

Quantity of 
acid iV-pre. 
aented. 

Quantiiien of 
outphatr of 
baryta (lianolved 
in 1000 gri. 

Increased 
ratio of 
aolublUty, 

No. 1 

2 

933-6 

1-00 

1000 

1-071 

0* 

No. 2 

6 

2800-8 

440 


1 693 : 

0-522 

No, 4 

2 

4301-2 

718 

... 

1-912 

0*841 


These facts, and others described in the paper, demonstrate that 
the solubility of the sulphate of baryta, or its non-formation, is not 
only influenced by the respective bulks of an acid of spec, grav. 1*167, 
and the respective quality of salts employed, but that the relative 
quantity of matter put in presence has a decided influence on che- 
mical aflinity ; and these observations not only corroborate perfectly 
the results obtained by Mr. Bunsen on the influence of volumes on 
the combination of gases, and the observations which show a like 
influence on the carbonates, but also are, I believe, the first instance 
which has been noticed of irregularity of solubility of a subetanoe 
in increased multiple bulks of a liquid. 





IIL Results of the Examination of certain Vegetable Products 
from India/’— Pai'tl. By John Stbnhouse, LL.D,,F.R.S. 
Received November 14, 1855. 

(Abstract.) 

Through the kindness of my esteemed friend Dr. Royle, 1 have 
been permitted to select such vegetable products from the extensive 
collection at the India House as seemed most likely to repay the 
trouble of investigation. My attention, during the last twelve 
months, has been chiefly directed to three of these vegetable sub- 
stances ; and the results of their examination I now take the liberty 
of submitting to the Royal Society, to be followed by those of the 
others as they may be completed. 

Datisca cannahina. 

The first of these substances which I examined consisted of a 
quantity of the roots of the Datisca cannabinut from Lahore, where 
this plant is employed to dye silk of a fast yellow colour. The 
roots, which had been cut into pieces about 6 or 8 inches long, were 
from a half to three-quarters of an inch in thickness. They had a 
deep yellow colour. A decoction of the leaves of the Datisca canna- 
hina was examined by Braconnot in 1816, who discovered in it a 
crystallizable principle, to which he gave the name of datiscine, 
Braconnot, of course, did not subject this substance to analysis, but 
he described its appearance and properties in an exceedingly accu- 
rate manner*. The observations of Braconnot had fallen into such 
entire oblivion, however, that for many years post, we find in most 
of the larger systems of chemistry the term datiscine used os syno- 
nymous with inuline. Thus in Braudels 'Chemistry/ vol. ii, 
p, 1168, we find it stated that a variety of names had been given to 
inuline, such as ** dahline, datiscine,*' &c. 

The bruised roots were extracted in a Mohr's apparatus by long- 
continued digestion with wood-spirit. The liquor obtained, which 
had a dark brown colour, was concentrated by distilling oH* a por- 
tion of the wood-spirit. The brown syrupy liquid remaining in the 
retort, on being poured into open vessels and standing for some 

♦ Aanales d« Chimie et cle Physique, 1816, iii. 277. 



687 


time, deposited a resinous matter containing merely traces of a cry- 
stalline substance. When this syrupy liquid, however, was treated 
with about half its bulk of hot water, the greater portion of the 
brown resin was rapidly deposited, and the mother- liquor having 
been poured off and left to spontaneous evaporation, deposited a 
considerable quantity of an imperfectly crystallizable substance 
resembling grape-sugar. These crystals are datiscine containing a 
considerable amount of resinous matter. The datiscine, however, 
is rendered perfectly pure by treatment with a solution of gelatine, 
to remove any trace of tannic acid, and repeated crystallizations out 
of weak spirits of wine. 

Properties of Datiscine, — Datiscine, when pure, is perfectly 
colourless. It is very soluble in alcohol, even in the cold, boiling 
alcohol dissolving any amount of it. By slow spontaneous evapora- 
tion, its alcoholic solutions yield small silky needles arranged in 
groups. Cold water does not dissolve much of it, but it is tolerably 
soluble in boiling water, the hot solutions on cooling depositing it 
in shining scales. 

Datiscine not very soluble in ether ; but an ethereal solution, 
when evaporated, yielded larger crystals than were obtained by any 
other method. On adding water to an alcoholic solution of datis*^ 
cine, no precipitate is immediately obtained, unless the solution is 
greatly concentrated; but on standing, very pure, pole yellow- 
coloured crystals of datiscine separate. 

When datiscine is heated to about 180 ® C., it melts, and if the 
heat be increased, it bums, evolving an odour of caramel, and leaves 
a voluminous charcoal. If datiscine be heated in a close vessel 
while a stream of dry air is slowly passed over it, a small quantity 
of a crystalline substance sublimes. Datiscine and its solutions have 
a very bitter taste ; and though it does not produce any change on 
test-paper, I think there is reason to regard it as a feebly acid body. 

It dissolves in solutions of the ffxed alkalies and ammonia, also in 
lime- and baryta- water. The addition of an acid to these solutions 
causes the precipitation of the datiscine. 

The aqueous solution of datiscine is precipitated by neutral and 
basic acetates of lead, and chloride of tin. These precipitates have 
a bright yellow colour. Salts of copper produce greenish, and 
those of peroxide of iron brownish -green precipitates. In con- 



538 


sequence of the lead salts forming such gelatinous precipitates, they 
could not be employed for determining the equivalent of datiscine. 

Action of dilute Sulphuric Acid on Datiscine. — When an aqueous 
solution of datiscine is boiled for a few minutes with very dilute sul- 
phuric acid, it deposits a crystalline substance. On examining the 
solution filtered from the crystals, very distinct evidences of the 
presence of sugar were obtained. These experiments show there- 
fore that datiscine, like salicine and similar bodies, belongs to the 
class of glucosides, and is a copulated compound of sugar and 
another substance which I shall call “ datiscetine/' 

Datiscetine. — DatUcetine in its general appearance and pro- 
perties closely resembles datiscine, but on a closer examination 
these two substances are found to differ essentially both in com- 
position and properties. Datiscetine when pure assumes the form 
of fine needles which are nearly colourless. It is easily soluble in 
alcohol, a hot alcoholic solution, on cooling, depositing the greater 
portion in crystalline groups. It is almost insoluble in water, con- 
sequently datiscetine is precipitated from its alcoholic ^solutions by 
the addition of water. It dissolves in ether in almost any quantity, 
and is deposited on the evaporation of that liquid in needles. These 
properties of datiscetine enable us to obtain it in a tolerably pure 
state, even when very impure datiscine is employed in its pre- 
paration. 

Properties of Datiscetine. — Datiscetine has no taste. When 
heated it melts like datiscine, but the heat required is much liighcr 
than for that body. It recry stallizes on cooling. By operating very 
cautiously, a portion of the datiscetine may be sublimed. The sub- 
limate, however, appears to be altered datiscetine, Datiscetine 
when burned does not emit the odour of caramel. Datiscetine, 
like datiscine, dissolves in alkaline solutions, and is reprecipitated 
by the addition of an acid. An alcoholic solution of acetate of lead 
added to an alcoholic solution of datiscetine produces a deep yellow 
precipitate, which can be easily washed both by alcohol and water. 
This precipitate therefore was subjected to analysis, and from the 
results obtained, the formula Hg 2PbO was calculated, 
which agrees with the formula Hu, derived from the 
analysis of datiscetine. 

Analysis of Datiscine. — It is difficult to calculate a formula for 



589 


datiscine, the numbers of which shall agree with thoee found by 
analysis. When* however* the decomposition of datiscine into 
datiscetine and sugar is taken into consideration, it seems probable 
that the formula for datiscine is 

Datiscetine -f sugar =: datiscine 

^30 ^^10 ^12 ^12 ^ 13 “ ^42 ^22 ^ 24 * 

If the formula C^o H.j,, 0^4 be correct, the decomposition of datis- 
cine by dilute sulphuric acid would be analogous to that of salicine 
when treated in the same way. 

Dilute hydrochloric acid, like dilute sulphuric acid, decomposes 
datiscine, converting it into datiscetine and sugar. On boiling an 
aqueous solution of pure datiscine for some hours, traces of sugar 
could be detected, thus showing that a small portion of the datiscine 
had been decomposed. 

It has been already shown that datiscine dissolves in cold so- 
lutions of potash without decomposition. When boiled, however, 
with a strong solution of potash for some time, decomposition takes 
place, and the precipitate, thrown down by the addition of an acid, 
has all the properties of datiscetine. In this respect, therefore, 
datiscine agrees with tannin and similar glucosides, which yield the 
same products when acted upon by acids and alkalies. Yeast and 
emulsine appeared to exert no action on solutions of datiscine. 

Action of Nitric Acid on Datiscine and Datiscetine , — Cold nitric 
acid of tlie ordinary strength acts violently upon datiscetine, brown 
vapours are disengaged, and a resinous substance is produced, 
which is ultimately dissolved, forming a dark red liquid, which, 
when evaporated, yields crystals of nitropicric acid. 

Dadscine treated in the same way yields nitropicric and oxalic 
acids. 

When datiscine is boiled with dilute nitric acid it dissolves, and 
the solution obtained, when cooled, deposits pale yellow crystals, 
which agree in every way with tlie properties ascribed to nitrosaH** 
cylic acid. 

On allowing datiscine to stand in contact with dilute nitric add 
in the cold it gradually dissolves, the solution, when left to eva- 
porate in vacuo, depositing a mixture of oxalic and mtropicric 
acids, 

8b 


VOL. VU. 



540 


Action of Potash on Datiscine and Datiscetine^^lt was stated in a 
previous part of this paper that datiscine and datisoetine dissolve in 
cold solutions of the alkalies witliout decomposition, and that datis* 
cine, when boiled with potash, is decomposed with the formation of 
datiscetine. It only remmned, therefore, to try the action of fused 
hydrate of potash. Datiscetine, when added in small successive 
portions to fused hydrate of potash, assumed a deep orange colour, 
and then dissolved with the evolution of hydrogen gas. When the 
disengagement of hydrogen had ceased, the mass was dissolved in 
water and supersaturated witli hydrochloric acid. A partly resinous 
substance separated, which, by sublimation, yielded perfectly colour- 
less, long crystals closely resembling benzoic acid. Their solution 
in water on the addition of perchloride of iron gave that deep violet 
tint which disappears on the addition of hydrochloric acid, and is so 
characteristic of salicylic acid. 

Action of Chromic Acid on Datiscetine, — On distilling datiscetine 
with bichromate of potash and sulphuric acid a liquid came over, 
containing no oily drops, but having the smell of salioyloua aoid, 
and which, when tested with a persalt of iron, formed a purple- 
coloured solution characteristic of that acid. 

It follows therefore, I think, from the experiments already de- 
tailed, that datiscine, like salicine, phloridzine, &c., is a glucoside, 
and that it approaches nearer to salicine than any other glucoside, 
with the exception of populine, yet known. 

I will conclude this account of datiscine by proposing the follow- 
ing practical application. As is well known, tlie colouring matter 
of madder, when boiled with dilute sulphuric acid, is changed into 
sugar and garancine, a new dye-stuff, which, for many purposes, is 
found superior to that originally present in the madder. Within 
the last twelve months Mr. Lieshing, by treating the colouring 
matters in weld and quercitron bark wirii dilute sul{)huric acid, has 
resolved them into new colouring matters, which are but slightly 
soluble in water, and are found nearly three times more powerful as 
dye-stuffs than the original colouring matters from which they had 
been produced. 

As datiscine, when boiled with dilute sulphuric acid, undergoes 
a perfectly similar transformation, being resolved into sugar and 
datiscetine, which hae a much higher colouring power than the 



541 


datisoine which has produced it, I have not the least doubt that silk 
dyers, who may hereafter employ solutions of datisca cannabimj will 
find it highly advantageous to convert their datiscine into datiscetine 
by boiling it with dilute sulphuric acid. 

Oil of the Ptychotis Ajowan, 

The Ptychotis Ajowan is an umbelliferous plant well known in 
India for its aromatic and carminative properties. When its seeds 
ore distilled with water they readily yield between five and six per 
cent, of an essential oil resembling in smell that of oil of tliyme. 
When this oil is left in shallow vessels to spontaneous evaporation 
at low temperatures, it deposits a large quantity of beautiful crystals, 
which are identical with the stearopten brought from India by the 
late Dr. Stocks, and described by me in a short notice in the De- 
cember Number of the ‘ Pharmaceutical Journal ’ for 1 854, 

The crude oil was rectified, and the portion which came over 
between 160° C. and 164® C. was collected separately and carefully 
rectified over sodium. Its boiling-point was found to be 172° C., 
and its composition isomeric with oil of turpentine, namely 
Cjy Hg or CjjQ 

The stearopten obtained from the less volatile portion of the oil 
was purified, and formed large flat rhombohedral crystals, which have 
been carefully measured by Professor Miller of Cambridge. When 
subjected to analysis it gave the formula 

CaoHi.O.orC^oHi^O, HO. 

In the notice of the stearopten of this oil which appeared in the 
'Pharmaceutical Journal,* from the examination of the small 
quantity then at my disposal, a different formula was deduced, 
which I now withdraw, and substitute the preceding formula, 
Cjjo Hj 4 in its stead. 

When the crystalline stearopten is digested for eight or nine 
days with the strongest nitric acid, it is gradually converted into a 
crystallkable acid, apparently containing no nitrogen. This acid 
is but slightly soluble even in boiling water, but is deposited in 
needles on the cooling of the solution. It is very soluble in idcohol 
and ether, from which it is deposited in crj^stals. Both its silver 
and its baryta salts are crystallizable, and appear very stable. It 

3b2 



542 


seems to mo to be a new acid» and this I hope soon to be able to 
ascertain. 

When the stearopten is gently warmed with oD of vitriol it 
dissolves, and, on cooling, solidifies into a crystalline mass. This 
new compound, which is a copulated acid, dissolves readily in hot 
water, and, on cooling, is deposited in large scaly crystals, of a 
mother* of-pearl lustre. It forms both a cry stalliz able lead and 
baryta salt. 

When the stearopten is distilled with a mixture of peroxide of 
manganese and sulphuric acid, it yields a substance exceedingly 
analogous in almost every resj>ect to the tbymbil obtained by Lalle- 
mande by subjecting the stearopten of oil of thyme to similar 
treatment. As the details of Lallemaude's experiments have not 
yet been published, it would be premature to pronounce with abso- 
lute confidence on the identity of the stearopten s from the Ptychoik 
and oil of thyme ; but if not identical, as 1 rather apprehend they 
are, they are certainly extremely similar bodies*. 


Gum of the Gardenia lucida, Roxh. {the Decamalee Gum of Sciiuk) . 

The specimen of this gum on which I operated was evidently 
very old. It formed a hard, dry mass, of a dark brown colour, 
with numerous patches of a greenish-yellow matter disseminated 
through it. It had but a faint odour, unless freshly fractured or 
gently heated, when it smelt like the urine of the cat, 

A comparatively recent specimen of this gum, which I saw in the 
hands of the late Dr. Stocks, had merely the consistence of candied 
honey, and an exceedingly offensive odour. Dr. Stocks informed 
me that the fresh gum was employed as a dressing for wounds, as 
it kept off the flies. The resin was digested in strong spirit of 

• Sittce this paper wa» commanicated to the ttoyal Society, a notice of the 
Ptychotia oU, by Ur. Haines, of the Bombay College, was read before the last 
meeting of the Chemical Society, Dr. Haines has generally arrived at similar 
concltiiiona to my own. He re^ods, however, the carbohydrogen portion of the 
oil not os isomeric with oil of turpentine, but as Hu. 

His formula for the stearopten is tho same as that given in this paper ; and he 
regards it as identical with Lallemande’s thymole. 

Dr. Haines, however, appears not to have observed the crystalline acid pro- 
duced by the action of nitric acid on the stearopten. 



543 


wine, till a saturated solution was obtained* This, on cooling, im* 
mediately deposited some yeUow amorphous docks. These were 
separated by filtration, and the clear liquid slowly evaporated in 
vaciio. On standing a few days, it deposited a quantity of golden 
yellow slender crystals, about half an inch in length. The crystals 
had considerable lustre, and were very brittle. To this crystalline 
substance I purpose giving the provisional name of Gardenine. 
Gardenine is nearly insoluble both in cold and hot water. It dis- 
solves pretty readily in alcohol, but much leas readily in ether; 
ether yielding bright yellow solutions, out of which it crystallizes 
on cooling. Alkalies, such as ammonia, do not appear to increase 
its solubility. It is more soluble in hot hydrochloric and sulphuric 
acids than in water, and is precipitated, apparently unchanged, on 
the addition of water. Its alcoholic solutions give no precipitate 
with ammonio-iiitrate of silver, or with basic acetate of lead. 
When gardenine is digested with concentrated nitric acid, it is 
rapidly decomposed ; nitropicric acid, but apparently no oxalic acid, 
being produced. 

Unfortunately, from the very small quantity of resin at my dis- 
posal, I was unable to prepare a sufiicient amount of the gardenine 
either to subject it to analysis or to examine it more particularly. 
Dr. Royle has, however, commissioned a large quantity of the resin 
from India, which I trust will ere long enable me to complete its 
examination. Gardenine appears to belong to the tolerably nume- 
rous class of ittditFerent crystollizable resins, of which it is certainly 
one of the most beautiful. 


IV, “On the Representation of Polyhedra.” By the Rev. 
Thomas P. Kirkman, A.M. Communicated by Arthur 
Cayuey, Esq., F.R.S. Received August 6, 1855. 

Tins paper constituted an addition to the paper by the same 
author read June 21, 1855. 

The author observes that to every p-acral q-edron corresponds a 
p-edral q-acron, the summits and faces of either having the same order 
and rank as to the number of edges with the feces and summits of the 



544 


other. When the corresponding pair will sometimes be iden- 
tical figures, aft to the number, rank, and arrangement of faces and 
summits ; and at other timcft, as is always the case if p be not equal 
to q, the two figures will differ. When they differ they may be 
called a sympolar pair, both being heteropolar\ when they form one and 
the same figure it may be styled an autopolar polyhedron. An elegant 
way of representing a sympolar pair is deduced from the two follow- 
ing theorems : — 

A. The q summits of a q-acron ore the angles of a closed polygon 
of q sides, all edges of the q-acron. 

B. A closed polygon of p sides can be traced on the p faces of 
every p-edron, having a side in every face, and passing through no"' 
summit. 


December 18, 1855. 

Col SABINE, ll.A., Treas. and V.P., in the Chair, 

It was announced that Mrs. Young, widow of Thomas Young, 
M.D., For. Sec. R.S., had presented to the Society a volume of MS, 
letters addressed to her husband by MM. Arago, Fresnel, Poisson, 
La Place, A. Humboldt, Berzelius, Biot, Bessel, and Dr. Wollaston. 

The following communications were read : — 

I, " On the Action of Sulphuric Acid on the Nitriles and on 
the Amides.^^ By 6. B. Buckton and A. W, Hopmann, 
Ph.D., F.R.S. Communicated by Dr. Hofmanv. Re- 
ceived December 1, 1865. 

Although the identity of the nitriles with the hydrocyanic ethers 
has been established by the experiments of M. Dumas, who obtained 
them by the action of anhydrous phosphoric acid upon certain am- 
moniacal salts, chemists have hitherto in vain sought for a method 
by which a passage might be effected from the nitriles to the general 
alcohol derivatives. 

Our attention has been directed likewise to the same subject, but 



545 


our exertions, like those of our predecessors, have not yet been 
crowned with success. The researches on which we have been 
engaged, have, however, furnished some results which appear to us 
worthy of the interest of chemists, the reactions being at the same 
time remarkable for their neatness and susceptibility of general 
application. 

Acetonitrile may be considered as the type of its class, both from 
the importance of the group to which it belongs, and the facility of 
its preparation. It is, in fact, the nitrile witli which we have been 
specially engaged. This body when mixed with its own volume of 
fuming sulphuric acid, evolves a considerable amount of heat, 
accompanied by a very energetic reaction. 

If care be taken to add the acid in small quantities, and to cool 
the mixture after each addition, scarcely any change of colour is to 
be observed. By the addition of water, and subsequent saturation 
with carbonate of barium, a crystalline salt is produced in consider- 
able quantity, which possesses all the characters and composition of 
the sulphacetate of barium, 

C 4 (H, Ba,) O 4 2 SOb, 

discovered some time ago by M. Melsens in the mutual reaction of 
anhydrous sulphuric acid upon glacial acetic acid. 

If, on the contrary, the mixture of acetonitrile and fuming sulphuric 
acid be made rapidly, and the liquid be rather strongly heated, an 
abundant evolution of carbonic acid indicates a more profound 
reaction. The residuary mass, which is tough and of a resinous 
consistency, when treated with water, and boiled with excess of 
carbonate of barium, yields a magnificent crystallization of a salt 
represented by the formula 

C 3 (Ha Boa) 4 SO 3 + 4aq. 

It is a substance of remarkable stability. It does not lose weight 
at a temperature of 100" C., but four equivalents of water of crystal- 
lization are disengaged at 170" C. It is not further affected by a 
temperature of 220" C. A strong heat resolves it into water, sul- 
phide of barium, sulphurous acid, free sulphur, and carbonic oxide. 
It may be boiled for hours with fuming nitric acid without the 
slightest decomposition. 

We have also mode analyses of the ammonia and silver salts. 
The former crystallizes with great facility in colourless oblique 



546 


prisms, %rbicb may be readily obtained upwards of an inch in length* 
They are anhydrous, and perfectly stable at a temperature of 190° C* 

The composition of this salt is represented by the formula 
C, [Hg (NH,)2] 4 S 0,. 

The silver salt is obtained by digesting oxide of silver with an 
aqueous solution of the new acid. It forms large crystals, which 
are easily soluble in water, but insoluble in olcoliol or ether. They 
contain 

C2(H,Ag,)4SO,. 

The acid may be obtained by decomposing either the lead or silver 
salt by hydrosulphuric acid, or perhaps more conveniently, by care- 
fully precipitating a solution of the barium salt with sulphuric acid. 
It is an exceedingly soluble and deliquescent substance, crystallizing 
in long needles. It has a sharp acid taste, with somewhat of the 
flavour of tartaric acid. 

For want of a more convenient name, we propose for this acid 
the appellation of Methylo-tetra-sulphuric acid. Without wishing 
to decide at present upon its constitution, its composition allows us 
to consider it as formed by the association of marsh gas with four 
equivalents of anhydrous sulphuric acid. 

In the reaction of sulphuric acid upon acetonitrile, two distinct 
phases may be traced. In the first, the nascent acetic acid simply 
combines with two equivalents of sulphuric acid; in the second 
phase, the acetic molecule undergoes a more thorough transforma- 
tion : faithful to its tradition it splits into carbonic acid and marsh 
gas, which remains combined with four equivalents of sulphuric acid, 
llie new substance also may be regarded as sulphacetic acid, which, 
losing carbonic acid, has assimilated an equal number of equivalents 
of sulphuric acid. 

The two reactions may be represented by the following 
equations : — 

C^H^N -f 2 HO + 3 HSO^ = C^H 4 04 2S03 + NH 4 SO 4 . 

^ir.. -11^ -ml* I 'I - 

Acetonitrile. Sulphacetic add. 

C4Hj,N + 5HSO4 =: C4H44SO, -f NH4SO4 + 2CO„ 

i -...My, f 

Acetonitrile. Methylo-tetra- 

sulphuric acid. 

The action, then, of bases and of acids upon acetic acid presents a 
remarkable analogy. 



547 


The nature of the change which the acetic molecule sufFerB, ia in 
fact identical. Under the influence of both agents, it splits into 
marsh gas and carbonic acid, but in the former case it is the car- 
bonic acid which is fixed, whilst in the latter it is the marsh gas 
that remains in combination. 

The production of methylo-tetra-sulphuric acid colls to mind the 
interesting substance, sulphate of carbyl, discovered by M. Magnus/ 
by combining olefiant gas with the vapour of anhydrous sulphuric 
acid. Our new acid is however easily distinguishable from this 
body, as well by its different composition as by its extreme stability ; 
sulphate of carbyl, as is well known, being decomposed by water 
into isethionic acid. 

As acetamide differs from acetonitrile only in containing two 
additional equivalents of water, it undergoes wdth Nordhausen sul- 
phuric acid a strictly analogous transformation. 

From the comparative facility of its preparation it offers peculiar 
advantages for procuring the methylo-tetra- sulphates. The only 
difference to be noted is, that in this case the ammonia salt is gene* 
rally eliminated instead of the free acid. 

M, Melsens, in his researches upon the sulpbacetates, appears in 
some sort to have anticipated the existence of the methylo-tetra- 
eulphates. He remarks that he once found in the mother liquor 
obtained from the preparation of sulphacetate of silver, a crystalline 
salt, the composition of which he represents by the formula 
C,H,Ag,S,0„. 

It is evident that these crystals contain the same elements as 
methylo-tetra-sulphatc of silver, but M. Melsens does not appear to 
have investigated the subject further than by showing the existence 
of this silver salt. 

A detailed description of the methylo-tetra-sulphates, and the 
study of the corresponding bodies of other series, will be on our 
part the subject of a special memoir* 



54B 


IL " On the Structure and Development of the Cysticercus 
cellulosae, as found in the Pig/^ By Georgk Rainey, 
Esq., Lecturer, and Demonstrator of Practical and Micro- 
scopical Anatomy at St. Thomases Hospital. Communi- 
cated by IloiiEHT D. Thomson, M.D., F.H.S. Received 
June 27, 1855. 

(Abstract.) 

The Cysticercus cellulose, in its mature state, consists of two 
parts ; one a small oval cyst, composed of a very thin membrane, 
rendered uneven on its external surface by minute rounded projec- 
tions, and containing in its interior, granular matter, particles of 
oil, and a colourless fluid. This may be called its ventral portion. 
The other is folded inwards, occupying the centre of the cyst just 
described, but by pressure it may be made to protrude. This part 
is sometimes called the neck. Its length varies very much in dif- 
ferent cyaticerci, depending upon their age. It is hollow, having 
strong membranous parietes, wrinkled transversely, and composed 
both of circular and longitudinal hbres. The cavity has no visible 
communication with that of the ventral portion* It contains a 
multitude of small oval laminated calcareous bodies, which, when 
acted upon by acids, effervesce briskly, and become partially dis- 
solved, leaving only a small residue of animal matter. When the 
neck is protruded, the extremity farthest fiom the cyst is seen to 
present an enlargement, sometimes called the head, on the free 
surface *of which there is a quadrangular area, occupied by 
four circular disks and a ring of booklets. Each angle contains a 
disk, and the booklets placed in a circle around the centre of 
this space. The suctorial disks are traversed each by a passage 
taking rather a spiral course, and terminating in the cavity of the 
neck. The membrane composing a disk presents two orders of 
fibres, circular and radiating. The booklets are generally twenty- 
six in number, thirteen long and as many short, arranged alter- 
nately a long and a short one. Each consists of a c\u*ved portion 
like a bird's claw, and a straight portion or handle; and at the 
junction of these two parts there are tubercles, two in the short 
booklets, and only one in the long ones. The booklets are crossed 
by two zones of circular fibres. They ore also connected by 



549 


radiating fibres, which occupy the spaces between each adjacent 
pair, like the interosseous muscles situated between the metacarpal 
bones and phalanges. Tlie booklets are disposed like rudlii with 
their points turned outwards and the extremities of their handles 
inwards, which, not meeting, circumscribe a circular space whose 
centre corresponds to tliat of the quadrangular area before men- 
tioned. At this part there is no perforation answering to an oral 
orifice, but here the membrane is simply depressed so as to present 
a conical hollow. By pressure upon the neck, this membrane can 
be made to protrude in the form of a tongue -like process, to which 
the handles of all the booklets are connected, so that when this 
part in the living animal is made to move, the handles of the book- 
lets will be drawn in with it, and their points carried from the 
entozoon, and thus made to penetrate the part to which it attaches 
itself. These entozoa are chiefly found in tlie cellular intervals 
between the muscular fibres, contained in an adventitious cyst 
formed by the condensation of the surrounding tissues. No more 
than one entozoon is ever met with in one cyst. 


Development of the Cysticercus cellulosee. 

The earliest appearance of the incipient stage of the cysticercus 
celluloses is a fusiform collection of small cells and molecules in the 
substance of a primary muscular fasciculus, or immediately beneath 
its sarcolemma. These cells, in this condition of the entozoon, 
have only an imperfect or partial covering; however, they soon 
become completely enclosed in a well-defined membrane which is 
at first homogeneous, but which afterwards sends out short, 
slender, projecting fibres, resembling short hairs or cilia. These 
hair-like fibres, though resembling in some respects cilia, differ 
i^om them in being much less sharply defined and leas pointed ; 
however, for convenience sake, I shall speak of them as cilia. 
Their direction is remarkable. At either extremity of the fusiform 
animal they are reflected backwards at a very acute angle, like the 
barbs of a feather, their direction being of course opposite at the 
two ends. They become less and less inclined as they approach the 
middle of the body, where they stand out at right angles to the sur- 
face. The apparatus of ciiia-Uke processes above described is evi- 



550 


dently designed to give to the entozoon, whilst in this stage of its 
existence, the power of penetrating between the ultimate muscular 
fibriilse, and thus to enable it to force its way from the interior of a 
primary fasciculus into the spaces between the muscular fibres. This 
will be the effect of the friction of the fibrillse against the cilia, which 
will allow of motion in one direction only. And as its two ends 
must move in opposite directions, the cilia will also serve to aid the 
entozoon in its development longitudinally. That such is their 
office will be apparent on examining a sufficient number of specie 
mens ; in some of which the primary fasciculi will be seen to have 
been completely split up by these animals. But the correctness of 
this inference is more strikingly proved by the influence which the 
size and arrangement of the primary bundles of muscular fibres 
have upon the form and dimensions of the entozoa. Thus in the 
muscular parietes of the heart, where the primary fasciculi are smaller, 
and, from their frequent interlacing, shorter than in other parts, the 
cysticerci are, in this stage of their development, also very short and 
of a different form to those found in other muscles, composed of 
striped fibre, although in other respects perfectly similar ; and, when 
completely formed, those token from the heart cannot be distinguished 
from those^ formed in other muscles. The cells which have been 
alluded to as forming the principal part of the cysticercus thus far 
des^elopcd, and contained in the investment first described, are all of 
the same character, differing only in their form and size, according to 
their age and situation. Tliose situated about the centre, and form- 
ing the chief part of its bulk, are collected together into rounded 
masses, giving to many of the animalcules an obscurely annulose 
appearance. They are of an elliptical, or rather reniform figure! 
This form, however, is not essential to these cells, but merely re- 
sults from the circular shape of the masses into which they enter, 
the convexity of each cell being a part of the outline of its 
respective mass. These cells contain minute granules, or rather 
molecules, which are variously disposed in different cells, so as to 
present a variety of appearances, such as circular spaces, which 
might be mistaken for nuclei, but which seem rariier to be pro- 
duced by a deficiency of the ccU's contents at these parts, than by 
any distinct nucleus. The mode of formation of these cells must be 
examined in the growing parts of the toimal, and for this purpose its 



551 


extreme ends are best adapted. When one of these ends is about 
to have an addition made to its length, the investing membrane 
at tliis part becomes at first very thin, and then disappears. A 
clear space is next seen, having in some specimens the form of the 
part which is about to be added to the extremity of the entozoon ; 
in others it has no defined limit. This space contains, in some 
caseSf nothing but extremely minute molecules, of different 
shapes; in others, these molecules are mixed with granules of 
various sizes, which have every appearance of having been pro- 
duced by the coalescence of the molecules ; and lastly, with these 
molecules and granules, there are in other examples very distinct 
globular cells, of a bright aspect, looking more like nuclei than 
perfect cells ; these soon become flattened oval, and ultimately take 
the elliptical form before described. All the time these changes are 
taking place in the molecules and cells, the membrane has been in 
progress of formation, so that when the molecules have disappeared, 
and their place has become occupied by perfect cells, the end of the 
animal is completed. The cilia are soon afterwards added. The 
lateral growth of these animals takes place in the same manner: the 
first indication is a^eparation of the cilia, which, it must be observed, 
are larger at the sides of an entozoon than at the extreme ends ; 
and then a thinning of the membrane supporting them ; and, lastly, 
the formation of globular cells, as before noticed. After the animals 
have become of a considerable size, and forced their way from the 
interior of the primary fasciculi into the cellular spaces between 
the larger muscular fibres, they still continue to grow, especially 
in breadth ; but they lose their cilia, and gradually acquire those 
parts which have been described as belonging to the neck. The 
first evidence of this addition is the appearance of inversion of the 
middle part of the cyst, forming a small hollow, the sides of which 
locflc as if thrown into folds containing granular matter, and the 
bottom presents a circular space in which ere granular partioles of 
various forms and sizes, but those in the centre are daricer than the 
rest. It is from these particles that the suctorial disks, the book- 
lets, and the first of the laminated bodies are about to be formed, 
but as yet none of these parts are recognizable. At a stage a little 
more advanced, this apparent inversion of the cyst has increased, 
the neck has become longer, and the appearance of dUloi, hook- 



552 


leta, and laminated bodies is sufficiently distinct to be perfectly 
recognizable. The process of development is particularly apparent in 
the booklets, and perhaps there is no other instance of the growth of 
an animal tissue which presents such facilities for the examination 
of the manner in which it is eiFected. First, because the part of 
the entozoon on which these organs are formed, is sufficiently trans- 
parent to admit of examination by the highest magnifying powers 
without any previous dissection. Secondly, because the material 
of which they are composed is so characteristic, and so dissimilar 
to the surrounding parts, that it can be detected in the minutest 
possible quantities. And, tliirdly, as only a few of these booklets 
are in progress of development at one time, and as these are in all 
stages of formation, every step in the progress of their growth can 
be traced from the merest molecule to a perfect booklet. This is 
important in reference to the general theory of development, as it 
furnishes an example of the formation of a complete set of organs, 
on a plan more simple, and at variance with the cell-theory of 
Schwann and others. Before one of these booklets takes on a 
recognizable form, it exists as a group of exceedingly refractive 
particles, all apparently of the same composition, and of a more or 
less globular form, but of very different sizes, some being so minute 
as scarcely to be visible by one-eighth of an inch lens* others 
being almost as large as the handle of a perfect booklet, while 
the rest are of all dimensions between these extremes. The next 
condition of a booklet is the apparent fusion or coalescence of 
some of these particles into the hooked part of the organ. Then 
the handle and tubercles are added, these having been previously 
formed by the fusion of the smaller particles, and these latter by 
the coalescence of the minutest and the minuter ones. Before 
the several parts are perfectly consolidated, their points of junction 
can be distinguished, and in other groups the fragments corre-' 
spending to those recently united can be recognized. Directly a 
booklet is found, it is of its full dimension ; and some of its parts 
ore even larger and more clumsy-looking than in older booklets. 
The substance of the particles entering into these organs, after 
they are once formed^ undergoes no change in its microscopical 
characters, but is the same after as before their union. It is im« 
possible to single out any one particle from the rest, which can be 



653 


taJken for the nucleus of a cell* or for what physiologists would call 
a nucleated cell; and thus there is nothing which indicates that 
these organs have been formed by transformation of previously ex- 
isting cells, but, on the contrary, there is every appearance that 
their formation is due to the simple coalescence of homogeneous 
molecules. 

Up to the present point, the facts which I have stated are so 
obvious, that their accuracy will, I think, not be questioned ; also 
the interpretation of them is not only that which appears to 
me the most natural, but is almost self-evident. There remain, 
however, some considerations of a more theoretical kind, though 
not of less importance. It will be asked, how the entozoon, in its 
earliest condition, such as I have described it, finds access to the 
interior of a primary fasciculus. Before attempting to answer this 
question, 1 must observe that my description commences from a 
condition of this entozoon so complete, that no one. on examining 
it in this state with the microscope, will deny its perfect similarity 
to those of the higher form. But there are other links in the chain 
which I must now consider, and which so far have been omitted 
only because 1 wished to keep that whicli is certain distinct from 
that wixich is probable. Before the cells and molecules already 
described accumulate in sufiicieat quantity to present the un- 
doubted character above mentioned, they are found aggregated in 
smaller groups, and even occurring individually in all the primary 
fasciculi of the diseased muscle ; their quantity, and the size and 
form of these groups, present the greatest possible irregularity in 
the different fasciculi. In some the molecular deposit looks like an 
early stage of fatty degeneration, but it has characters very different ; 
one is the shape of the molecules, which resemble in all respects 
those in the growing ends of an entozoon ; and another is, their 
situation, which seems to be between the primary fibrillee, tending 
to separate them longitudinally; however that may be, it is an 
abnormal condition, and always co-existent with the higher forms 
of the cyaticercus ; and as the entozoon, as 1 have first described it, 
could not possibly have taken on that form all at once, these groups 
of molecules must therefore be looked upon as its antecedent 
stage, or as portions of cysticerci in progress of development. But 
I also find in the specimens of muscle infested with these entoxoa, 



554 


many of the oapiUariea and smaller blood-vessels filled with organic 
molecules, which, so far as X am able to judge from the comparison 
of such extremely minute bodies, seem to resemble those molecules 
which are found in the primary fasciculi. The vessels filled with 
these molecules have their coats so thin as to be inappreciable, and 
some of the capillaries appear to be partially destroyed, and their 
molecular contents diffused among the sarcous elements. As this 
is an abnormal condition of the contents of these vessels, as well as 
of their coats, and, so far as ray experience goes, is not found ex- 
cepting in conjunction with the earliest stages of the cysticerci, I 
am inclined to believe that the molecules in question are the same 
as those in the primary fasciculi, and that it is by their coalescence 
in these fasciculi that the formation-cells of the cysticerci are 
formed. 

Addition to the foregoing communication, received 
December 6, 1856. 

After an entozoon has left the interior of a primary fasciculus, 
and arrived at the space between the muscular fibres, it loses its 
ciliated investment, and begins to increase in breadth. Its 
margin now seems to be formed entirely by the convexities of 
the globular masses of cells of which its body appears to be made 
up, causing it to present a crenate form similar to that of the ven- 
tral portion of the perfect animalcule, with this difference only, 
that these cells are compressed. The next change which is visible 
is the formation of folds, which become more perceptible as the 
animal increases in breadth, and which remain in the perfect 
entozoon so long as it is confined to a small space, but dis- 
appear when it gets to the space between the surface of a muscle 
and the fascia covering it. The unfolding in this last situation 
seems to be produced by the imbibition of fiuid, and the consequent 
distension of the ventral part. I'hese more advanced stages of the 
worm-form are best found in those specimens of diseased muscle 
in which the perfectly developed cysticerci abound. Their number 
in proportion to that of the perfect animalcules varies considerably 
in different specimens. 

I have always succeeded in finding some of those of the worm- , 
form along with the perfectly developed ones ; and in some cases 



565 


there are as many of one kind as the other. After they have 
acquired a certain breadth — about one- twelfth, or the one-eighth of 
an inch, — the central part of the cyst appears to be drawn inwards, 
forming a hollow ; at the bottom of which, the granular material 
is depcmited from which the suckers, booklets, and calcareous 
granules are formed, as above described. 


December 20, 1856* 

The LOUD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

The President stated that Robert William Sievier, Esq., who by 
reason of non-payment of his annual contribution ceased to be a 
Fellow of the Society at the late Anniversary, had applied for re- 
admission ; and an extract of his letter to the Council was read, 
explaining the circumstances under which, during his absence on 
the continent, the omission of payment, had taken place. Notice 
was accordingly given, that the question of Mr, Sievier*s re-* 
admission would be put to the ballot at next meeting. 

The following communication was read : — 

Further Researches on the Polarity of the Diamagnetic 
Force*'^ By John Tyndai*!*, Ph.D*, F.R.S. Received 
November 27, 1865. 

The author commences by referring to the results recorded in 
the Bakeiian Lecture for 1855. The fact of diamagnetic polarity 
was there established, by permitting fixed magnets to act u)>on a 
moveable bar of bismuth, encircled by an electric current; and, 
from the deflections of the bar, the character of the force acting 
upon it was inferred. The experiments recorded in the present 
paper may be regarded as complementary to the above. Here dia- 
magnetic bars, suitably excited, are permitted to act upon an 
astatic system of steel magnets, and from the deflections of the 
system, the polarity of the bodies acting upon it is inferred. An 
experiment of the nature here indicated was made, three years ago* 

VOL. vu. 3 c 



556 


by Professor W. Weber; but, notwithstanding his known skill and 
accuracy as an experimenter, his results did not command general 
conviction. The author sketches the arguments that have been 
urged against the inferences which M, Weber has drawn from his 
experiments, and the conditions laid down by those wh*b urged 
these Jirguments, for the rigorous demonstration of diamagnetic 
polarity. In the present paper these conditions are accepted and 
fulfilled. 

To arrive at an exact notion of the value of M. Weber s experi- 
ments, the author thought it best to operate witli an instrument 
similar to that used by M. Weber himself. He has to thank the 
latter philosopher for the plan of an apparatus more delicate than 
any which has been hitherto used, which plan was carried out in an 
efficient manner by that able mechanician, Leyser of Leipzig. 
The instrument consists essentially of two spirals of covered copper 
wire, about eighteen inches long, firmly attached to a massive slab 
of mahogany. The slab is attached by brass bolts to the solid 
masonry of the Royal Institution, so us to have the spirals in a 
vertical position* Above the spirals is a wooden wheel, with a 
grooved periphery, and below them a similar one. The wheels are 
united by an endless string, which communicates motion from one 
of them to the other. To this string the cylinders submitted to 
examination are attached ; and by turning the lower wheel with a 
suitable key, the cylinders can be caused to move up and down 
within the spirals. Two steel bar magnets are arrjinged astatically, 
connected by a rigid brass junction, and so suspended that the 
magnets are in a horizontal plane, 'i’he two magnets have the two 
spirals between them, and have their poles opposite the centres of 
the spirals. When tlierefore a current is sent through the spirals, 
it exerts no more action upon the magnets than the central, or neu- 
tral point of a magnet would do. If the bars within the spirals 
be perfectly central, they also will present these neutral points to 
the suspended magnets, and hence exert no action upon them. 
But if the key be so turned that the two ends of the diamagnetic 
bars shall act upon the ma^ets, then, if these bars be polar, the 
intensity and character of their polarity will be indicated by the 
deflections of the magnets. Here, then, we have not only the 
action of the earth neutralized, but a turning force is brought to 



557 


bear upon the suapended syatem four timea that which would come 
into play if only a single spiral and a single pole were made use of. 
The mode of observation is the same as that applied by Gauss to 
his magnetometer. The instrument is enclosed on all sides from 
extern^ air- currents ; the magnets have a mirror attached to them 
which moves os they move, and which is observed by means of a 
telescof)c and scale placed at a distance of about ten feet from the 
instrument. 

■ When cylinders of bismuth are submitted to experiment, a very 
marked detlection is produced, indicating, on the part of the bis- 
muth, a polarity opposed to that of iron. This is the only sub- 
stance which has hitherto been examined ; and against M. Weber's 
results, obtained with this metal, it has been urged that the de- 
flection observed by him was due to induced currents, aroused in 
the bismutii by Its mechanical motion up and down witliin the 
spiral. With regard to this objection, as bearing upon the author’s 
experiments, he remarks, first, that the deflection produced is par- 
maaenty which could not be the case if the effect were due to 
induced currents, which vanish instantaneously. Secondly, if 
the ert'ect were due to induction, it would be shown iu the most 
exalted degree by the best conductors. Now antimony is less 
diamagnetic than bismuth, but it is a better conductor. The 
deftection produced by it, however, shows that it is its dxnmagnetk 
quality, and not its conductive quality, which is effective; the 
deflection is less than that of bismuth. Copper is fifty times a 
better conductor than bismuth, but its diamagnetic capacity is 
nearly nil ; it produces no sensible action upon the magnets, which 
could not possibly be the case were the result due to induction. 

Again, a quantity of bismuth was powdered, and the powder 
suffered to become so tarnished that it was unable to conduct vol- 
taic electricity. Tubes filled with this powder produced effects 
almost as striking as those produced by the massive cylinders of 
bismuth. 

Bat the experiments have been extended to a great number of 
insulators, with the same result. Heavy -glass, sulphur, calcareous 
spar, statuary marble, nitre, phosphorus, wax, and other insula- 
tors, have been examined, and proved polar. Both paramagnetic 
and diamagnetic liquids have also been embraced in the examina- 



558 


tictti, and the polarity of both e»tabliehed. Thus every objection 
that has been raised against the polarity of the diamagnetic force 
has been removed, and an amount of evidence accumulated in its 
favour, which places it amongst the most firmly established tnitlis 
of science. 


Society then adjourned over the Christmas recess, to the 
10th of January, 1856. 



559 


November 80, 1855* 
AOTIVEBSABT MKETOfa 


The LORD WROTTESLEY, President, in the Chair. 

Mr. Cayley reported, on the part of the Auditors of the Treasurer*# 
Accounts, that the total receipts during the last year, including a 
balance of £1043 19^. 9d. carried from the account of the preceding 
year, amounted to £3231 16«. Od., and that the total payments in 
the same period, including £2000 invested in the Funds, amounted 
to £4531 5s, 5<f., leaving a balance due to the Treasurer of 
£255 9s. 8d. 

The thanks of the Society were voted to the Treasurer and 
Auditors. 4^’ 


List of Fellows deceas^ljyi^ince the last Annivdrsary. 

Honorary, - . 

His Imperial Majesty Nicholas Emperor of All the Russlas. 
On the Home List, 


Martin Barry, M.D. 

Sir Edward Ffrench Bromhead, 
Bart. 

William Archibald Cadell, Esq. 
'Diomas Copeland, Esq. 

GriflElth Davies, Esq. 

James Colyer Dawkins, Esq. 

Sir Henry 'Thomas De la Beche. 
Lewis Weston Dillwyn, Esq. 
Bryan Donkin, Esq. 

Bight Hon. Henry Elite, 

George Bdlas Oreenongh, Esq. 
Wyndfaam Harding, Esq. 

Joseph Hume, Esq., M.P, 

Die Bil^t Hon, Sir Ebbert Hairy 
Bart, 

Jaioes R W. Jib||itai, JBsq. 


Rev, John Maddy, D.D. 
William Francis Spencer, Lord 
de Manley. 

Sir William Moleswortli^ Bart. 
Rear-Admiral Sir William Ed- 
ward Parry. 

Joseph Phillimore, LL.D. 

Philip Pusey, Esq., D.C.L. 
William Rashleigb, Esq. 

B«v. Richard Sheepshanks. 
Edward Adolphus, Duke of 
Somerset. 

Philip Henry, E||rl Stanhope. 
Fercy Qintoa Sydney, Viscount 
Stiwgfbrd. 

John Henry Vivian, Eaq. 
Diomas Weaver, Esq. 
fiobn Wcylai^d, Esq. 

John, l^arncliSe. 

8 » 



Karl Friedrich Gauss. 


On the Foreign List* 

{ George Simon Ohm. 


Withdrawn* 

Captain Sir William Symonds, R,N, 


Defaulters* 

Robert William Sievier, Eeq. | Rev. John Wright, M. A. 
List of Fellows elected since the last Anniversary. 


Arthur Connell, Esq. 

Henry John Reynolds Moreton, 
Earl Ducie. 

William Farr, psq. 

William Lewis Ferdinand Fischer, 
Esq. 

Isaac Fletcher, Esq. 

William John Hamilton, Esq. 
Edward John littleton Baron 
Hathcrton. 

John Hawlcshaw, Esq. 


John Hippisley, Esq, 

James Luke, Esq. 

A. Follett Osier, Esq. 

Thomas Thomson, M.D. 

Charles B. Vignoles, Esq. 
Charles Vincent Walker, Esq, 
Robert Wight, Mi^D. 

Aleimnder William Williamson, 
Esq. 

George Fer^usson Wilson, Esq. 


Readmitted* 

BdwSrd Blackett Beaumont, Bsq. 

The President then addressed the Society as follows : — 
Gentlemen, 

In addressing yon for the first time, it is perhaps to be regretted that 
the course of events during the last year should have imposed on me 
the obligation of alluding to subjects which cannot be iqiproached 
with too much caution, and which involve considerations of no ordi** 
nary difficnltj. - 

One of the snl^jecta may be described most gen^ridly as the Be« 
lation of Science to the supreme authorhaea in the State ;** and ^Ods 
is chiefly important as it affects the extent to which the claittts of 
Science are recog^ed and regard paid to ita bterlMss by tbo 
powers. For example, it has ofteh been more than doubted whether 
the opini<ms of eminent then of science, even wheu expresbd in the 



561 


most formal and deliberate manner, do, as things are now constituted; 
exercise sufficient influence over the deliberations of Government and 
Parliament when they are called upon to decide upon questbns for 
the proper determination of which scientific knowledge must be con- 
sidered as a valuable, and sometimes an indispensable qualification. 
Among the varioiis causes to which this may be ascribed, it seemed 
to some that a want of representation of Science in the Legislature 
was possibly one ; that is, that there was no one in either House of 
Parliament who was entitled to consider it his peculiar province to 
watdi over the interests of Science and defend them, when, amidst 
the heterogeneous mass of subjects to which the attention of our 
Government and legislators is directed, it appeared probable that 
those interests would suffer, or receive less of that attention than 
their importance deserved. 

With the view of remedying this defect, the Parliamentary Com- 
mittee of the British Association for the Advancement of Science 
was formed ; it consists of seven members of the House of Lords and 
six of the House of Commons, who are ** requested to act as a per- 
manent Committee to watch over the interests of Science, and to 
inspect the various measures from time to time introduced into Par- 
liament likely to affect such interests.’* 

My excellent predecessor in this Chair, who is himself a distin- 
guished member of this Committee, thinks there is something in this 
arrangement forced and awkward.” It may be so, for it is neces- 
sarily a makeshift, a substitute for a more formal and recognised 
representation of Science in Parliament ; but perhiqis the more mate- 
rial questioii is, How has this arrangement hitherto worked ? Has 
this Committee already done some good service to Science or not ? 
The following is a short statement of what has been done. 

1st. The ParUamentaiy Committee, in conjunction with your 
OounciL fivvoured by the sealous cooperation of the present Chair- 
man of the Board of Customs, succeeded in carrying tmt a very bene- 
ficial amingeineilt at the Cu^;om Houses by whiifii the intemational 
omnmunkatibn of sdeutific publicationB has been greatly facilitated ; 
and with the same view they have represented to the Postmaster- 
Oenmd the in^mrtanoe to acienee of prevailing on fore%n ecftintiies 
tb the eid«hilotrtothemse}vescf our exfwlleatsy^^ 

pnaiige. A ecitraj|»n^^ Ims been had with the Postmaster- 

Sn2 



562 


General and Mr. Rowland Hill, and interviews have been solicited 
and obtained. There is a great desire on the part of the Post Office 
authorities to carry out this ol^ect ; and the only obstacle to success 
seems to be the reluctance of some foreign countries to consent to a 
perfectly free admission of publications. 

2ndly. The subject of pensions to men of science has been brought 
before successive Governments, with the view of obtaining for Science 
its fair share in the distribution of the Parliamentary Grant, and im* 
pugntng that principle of selection which implies that absolute poverty 
in the recipient ought to be an indispensable qualification for the 
receipt, — a principle of which the adoption appears to have originated 
in the smallness of the sum placed at the disposal of the Government 
for the recompense and encouragement of civil services. 

3rdly. The Committee supported, and with success, a representa- 
tion which had been already made to the Government by your 
Council, urging them to establish on office in this country to coope- 
rate with Lieut. Maury in America, in collecting and reducing 
meteorological and hydrographical observations made at sea, and 
embodying the results in improved charts and sailing directions. 

4thly. The Parliamentary Committee has supported the memorial 
addressed to Government, requesting them to appropriate some 
buildings in a central situation in this metropolis to the accommoda- 
tion of the principal scientific societies. 

dthly, and lastly. The Committee has, in a Report lately presented 
to the British Association at Glasgow, collected and embodied the 
(pinions of eminent cultivators of Science on a question of great 
importance, viz. Wliether any meaaures could be adopted bjr the 
Government or Parliament that would improve the position of Sdence 
or its cultivators in this country? 

The absence of a representation in Parliam^t has been mentioned 
as being possibly one of the causes of the supposed want of deference 
to the interests of Sdeuce ; hut there are others which may well 
exercise some influence in bringing about a result, which, if its 
existence be admitted, must be a subject of regret to iB whose 
opinions arc deserving of respect. 

It rxAj be that there is something in the eonsritation of our 
Bdentific Soeiettea which may deprive them of their due wdght and 
infiueiice. In gome foreign oountries thmre are Insdttttes, or miber 



568 


analogotis bodies, recognized hy their gOTemments as part of the 
civil organizatiou, and consulted on almost all occasions when scien** 
tide questions are under the consideration of executive or legislative 
bodies. 

There seems ground for the belief, that any plan for the establish- 
ment of an Institute, properly so called, in this country, and certainly 
for organizing any direct dependence of Science on the Government, 
would meetwith little favour ; nor does there seem to be any desire that 
the aid now* afforded by contributions from the public purse should 
be much increased ; m trutli, there is nothing that would indict a 
more serious blow on Science and its cultivators, than that an idea 
should prevail that the latter had obtained from those entrusted 
with the conduct of public affairs a greater share of national pecu- 
niary support than the well-considered interests of the community at 
large rendered desirable ; there is nothing that ought to be more 
deprecated, for there is nothing that would be more fatal to the suc- 
cess of that which must always be our primary object, the object to 
which the interests of all societies, and of their members, must 
always be a secondary consideration, viz. the diffusion of Science 
itself, and the increase of our knowledge of the laws and phmnoniena 
of the universe. 

At the same time, no one who has watched the course of recent 
events can fail to suspect that the influence of those who represent 
Science is rather less than greater than it ought to be. For ex- 
ample ! — 

Some appHoations for assistance addressed to the Government, and 
alluded to by your late President, were unsuccessful ; and if disposed 
to speculate upon the cause of failure, we may possibly adopt the 
conclusion, that our Scientific Societies (not excluding even this, the 
most ancient and influential of all), owing to defects in their consti- 
tution'or other causes, do not inspire the Government with suflScient 
confidence in their recommendations ; and we adopt this condusion 
the rather that we perceive no distaste for, or depreciation of, Science 
in the abstract among those whose influence is powerful in the State ; 
on the contrary, we recognize among the members of succesuve acU 
ministrations many known to be sincere friends to its advancement, 
and perceive also that great deference is sometimes paid to the indi^ 
vidnd qpituonaof men eiyoying high scientific cdehiity, and to those 



664 


of public bodiesi such as the Board of Visitors of the Royal Observa- 
tory and the Trustees of the British Museum^ which are invested 
with a more ofHcial character. Can it be possible then that the 
distrust of the recommendations of Scientific Societies as such, pro- 
ceeds from some apprehension that iu making them they are in- 
fluenced by views of advantage to their own individual interest^, 
which are opposed to the interests of the community at large ? 1 

should be reluctant so to think ; but all will agree, that everything 
that can by possibility exercise any injurious influence deserves to 
be attentively considered and, if practicable, corrected. 

Those who entertain that opinion will perhaps be disposed to 
receive with favour a scheme propounded for remedying the evil, 
which meets with the approval of some on whose judgment reliance 
may be placed ; I mean the proposal to revive the late Board of 
Longitude under a new form, that is, to constitute a Board or 
Committee, com|K)Bed partly of men holding high ofEcial situations, 
and partly of men of distinguished eminence iu Science, to perform 
for its whole domain the functions which the late Board fulfilled 
for Navigation and Astronomy alone. 

My distinguished predecessor in this Chair, while admitting the 
evils to which allusion has been made, has suggested a different 
remedy, that is, an augmentation in the number of your Council, 
and that the additional members shall be selected from such of our 
Fellows as, to use his own words, ** have high general education, and 
are men of the world and of influence.” It may well be doubted 
whether any change in the internal constitution of this Society, and 
least of all that change, will inspire the Government with greater 
confidence in its recommendations ; in truth, the prestige of antiquity, 
and the belief in the scientific qualifications of your Council, are pt<h 
bably the chief grounds on which such confidence as is now extended 
to suggestions emanating from us is based ; that confidence, there^ 
fore, might be stiU further impaired by dumges in our conatitutiem, 
and by admitting to our Council a larger proportion of men, who, 
however eminent in other departments of knowledge, have ^nev^ made 
physical science their especial study or pursuit. However this may 
be, it cannot be otherwise thm b^eficial that these suggested 
dies, which are now lairiy brfore the scientific world, should be 
thmou^y canvassed and diseussed in cot^unction with any other 



565 


schemes which may be hereafter proposed for effecting a like object. 
It would be unreasonable to expect that any very general assent 
should be immediately g^ven to any plan which has sufficient novelty 
to prevent its ready acceptance by some Fellows of this Society and 
others, who seem to have an instinctive dread of any Government 
interference with the independence of societies, and take a just pride 
hi discharging, in this country, by their own gratuitous services, 
those functions which in other countries are performed by men ap- 
pointed and paid by the State. 

The views which have been put forward may seem to be in some 
degree confirmed by the recent correspondence and discussions 
respecting the ^1000 entrusted to this Society for the promotion 
of scientific objects. It would be improper to go into any detail on 
a subject which has already been more than sufficiently discussed, 
and on some occasions in a spirit which was hardly called for or 
justified by the facts. Whilst the reasons assigned for witliholding 
the grant seemed doubtless to imply a misapprehension as to the 
purpose for which it was ori^nally conferred, and the part fulfilled 
by the Society in the administration of it, at the same time it was 
the duty of the Government to require a statement of the mode 
in which the public money had been expended, and also of the 
grounds on which a renewal of the grant was solicited ; and it is to 
be regretted that any remarks should have been publicly made on 
the withholding of the grant until that information had been pre- 
pared and laid before the Executive, mid th^ had had an oppor- 
tunity afforded them of considering it, and deciding on their future 
course. 

The Government we may presume, are now satisfied with our 
distribution of the grant, and convinced of its utility, and they have 
decided in fovoor of its oontinuanoe. The whole matter has also been 
placed on a more satisfactoiy basis, by the resolurion which has been 
adopted of making the grant for the future the subject of a special 
annual appUcation to Parliammit, to be made by the Government. 

I allude however to this subject, because it be not an example 
of miseppreheiuiion on the part of the Executive of that kind to which 
reference has been made, 1 would at least direct your attention to the 
aocomit whixdi im been recently published in our ProoeediiigB of tlie 
thauner in whUh J05OO0 idready granted by the Government has 



666 


been disposed ot You are awture that a Committee* consbting of 
about forty in number* and composed of men well known in science* 
have been the distributors of that fund ; and 1 think that on care- 
fully looking over the list of the various researches of interest to which 
it has been devoted* and weighing the paramount utility of the inves- 
tigations and the value of the results, every one will join me in the 
expression of congratulation* that a grant so productive of advantage 
to the best interests of our country and mankind has not been with- 
held, At the same time it has been a subject of regret to the Com- 
mittee of Recommendations* that either owing to the existence of the 
grant not having become generally known* or to some other cause* 
the number of appHcations of an eligible character to share in its 
distribution has not increased as much as might have been antici- 
pated. It is possible that some modification of the stringent rules 
under which the money is now distributed may tend materially to 
enlarge the sphere of its usefulness. It is very much to be wtsbed* 
that young men who have received a regular scientific education* and 
are anxious to devote themselves to researches for which their own 
pecuniary resources are inadequate* should be encouraged to avail 
themselves of this Government Grant. 

I cannot take leave of the subject of the temporary withdrawal of 
this fund, without recalling to your memory the seal with which 
Lord John Russell (to whom we owe the ori^nal proposal of the 
grant) and Lord Brougham thm advocated the interests of Science* 
both unwearied promoters of the intellectual progress of the human 
race, and both have thus augmented their claims to the honours with 
which an impartial posterity will doubtless reward their services. 

H.E.H. Prince Albert, on the occasion of lajring the first stone 
of the Birmingham and Midland Institute* set forth the advantages 
of the study of Science in language calculated to make a povmrfid 
impressiou on the numerous auditory to which it was addressed. 
Lord Ashburton also showed* that* for want of a better scientifie 
education In our artisans* we were likely to be outstripped in the 
race of commerce. May we view these events as examples of a |yow- 
ing desire to encourage scientific study and reseatrik* diffuse their 
benefits more widely I 

The question of the removal of the Society to Burlington House 
has received the onxions oonsidemtioti of your officers. An inter- 



567 


yiew with Lord Palmerston, in the month of June last, had given 
us ground to hope that we should ere now have received some oth* ^ 
dal notification of the intentions of CKivemment on this subject. 
In this we have been unhappilj disappointed } but all the informa- 
tion which has been received during the recess would lead to the 
condusion that it has been determined to place Burlington House, or 
buildings erected on or near its site, at the disposition of the priu- 
dpal Scientific Sodcties of this Metropolis. No situation could be 
selected more favourable ; and one cannot but antidpate that very 
important advantages will accrue to Science from their joint occupa- 
tion of such a site. Among the most important of the benefits likely 
to flow from this change of our abode, I would specify, — 1st, the 
facilities which it will afford to men engaged in common pursuits to 
meet and interchange their thoughts and views on subjects deeply 
interesting to all of them ; 2ndly, the economical advantages that 
will result from a joint occupation ; 3rdly, the benefits which will 
accrue to all the societies by the approximation of tlieir libraries; 
and 4thly, the great increase of weight and dignity arising from so 
public a recognition of the claims of Science to National regard. At 
the same time we may purchase these advantages too dearly ; and 
all the circumstances of the exchange must be well weighed before 
we finally agree to abandon our present location. 

Since my acceptance of this office, 1 can truly say 1 have received 
the most unvaried kindness from all. The best understanding has 
always subsisted, and I trust will ever continue to subsist, between 
your officers ; and the various matters of business which arise in 
the intervals between successive meetings of Council have been dis- 
cussed by them at meetings held prior to each Council ; by which 
arrangement, the officers bring to the Council a better knowledge of, 
the principal subjects about to be deliberated upon. 

In the Beport of the Parliamentary Committee, to which allusion 
has been already made, various other matters of great importance 
have been mooted, which may be classed under two heads: — 1st, 
those which respect the extension of scientific knowledge; and, 
2ndly, those which have relation to rewards and encouragements to 
he bestowed on proficients in that department of learning. Under 
the first divisi<»tii the most important questions, doubtless, that can 
he agitated lure those of the means to be adopted for improving the 



elementary ioatmetion giTen in our achoolSi and renderix^ the 
teaching of physical science more general at our Universities ; but 
on these^ time will not permit me now to enlarge. The difficult 
consideration of the extent to which public aid ought to be affiorded 
to popular lectuxeSj has been raised. I am not disposed to agree 
either with those who altogether condemn tins mode of imparting 
instruction, or with those who anticipate great advantages as likely 
to accrue to the cultivation and didTusion of Science from its exten- 
sion. There can be no doubt that latent talent has been sometimes 
called into existence by superficial teaching ; and, on the other hand, 
that superficial teaching will never confer sound knowledge. Dili- 
gent and earnest private study alone can put the seal of authenticity 
on information acquired in the lecture-room. But when we consider 
what a large proportion of our fellow-subjects have neither the 
means nor the opportunity of studying at the Universities, or of 
otherwise acquiring the knowledge referred to, and the great advan- 
tages that would result to the middle classes and the higher grade of 
artisans, from acquaintance with at least the elementary truths of 
Science, it is worthy of seiious consideration whether a certain 
amount of support by the State should not be conceded to popu- 
lar lectures and also to educational establishments, at wluch the 
elements of the phy»cal sciences may be taught on a more general 
and systematic plan to students, who shall be mvited and expected 
to enter on their study with a serious intention of learning, so far as 
their means and opportunities extend. 

In connexion with this subject, of the scientific instruction of the 
masses, it is impossible to overlook the efiects which may be pro- 
duced by the publication, within the last few years, of works written, 
it may be, in a somewhat unphilosopbical spirit, and propounding 
theories which rest on unsubstantial fbnndations, but written with 
great ability, and escalated powerfully to excite the imaginatkm of 
those by whom the truths of naturol science hare been little studied. 
Some students may perhaps require to have their attention aroused 
by the announcement of startUng novelties, and these works may be 
to them the honey with which the bitter cup of abstract sdeme hmst 
be anointed to attract their palates 

« Ut puerorom sstai Impmrids Itul^ 
tsbrorum teaus/’ 



669 


Under the second diyision of rewards and encouragements to 
those who are profideuts in Science, the difficult subject of the 
utility of medalflt decorations, and other stimulants of that kind, is 
discussed. As to medals, 1 agree with those who consider it expe- 
dient that gome should be given ; but care should be taken that such 
distinctions are not unduly multiplied. The subject of decorations, 
titles, and orders of merit, considered as incentives to the application 
to scientific research, is full of difficulty. On the one hand, it is 
doubtless an anomaly, in this country, that while these honours are 
now somewhat lavishly bestowed for military services, a very high 
degree of merit in any civil line is seldom rewarded by any such 
distinctious. On the other hand, it is clear that rewards which were 
not approved by public opinion would confer little honour, and that 
there are many eminent cultivators of Science in this coimtiy who 
would set little value on distinctions awarded by the Government, 
which would rarely be in a condition to form an accurate estimate of 
the claims of rival candidates. 

That the emoluments of Professors should be increased, and more 
pmes provided at the Universities for scientific merit, is generally 
admitted. 

There is one point on which the Report in question is silent, but 
that involves so serious a grievance, and is calculated so much to 
discourage the devotion of high mental endowments to physical re- 
search, that it would be improper to omit all meution of it here, 
when something like a cursory review of the present position of 
Science in this country has been attempted. 

It has somehow or other become almost an established practice in 
this country, that no amount of labour, however arduous, performed 
for the benefit of the community by men of science, is considered, 
as such, entitled to pecuniary reward. I could enumerate many in- 
stances which have fallen within my own personal experience, in 
which a very great amount of anxious and harassing toil, wearisome 
alike to hoth body and tnind, and calculated to exhaust the energies 
of both, has been performed for the State gratuitously by men of 
great eminence in their various walks of science, with a seal and de- 
votion worthy of all praise. 

It is unnecessary, and It would be improper, to instance cases of 
services performed by persons now liring ; they are well known, and 



570 


some of them will occur to the gr^t majority of my auditors ; but 
there is one very remarkable and recent example, in which he to 
whom my observations relate is unhappily no more, and whose 
labours have been alluded to in our biographical notices, — 1 mean that 
of the late Mr, Sheepshanks, a name which 1 cannot mention 
without recalling, with alFectionate regret, the various occasions on 
which he has kindly assisted with his advice and stimulated by his 
encouragement my humble labours in science*. As an originid 
member of the Astronomical Society, and thus associated more or 
leas with its Fellows for more than thirty-five years, I have wit- 
nessed the dawn, progress and final close of the honourable career 
of its most distinguished ornaments, many of whom I had the plea- 
sure of numl>ering among my friends ; and 1 can truly say, that men 
more disinterested, more ardent lovers of science and human pro- 
gress, and more enlightened members of society, it was never my 
lot to meet ; and when a more advanced stage of civilization shall 
be attained, — a period I fear long distant, — the labours of such men 
will be appreciated as they deserve to be, and they will he cited as 
bright examples of a life spent in fulfilling one of the noblest of 
tasks, that is, enhancing the dignity of man, by showing of what 
things the human mind is capable. 

Your partial suffrages having placed me, however unworthy, to 
fill that distinguished post at the head of the most ancient and 
venerable of our British Scientific Institutions, I have thought it 
right to avail myself of this, the first opportunity afforded to me of 
addressing you, to take a review, necessarily hasty and imperfect, of 
some of the desiderata of Science ; and having been so highly honoured 
above my deserts, I only derire that it may be said of me with truth, 
that I laboured diligently to induce my fellow-countrymen to regard 
with fisvour and respect, to cherish and foster, to appreciate and 
reward the labours of the cultivators of Science. 

♦ Siaoe the above wm written, I have been infbmed that the h^o Sir itobevl 
Peel otTered ^£500 a year n a remimeraiion for ariennSc eeryiceB In eonnerion 
with the reiteration of the National Standards, and that both Mr. Brity and Mr. 
Shee|>shanks preferred serving the nation gratnitonsly to the aceeptance of wbat 
may have been considered an inadequate reward. The remarks in the teat do 
not depend for thrir justification on a tingle example. 



571 


The Cop!ey Medal for the present year has been awarded to 
M. Foucault, of Paris. 

M* Foucault has been engaged in rariouB remarkable researches 
during the last ten or twelve years. His earliest labours were de- 
voted to photography. In the year 1844, he published, along with 
M. Fiseau, an investigation of the comparative intensity, both che- 
mical and optical, of three of the most brilliant sources of light of 
which we can avail ourselves, — ^the sun, the voltaic arc, and incan- 
descent lime*. The investigations of these philosophers led to 
numerical results, from which the vast inferiority of the lime-light 
came out in a very striking manner. Wliile the voltaic arc with coke 
poles gave a light of which the intrinsic intensity was nearly -fths of 
that of the sun, the intensity of the oxy-hydrogen lime-light was 
found to be only about -g^th of that of the poles of the voltaic arc. 

Shortly afterwards, M. Foucault was engaged, in conjunction with 
M. Fizeau, in a series of important researches on the interference of 
light produced by a considerable difference of path in the interfering 
streamsf. In ordinary cases, all signs of interference cease when the 
difference of path amounts to a few undulations, though inter- 
ferences of a high order had been observed with the light of a spiri t- 
lamp with a salted wick, and also in certain peculiar phenomena 
exhibited in a pure spectrum. But the prism does not seem to have 
been employed in the investigation of interference, except for the 
take of analysing the tints produced by means of polarized light ; 
and theorists even doubted whether the vibrations of the body emit- 
ting the light in the first instance wore sufficiently regular to render 
inieiference possible in the case of great differences of path. But 
by subjecting a narrow band of interfering light to prismatic onalysist 
the authors were able to detect perfectly distinct interference pro- 
duced by great retardations, amountbg in one case to no less than 
7394 undulations, proving that the undulations are regular in a very 
high degree, A similar method of research enabled the authors to 
study the modifioations of poUrbed light with great advantage. 

e AaiMles de Chimte, tom. id. p* 

t Aatities de Chimie, tom. xxvi. (1949) p. 138, haviag been read to the Acs* 
deny May 84, 1845 \ and Ann. de Ch. tom. txx, (1850), p. 146, having been read 
March 9, 1646. 



57» 


In September 1847, MM. Foucault and Fizeau read to the Aca- 
demy an account of their researches on the interference of the calo^ 
rific rays. By the use of very small spirit thermometers of great 
delicacy, they were enabled to detect alternations of intensity corre- 
sponding to those of illumination in the fringes produced by the 
mirrors of Fresnel. By the same means they detected alternations 
of temperature, corresponding to and coincident with those of illumi- 
nation, in the interrupted interference-spectrum obtained by the 
methods em]>loyed in their last-mentioned researches ; but the alterna- 
tions of temperature were not confined to the region of the visible 
rays ; they extended into the region of the invisible heat-rays of Sir 
William Herschcl, situated beyond the extreme red. The authors 
established also the diffraction of heat, having succeeded in showing 
that the heat at a point a little outside the geometrical shadow of an 
opaque body with a straight edge, was greater than at such a distance 
from the shadow that the influence of the body was insensible. 

On the 6 th of May, 1 850, M. Foucault communicated to the French 
Academy an account of a highly ingenious and striking experiment 
relating to the velocity of lights. The reflexion and refraction of 
light had long before been explained, both on the theory of emissions 
and on that of undulations. According to both theories, the velocity 
of light within a refracting medium is different from the velocity in 
air ; but according to the theory of emissions it is greater, in the 
ratio of the refractive index to unity, while according to the theory 
of undulations it is less in the inverse ratio. The progress of opti- 
cal science had since been such, that the theory of emissions was 
almost abandoned, while the theory of undulations continually 
gained fresh support from new phenomena. The effect of the in- 
terposition of a thin transparent plate in the path of one of two 
interfering streams, which had been deemed a crucial experhnent, 
was wholly in favour of the theory of undulations* Still, the con- 
clusion was only an optical inference from the observed result ; the 
time of transit of the light did not intervene meclnuiically in the 
experiment. M. Arago bad proposed to employ the revolving inirror 
of Mr. Wheatstone to decide the question mechanically, in d manner 
closely resembling that employed by Mr. Wheatstone in measuring 

* Coxaptes Rendtts, tom. xxx. (1860) p* 601, and Amudes dc Chinde, tom. xli. 

p. m. 



573 


the Telocity of electricity, and had shown by numeric^ calculation 
that with a high velocity of rotation the result would be sensible to 
observation. But the experiment proposed by M. Arago, though 
the execution of it might not have been impossible, would at any 
rate have been liigbly inconvenient for observation, because the 
result depended on the aspect of a momentary image appearing 
casually at an unknown instant in an unknown part of the held of 
view, and it was never carried out. The velocity of light had recently 
been measured directly for the first time by M. Fizeau ; but in this 
cose the observed time was that which light took to travel some 
miles in air. But by a highly ingenious contrivance, in which, by 
the introduction of a concave mirror, he was able to produce a fixed 
image of a revolving image, M. Foucault actually solved experiment- 
ally the question proposed for solution by M. Arago, though in a 
manner totally different from that suggested by that distinguished 
astronomer, and thus proved, for the first time by direct experiment, 
that light is propagated more quickly in air than in water. 

On the 3rd of February, 1851, M. Foucault communicated to the 
French Academy * an experiment which has attracted more public 
attention thati perhaps any other of modem times, namely his cele- 
brated experiment of the pendulum. The phenomena of astronomy 
have long since proved the rotation of the earth ; hut we, living on 
it, are not sensible of that rotation. In one experiment only liad 
the effect of the rotation been manifested, namely in the easterly 
deflection of a body let fall from a great height. But in this case 
the experiment could only be attempted in particular places, and the 
result was ouly a small deflection, which wajf liable to be interfered 
with by a variety of disturbing causes. But M. Foucault showed 
that a pendulum suspended so as to oscillate in all vertical planes 
alike, withdrawn fl^om the vertical, and then left to itself, became by 
the very fact of its motion in some sense a celestial body ; and while 
the plane of motion tended to remain parallel to itself, and would 
actually do so at either pole, the earth turned round under it, and 
thus the plane of motion was affected with an apparent rotation in 
the direction, in our hemisphere, of the hands of a watch, the velo- 
dty of rotation decreasing from one turn in twenty-four hours at the 
pole to zero at the equator, in proportion to the sine of the latitude, 
* Comptei RenduB, tom. xxxii. p. 155. 



574 


and changing sign in passing into the southern hemisphere. This 
experiment, as is well known, had actually been carried out by 
M. Foucault, and has since been repeated by ntimbers of others. 

More recently still, M, Foucault has invented another instrument, 
which he calls a gyroscope, for the experimental demonstration of 
the earth’s rotation. The action of the instrument depends on the 
fixity of the plane of rotation of a disk made to revolve with great 
rapidity about its axis. The instrument is quite small, and may be 
used on a table, but requires great nicety of construction. By 
availing himself of the precessional motion of the axis when the disk 
is acted on by a force tending to turn it about an equatorial axis, 
M. Foucault is able, in consequence of the constmetion of the instru- 
ment, not only to exhibit the earth’s rotation, but also to determine 
experimentally the plane of the meridian and the latitude of ^he 
place. 


M. Foucault, 

I present to you this Medal in testimony of our admiration of 
the skill, ingenuity, and talent displayed in your very remarkable 
experimental researches. 

Your Council have awarded one of the Eoyal Medals for this year 
to Mr. John Russell Hind, Superintendent of the Nautical Almanac, 
for his researclies and discoveries' in Astronomy ; an award, which I 
feel sure will meet the warm concurrence of the Society. 

Mr. Hind commence(| his astronomical labours as assistant to the 
Astronomer Royal, to which office be was appointed in November 
1840. 

Mr. Hind held that situation during four years, and was distin- 
gmshed by his punctuality, attention and zeal; moreover, he devoted 
his leisure hours to the careful reading up of astronomy, both 
pracricai and theoreticaf; thereby familiarizing himself with the 
various methods of observation and reduction, as well as the calculation 
of orbits for comets and double stars. Sis first attempt at positive 
computation was an ephemeris of Bremickeris comet for 1840, which 
Mr. Airy printed in the Greenwich Observations of that year. In 
1844, on being applied to by Mr. George Bishop , -hi Fellow of this 



576 


Societj, BO well known for his attachment to science, and his muni- 
ficence in furthering it, — ^the Astronomer Royal recommended Mr. 
Hind for the practical charge of that gentleman* s private observatory 
in Regent's Park. It is for the observations made for Mr, Bishop, 
that the Council have made their award; and I beg to enumerate the 
principal. 

Mr. Hind has discovered no fewer than ten new planets, and 
computed the (dements of their orbits — first from his own observa- 
tions, and again from those of other astronomers ; and he has greatly 
improved our knowledge of the motions of the other meuibors of the 
planetoidal group, by similar discussions, in each case, of all avail- 
able data. 

He has also discovered three new comets, and assisted greatly in 
procuring multiplied observations of them and of others, by his rapid 
calculation and speedy publication of successive approximations to 
the elements of their orbits ; having thereby enabled many comets 
to be followed up through important portions of their paths, which 
would otherwise have been lost, — as witness the momentous and 
then unique case of his comet of 1847, which was observed at its 
perihelion passage at noonday, and in the immediate proximity 
of the sun, in consequence of the accuracy of Mr. Hind’s computed 
places. 

With the powerful and efficient means thus furnished by Mr. 
Bishop, this assiduous observer has, moreover, discovered two ellip- 
tical nebulae, and a remarkable variable star in Ophiuchus, which, 
when first seen in April 1848, was of the fourth magnitude, and has 
now diminished to the twelfth. He has also noted the variability of 
other stars, including the very remarkable changes in S Cancri, of 
which he published an ephemeris. He has strengthened the evi- 
dence of the existence of a physical connexion between the consti- 
tuents of binary stars ; and — with Mr. Bishop — ^lie has accurately 
mapped and published, for the advantage of astronomers in general, 
all the stars in a large part of the ecliptic region of the sky, down to 
and including the eleventh magnitude. These maps cannot fail to 
be of great utility in promoting the future discovery of planets and 
asteroids ; in fact, of gleaning the heavens in that very interesting 
department. The datejs and names of Mr, Hindis own discoveries 
in it being — 

VOIj. vu. 3 A 



576 


Name$. DaU ^ disc&oery. 

Irifl 1847. August 13. 

Flora 1847. October 18. 

Victoria 1850. September 13. 

Irene 1851. May 19. 

Melpomene . 1852. June 24. 

Fortuna . 1852. August 22. 

Calliope 1852. November 16. 

Thalia 1852. December 15. 

Euterpe 1853. November 8. 

Urania 1854. July 22. 

Mr. Hind, 


Accept this Medal, which the Boyal Society presents to you, by an 
award which every astronomer will heartily confirm ; and I may add 
our best wishes that length of years and renovated health may enable 
your enthusiastic zeal and high talents to render further aid to 
science, to discharge, with ever-augmenting fame, the duties of the 
responsible office which you occupy, and to reap additional honours 
for yourself and country. 

Mr. Westwood, 

I have the pleasure to inform you that the Council of the Royal 
Society have awarded to you one of the Royal Medals, on account of 
your valuable and long-continued researches in Entomology. The 
Council have been led to this decision from the fact that you have 
not confined your attention to any one region of the world, or to any 
one class of insects, — extensive as these classes are, — but have 
grappled with the whole subject. Besides a large amount of system- 
atic work, you have particularly attended to the geaeral principles 
of classification, and to the various kinds of affinity by which all 
organic beings are so curiously connected together ; and in your 
study of different groups of insects you have carefully observed their 
habits, economy, metamorphoses and geographical distribution. 

It is now nearly thirty years since you commenced the long series 
of papers which are well known to naturalists, not only of this 
country, but abroad ; and that your writings have been appreciated 
on the Continent has been shown by their frequent translation. 

Among your earlier labours, it is enough to refer to your well- 



577 


known ' Modern Cliissificatiou of Insects/ in which the whole subject 
is treated in a masterly manner, as has been acknowledged by many 
most competent judges who have since profited by your labours. Of 
your more recent memoirs, which we have especially in view on this 
occasion, I may specify as particularly deserving of attention, those 
on the Cleridse, Lucanidre and Paussidse, published in the Transac- 
tions of the Linncan, Entomological and Zoological Societies, your 
monographs on several Carabidous genera in Gu<5rin's ‘ Revue Zoolo- 
gique,* your contributions to Fossil Entomology in the Jounial of 
the Geological Society, atid the completion of the great work in folio 
commenced by Mr. Doublcday on the genera of the Diurnal Lepi- 
doptera. Nor can I quite pass over your archajological researches, 
though these are not connected with the objects of this Society. 

Mk. Westwood, — Tliis Medal is presented to you in token of 
the interest which we take in your entomological researches, which 
reflect so much honour on your talents ami zeal. 


Obituary notices of deceased Fellows. 

Da. Maktin Bakry was born at Fratton, in Hampshire, on tlxe 28th 
of March, 1 802, Though originally designed for a mercantile career, 
his strong bent for scientific pursuits led to his embracing the medical 
profession, for which he studied in the Universities of Edinburgh, 
Paris, Erlangen, Heidelberg, and Berlin, as well as in some of the 
medical schools of London. He became a member of the Royal 
College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, and graduated as M.D, in the 
University of that city in *1833. During the period of his student- 
ship he took an active part in the Medical, Royal Physical, and 
Wernerian Societies of Edinburgh, of which he was a member, and 
he was subsequently elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edin- 
burgh. His love of fine natural scenery, and pursuit of botany and 
geology, led him to devote his college vacations usually to excur- 
sions in the mountain and lake districts of Scotland ; and, after a 
session of study at Heidelberg in 1834, he spent the autumn of that 
year in a pedestrian tour through part of Switzerland. 

In the course of these wanderings he arrived at Chamouni on the 

3b2 



678 


15th of September, and, although it waa then later in the season than 
any successful ascent of Mont Blanc had been achieved, Dr. Barry 
resolved upon the enterprise, and accomplished it with safety to him- 
self and his guides. His was the sixteenth ascent that had been 
made : it occupied three days, owing to the unusual obstacles which 
the snow at that season presented ; but the Doctor was rewarded by 
a magnificent view from the summit, and by weatlier so remarkably 
fine that during the whole time he did not see a single cloud.” In 
March 1836, Dr. Barry published an account of this ascent, which 
formed the subject of two Lectures delivered by him in Edinburgh, 
the proceeds of which he presented to the Royal Infirmary of that city. 
Baron Humboldt so highly esteemed the narrative and its author, that 
he personally requested Dr. Barry to translate from the German his 
(the Baron’s) “ Two attempts to ascend Chimborazo.” This transla- 
tion appeared in the Edinburgh New Philosophical Journal. 183^. 

The difficult and recondite subject of animal development and 
embryology early attracted the young physician's attention, and he 
made himself intimately acquainted not only with the literature of 
that department of physiology, but with the eminent authors of the 
most valued works and treatises on those subjects. In the museums 
and laboratories of Professors Wagner, Purkinje, Valentin, and 
Schwann, Dr. Barry acquired that skill in microscopical investiga- 
tions of which he subsequently made such excellent use. 

He published a translation of the first part of ‘Valentin's Manual 
of the History of Development,' in the Edinburgh Medical and Sur- 
gical Journal for 1836. From that period to 1840 he devoted him- 
self exclusively to original researches on the development of the 
mammalian ovum and embryo, which at the time when he took up 
the subject was the darkest part of emhryological science. The 
results of these researches were communicated to the Royal Society 
of London in three successive memoirs, entitled “Researches in 
Embryology.” The ‘ First Series’ was printed in the Philosophical 
Transactions for 1838 ; the ‘ Second Series' in the volume for 1839 ; 
the ’ Third Series.’ entitled ** A Contribution to the Physiology of 
Cells,” in that for 1 840. In the same year Dr. Barry communicated 
a memoir ** On the Corpuscles of the Blood,” printed in the Philo- 
sophical Transactions for 1840. llie Philosophical Transactions 
for 1841 contain his memoirs ’’On the Formation of the Chorion,” 



579 


On the Chorda dorsalis/* and two supplementary memoirs " On 
the Corpuscles of the Blood.*’ The volume of the Transactions 
for 1842 contains his memoir "On Fibre/* and that for 1843 his 
capital discovery of the " Spermatozoa found tvithin the Ovum.” 

These Researches in Embryology contain a comprehensive, well- 
selected and well-conducted series of original experiments and obser- 
vations on the formation and earlier stages of development of the 
ovum in the Rabbit and Dog, and in examples of the oviparous verte- 
brate classes from the bird to the fish. In the ftrst series the author 
determined the order of formation of the dilFereut parts of the ovum, 
and the nature and mode of development of the vesicle called 
* ovisac,* in which those processes take place. He made known the 
nature and traced the development of the so-called " disc of Von 
Baer,** and detected in it a peculiar mechanism (retinacula) which 
he supposed mainly to regulate the transit of the ovum into the 
Fallopian tube. In the second series Dr, Barry traced the 
changes which the ovum undergoes in its passage through the Fal- 
lopian tube ; the earliest and most interesting stages of mammalian 
development being for the first time described in this memoir. The 
important discovery of the segmentation of the yelk of the mamma- 
lian ovum is communicated in this memoir (1839), in which he first 
extended to that class the observation of a phenomenon which had 
previously been known only in the Batracbia. Dr. Barry*8 discovery 
made on the ovum of the Rabbit, was subsequently confirmed by 
Prof, BischofF, in the ovum of the Dog and Guinea pig. 

Another most important observation, communicated by Dr. Barry 
to the Royal Society, in his Third Series, 1840, of the penetration 
by the spermatozoon of the ovum in the Rabbit, by an aperture in 
the zona pellucida, was of so minute and difiicult a kind that it did 
not at once command assent. In 1843, Dr. Barry, however, pub- 
Mshed a confirmatory observation, which he had then made, of 
spermatozoa within the ovum of the Rabbit, taken from the Fallo- 
pian tube and in process of segmentation. 

lliese statements at first met with positive denial by Professor 
BischofF, who bad failed in hia attempts to repeat Dr, Barry's obser- 
vations : and it was not until nine years afterwards that tlie observa- 
tions of Dr. Nelson, on the impregnation of the A$caris 
* Phlloflopbicsl TrsnssstionBi 1851. 



580 


gave a corroboration of the fact of the penetration of the ovum by the 
spermatozoa. Mr. Newport next discovered the s}>erraatozoa within 
the ovum of the Frog. Meissner soon after confirmed the fact that 
the spermatozoon penetrates the interior of the ovum of the Rabbit ; 
and, finally. Prof. BischofF 'satisfied himself of the truth of Dr. Barry's 
discovery, which he had been the first to call in question. 

Dr. Martin Barry was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of 
London on the 1 3th of February, 1840, and so highly were his com- 
munications esteemed by the Society, that the Royal Medal was 
awarded to him, November 30th, 1839- 

Dr. Barry's embryological researches were followed by observa- 
tions on the formation and changes of the primitive cells in the 
origin and growth of the tissues of the animal body, and he arrived 
at new and important conclusions on the importance and functions 
of the cell-nucleus. 

In his memoir On Fibre," Dr. Barry first promulgated Ids views 
as to the ultimate spiral structure of the muscular fibre ; and he 
subsequently extended the same views to most of the tissues of orga- 
nized bodies. These opinions have not been confirmed or accepted 
by histologists ; although Dr. Barry had latterly the satisfaction of 
citing a few microscopical observations of eminent botanists which 
seemed to lend support to certain applications of his favourite idea. 
'* Now that he is no more,” writes an eminent physiologist, it 
will be more pleasing to endeavour to extract that which was good 
and true in his works, rather than discuss their doubtful and con- 
tested points.” And Professor Allen Thomson, in the same biogra- 
phical sketch, writes, ** It cannot be doubted that Dr. Barry's 
researches as a whole gave a decided impulse to the progress of 
knowledge in the departments of which they treat, partly by the 
actual contribution of new and valuable facts, and partly by the 
ingenuity of his speculative views, the vigour with which they were 
supported, and the discussions to which they gave rise.” 

Dr. Barry's latest contributions to science were chiefly notices 
and comments on the observations of other histologists and physio- 
logists, which appeared to confirm or countenance his views of the 
cell-nucleus, the primitive fibre, and the penetration of the zona 
pellucida by the spermatozoon. The last few months of his life 
were employed in a review of hU microscopic observations, and in 



581 


forming, at the request of foreign physiologists, an abstract of 
them, to be published in Germany. Some portion of this work 
occupied his last hours, and he appeared to have a satisfaction in 
having done with it, as one leaving the world 

The private circumstances of Dr. Martin Barry were such as 
enabled him to dispense with the pursuit of the practice of his 
profession as a means of support. The proportion of his time so 
saved was devoted to the poor, and chiefly in connexion with some 
public institution. In the year 1844, after the publication of his 
most original and important observations, and after receiving the 
high testimonial of the Boyal Medal from the Royal Society of 
London, he accepted the office of House-surgeon to the Royal Ma- 
ternity Hospital in Edinburgh ; and Professor Simpson, the director 
of the institution, speaks of Dr. M. Barry as our invaluable 
house-surgeon, and a gentleman to whose talents, zeal, and hu- 
manity the hospital is deeply indebted for its prosperity.** Dr. M. 
Barry reared up diligent students, notwithstanding the harassing 
nature of the duties of a midwifery pupil; and his kindness, 
promptness, and unweariedness in rendering aid to the poor dis- 
tressed parturient females in Edinburgh have made his name still 
gratefully remembered amongst them. 

From 1849 to 1853, Dr. Barry*8 health, and especially his eye- 
sight, having become affected by his close and persevering studies, 
he was induced to return to the continent, and resided successively 
at Gottingen, Giessen, Breslau, and Prague. At the latter city he 
resumed his microscopic studies of muscular fibre, with the co- 
operation of his friend Professor Purkinje ; and the result of their 
combined researches is given in Muller's Arcliives for 1850, and in 
a translated abstract in the Philosophical Journal for August 1852. 

In that year he revisited Scotland, and resided occasionally in 
Arran, Rothesay, and Edinburgh. His friends deeply grieved to 
witness, in his emaciated frame, the evidence of progressive malady. 
He suffered much from neuralgic pains, being deprived, therefrom, 
of rest for nights in succession. In the autumn of 1853 he finally 
took up his abode at Beccles, SufiFolk, near his brother-in-law. 
Dr. Dashwood, who married Dr, Barry’s only sister, Sootlied and 
sustained by the devoted attention of his affectionate relatives, he 
Biographical Memoir in the Bdin. Med. Journal. 



582 


lingered, with intellect unimpaired, and power of labour little 
abated, until the 27th of April, 1855. On that day, in the imme- 
diate prospect of death, he said, All is peace ; ** then added, even 
now ; and soon afterwards passed away, full of a Christian’s hope. 

Sia Henry Thomas Dk la Becbk, C.B., F.R.S.. F.G.S., Corr. 
Memb, of the Academy of Sciences of Paris, &c. &c., was bom in 
London, February 10, 1796, married in 1818, received knighthood 
in 1842, was nominated C.B. in 1848, and died April 13. 1855. 
His education was conducted partly at home, partly at Keynsham and 
Ottery St. Mary, till in 1810 or 181 1 he went to the Military College 
at Marlow. In 1817 he became F.G.S., and was admitted F.R.S. 
in 1819. From this epoch the prevalent bias of his mind toward 
Natural Science was manifested in a long series of valuable contribu- 
tions to Geology, for the most part founded on personal research in 
districts to which he was ever partial, attached by early associations 
or allured by the instincts of an artist. 

The southern coasts of England and Wales offered to the young 
and zealous student a series of interesting phenomena, at that time 
little explored, — rocks of sedimentary origin, exhibited in unusual 
circumstances; an uncommon variety of granites, greenstones, 
porphyries, and other rocks of fusion ; singular complications of 
mineral veins, modem land-slips, ancient upheavings of strata, 
and undescribed organic remains. To all of these De la Beche 
brought a mind prepared ; they became for him the main object of 
his observation and meditation; he returned to them again and 
again, fortified by the experience gathered in other parts of the 
world, and supported by the scientific alliance and strong personal 
regard of Buckland and Conybeare. Here was the centre of his 
field of inquiry, here his scientific life began, here he earned his fame, 
and it was while meditating and directing new labours in this 
favourite region, that he sunk to his long repose. 

llie following are some of his publications on the subjects alluded 
to : — 

1819. The Rocks and Fossils of Devon. Geol. Trans. 

1823.^ On the Geology of the South-East of England, from Bridport 
Harbour to Babbaoombe Bay. 

On the Discovery of an Elephant’s Tusk near Charmouth. Geol. 
Trans. 2iid s^, i. 421. 



5^ 


1825. On the Geology of Southern Pembrokeshire. Gcol. TrAus. 2ttd 

ser. ii. 1. 

On the Litts of the Coast in the vicinity of Lyme Regis. Geol. 

Trans. 2nd ser. ii. 21. 

On a Submarine Forest at Charmouth. Ann. Phil. xi. p. 143. 

1826. On the Chalk and Sands beneath it in the vicinity of Lyme Regis 

and Beer. Geol. Trans. 2nd ser. ii. 109. 

1827- On the Geology of Tor and .Babbacoinbe Bays. Gcol. Trans. 

2nd ser. iii. 161. 

1H.30. On the Geology of Weymouth (in conjunction with the Rev. Dr. 

Buokland). Gcol. Trans. 2nd ser. iv. 1. 

1834. On the Anthracite near Bideford. Proc. Geol. Sot*, ii. 106, 

1835. On the IVappean Rocks associated vrith the New Red Sandstone 

of Devonshire. Proc. Geol. Soe. ii. 196. 

On Fossils from the Schistose Rocks of the North of Cornwall. 

Proc. Gcol. Soc. ii. 22.5. 

1836. Lettre sur la decouverte d’Braprerates de Plantes dans les Schistes 

subordonn^s de la Grauwack^. Bull. Geol. Soc. Fr. vi. 90. 

1839. Report on the Geology of Cornwall, Devon, and West Somerset. 

8vo, 

1846. On the P'ormation of the Rocks of South Wales and South- 

Western England. Mem. Geol. Surv. i. p. 1. 

On the Connexion between Geology and Agrienlture in Cornwall, 

Devon, and West Somerset. Joum. Agr. Soc. Eng. iii. 21. 

The natural history of the same region had other charms for the 
enterprising spirit of De la Bechc. To dredge the sea, to gather 
the living wonders of the deep, suited the bold swimmer and skilful 
boatman ; to examine the structure and habits of marine creatures 
was not less congenial to the microscopic observer and the accurate 
and forcible artist. The “ Notes on the Habits of a Caryophyllia from 
Torquay (Zool. Joum. 1828), and the ** Catalogue of the Birds and 
Mollusca in the vicinity of Geneva,” are indeed all that remain to 
mark the strong interest felt by De la Beche in recent Natural 
History ; but they who have accompanied him over miles of land 
and sea know well the untiring delight with which, even in later 
life, he would scrutinize the isochronous movements of Rhizostoma,-*- 
thc varying hues of Octopus, — the sensibility to light of the Bryozoa, 
— how sharp his attention to the peculiar instincts of the animal 
creation. 

To such a mind came easily and naturally the inquiry into the 
osteological relations of the huge fossil reptilia, so long known, but 
so little understood by the collectors of fossils at Bath, Glastonbury 



584 


and Lyme Regia, — an inquiry which in the hands of Conybeare and 
De la Beche gave ua the Pleaiosaurus, that singular link between 
Ichthyosaurus and Crocodile.” (Geol. Trans. 1823, 1 ser. v.) 

Love of scenery and ill-health induced him to prolonged residence 
abroad, and in 1819 and subsequent years we find him mapping 
and sounding the lake of Geneva — in 1 823, tracing the geology of 
the north coast of France, examining the fossil plants of the Col de 
Balme — in 1824, 1825, exploring the geology of Jamaica, where 
lay his paternal estates — in 1828 and 1830, reporting on the geology 
of Nice and the Gulf of La Spezia. 

In the midst of all his pleasant labour, De la Beche found time to 
prepare selections from the valuable memoirs in the Ann. des Mines 
(1824); 'A Tabular View of the Classification of Rocks' (1827) ; 
'Geological Notes ' (1830) ; ‘Sections and Views of Geological 
Phenomena ' (1830) ; ‘A Geological Manual ’ (1831) ; ‘ Researches 
in Theoretical Geology ' (1834) ; ‘ How to Observe ' (1835) ; ' The 
Geological Observer' (1851). He officiated as Secretary of the 
Geological Society (1831), as Foreign Secretary from 1835 to 1846, 
and 08 President, 1848 and 1849. He was appointed Corresponding 
Member of the Academy of Sciences in 1853. 

But the most important results of the labours of this eminent 
observer are contained in those valuable Geological Maps of the 
British Isles, which have been prepared partly by his hands, but 
entirely by lus direction. 

That which had been vainly solicited by the interests of agricul- 
ture in 1805, was conceded to the urgency of geology in 1832 ; the 
' Ordnance Geological Survey' was begun, with De la Beche for its 
head or rather only officer, in the mining districts of Devon and 
Cornwall. From this epoch began a new era of British Geology, 
characterized by a minuteness of field surveying previously unknown, 
by exact measurements of the thickness and inclitiation of strata, 
by published maps and sections of unequalled truth and beauty. 
De la Beebe's maps of the great western district, — one of the most 
difficult tracts in Britain for the geological surveyor, — appeared 
with a valuable explanatory report in 1839. In the map which 
accompanies the volume, the older strata of North and South Devon 
ore called * Grauwacke.' I’heir true relation to the old red sand* 
stone groups, suggested by Lonsdale, Murchison, and Sedgwick, 



585 


wa» adopted in 1840 by the Director of the Survey, and made the 
subject of a separate volume drawn up by one of hU friends. 

From Cornwall and Devon the * Ordnance Geological Survey' 
was transferred to South Wales, and before the close of 1841, the 
Director, with his staff of geologists, had measured the Palseozoic 
strata in all the cliffs of Pembrokeshire, and constructed maps ex- 
tending from St. Bride’s Bay to the sources of the Usk. In this 
large area the problem of the succession of strata has a different 
aspect from that which is presented in the eastern and northern 
parts of the Principality, and the distribution of ancient life offers 
many points for inquiry. These phenomena were discussed in the 
early memoirs of the Geological Survey, after an opportunity had 
been afforded of comparing them in detail with the typical Silurian 
tracts of Malvern and Ludlow, rendered famous by the earlier 
labours of Murchison. 

Those who at this time shared the society of Sir Henry De la 
Beche in the field, experienced an enjoyment of no common de- 
scription. Ill-health, the cares of office, anxieties of every kind, 
were swept away by the mountain wind, or forgotten amidst the 
glancing waves ; every day brought new facts to an indefatigable 
observer, new scenes of beauty to an enthusiast in art, new occa- 
sions for profound reflection, sagacious inference, and practical 
instruction to his young companions. In after-years the Survey 
became too extended to admit of the same personal superintendence 
in every port. Separated from the 'Ordnance Survey' in 1845, it 
assumed the shape of a department, received local Directors for 
England and Ireland, an augmented staff, laboratory, lecture-room, 
and museum in London. 

Over all this large establishment, the realization of his own plan. 
Sir H. T, De la Beche presided with the unflagging resolution which 
hod brought it into being, — presided, indeed, too long. The strength 
which grew under the hammer, and rejoiced in long days of wan- 
dering over rocky hills, faded away among the official niceties and 
impediments of his great office ; but he clung to his self-destroying 
work, and had before his death the satisfaction of seeing in full 
operation that Mining School, that Palssontological Museum, that 
systematic field geology, and professional teaching in pracdcal 
science which he had kept steadily in prospect for twenty years. 



586 


In Sir Henry De la Beche, an active, prudent, and successful 
administrator has been withdrawn from the public service ; but a 

s 

far heavier loss is deplored in that branch of science in which he 
won his renown, and whose foremost cultivators were his friends, 
fellow-labourers, and disciples. 

Mr. Bryan Donkin was born at Sandoe, Northumberland, on 
the 22nd of March, 1768. His taste for science and mechanics soon 
showed itself; and he was, almost as a child, continually to be 
found in his little workshop, making thermometers and ingenious 
contrivances connected with machinery of all kinds. This mechani- 
cal turn of mind was ultimately encouraged by his father, who was 
agent for the Errington and other estates, and who had formed the 
acquaintance of John Smeaton, the eminent engineer, from having 
frequent occasion to consult him on questions relating to the 
bridges and other works on the Tyne. 

On leaving home, the son began life in the same business as his 
father, being engaged for a year or two as Land Agent to the 
Duke of Dorset at Knowle Park, Kent. Soon, however, the bent of 
his genius showed itself, by his leaving the Duke's agency, and 
going to consult Mr. Smeaton as to the best course to pursue to 
become an engineer. By Smeaton's recommendation, he ap- 
prenticed himself to Mr. Hall, of Dartford, and was soon able to 
take an active part in Mr, HalPs works; so that, in 1801-2, he 
was entrusted principally with the construction of a model of the 
first machine for making paper, the execution of which had been 
put into Mr. Hall's hands by the Messrs. Fourdrinicr. 

The idea of this machine originated with Mr. Roberts, and formed 
the subject of a patent obtained by Mr. Gamble, which was assigned 
to Messrs. Bloxam and Fourdrinier. After some time had been 
spent and considerable expense incurred, many attempts were mode 
to set the model to work, but in none of these trials was any paper 
produced fit for sole. 

The model remained at Mr. Hall’s works until 1802, when Mr, 
Donkin agreed with Messrs. Bloxam and Fourdrinier to take the 
matter in hand ; and, having taken premises at Bermondsey (still 
occupied by his sons), he made a machine, and erected it, in 1 804, 
at Frogmore, Herts. On putting this machine to work, it was found 



687 


succeasfuU but yet far from perfect. A second machine was made 
by Mr. Donkin, and erected, in 1805, at Twowaters, Herts, in which 
ho introduced further improvements, although much still remained 
to be done. However, in 1810, eighteen of these complex machines 
had been erected at various mills, some of which are even now at 
work ; and, at this period, having overcome the practical diHiculties, 
Mr. Donkin erected in this, and various foreign countries, many si- 
milar machines, which rapidly superseded tlie method of making paper 
by hand. Thus for eight years Mr. Donkin gave his time and skill 
almost wholly to this one object ; and his perseverance was crowned 
with signal success ; for, although the original idea was not his, 
the credit of its entire practical development is due to Mr. Donkin. 

The paper machine, of which at this time about two hundred 
have been made and erected by Mr. Donkin and his sons, ranks 
amongst the most useful and complete of mechanical contri- 
vances ; carrying the process uninterruptedly from the liquid pulp 
to the perfect sheet of paper, ready for writing or printing. The 
merit of these and of the later improvements introduced by the 
Messrs. Donkin was recognized by the award of the Council Medal 
at the Great Exhibition of 1851. 

Mr. Donkin was also one of the earliest to introduce improve- 
ments in printing machinery. In 1813, he, in conjunction with 
Mr, Bacon, secured a patent for his Polygonal printing machine ; 
and one was erected for the Cambridge University. It was then also 
he invented and first used the composition printing-rollers, by which 
some of the greatest difficulties hitherto experienced in printing by 
machines were overcome. 

Mr. Kmnig and Mr. Cowper both used these rollers in their 
patent printing-machines, with Mr. Donkin's permission, which 
must be considered an act of the greatest liberality, since without 
these rollers no such machine can work. With the Polygonal ma- 
chine, from 800 to 1000 impressions were produced per hour; but it 
never came into extensive use, as the construction was expensive, 
while the work produced was of a quality beyond that required in 
machine printing. 

Mr. Donkin was also much engaged with Sir William Congreve, 
in 1820* in contriving a method of printing stamps in two colours, 
with compound plates, for the prevention of forgery ; and, with the 



58B 


aid of Mr, Wilks, who was then his partner, he produced the beau- 
tiful machine now used at the Excise and Stamp Offices, and by the 
East India Company at Calcutta. 

Amongst the many inventions and ingenious processes in the pro- 
motion of which Mr. Donkin materially assisted, was the method of 
preserving meats and vegetables in air-tight cases. His attention 
was caUed to this subject in the year 1812, when he established a 
considerable manufactory for this pur|)ose in Bermondsey. The in- 
troduction of this process has been of great public benefit ; and on 
long sea voyages meat preserved in this way has become a necessary 
part of the stores of every well-appointed vessel. 

Mr. Donkin was an early member of the Society of Arts, of 
which he was one of the Vice-Presidents ; and as Chairman of the 
Committee of Mechanics, an office he held for many years, the 
soundness of his judgment and the urbanity of his manners made 
him much esteemed and beloved. He received two gold medals 
from the Society; one for his invention of an instrument to 
measure the velocity of rotation of machinery, the other for his 
admirable counting engine. 

Although our space will not allow us to notice the various other 
inventions and improvements in machinery due to Mr. Donkin, we 
cannot pass over in silence his exquisite dividing and screw-cutting 
engine. 

Mr. Donkin was much engaged during the lost forty years of his 
life as a civil engineer, and was one of the originators and a Vice- 
President of the Institution of Civil Engineers, which was founded 
by one of his pupils, Mr. Henry Palmer, with a few other gentle- 
men ; and Mr. Telford with Mr. Donkin obtained the Royal Charter 
for that body. In 1838 he was elected a Fellow of .the Royal 
Society, and repeatedly served on the Council. He was also a 
member x)f the Royal Astronomical Society, and was held in such 
esteem by that body, that they placed him in the Chair on the occasion 
of receiving their Charter. He had, moreover, a small observatory 
in his garden, where he spent much of his leisure time ; and it was 
to his own transit that he first applied his novel and beautiful 
level. 

For many years Mr. Donkin was a magistrate for the county of 
Surrey, and, up to within a short time of his death, was very 



m 


regular and aeaiduouB in the discharge of his duties. His life was 
one uninterrupted course of usefulness and good puriiose ; and he 
died on the 27th of February, 1855, after enjoying that general 
esteem and resi)ect which render old age serene and happy* 

It is now more than sixty years since Charles Frederic Gauss, a 
young student resident in the city of Brunswick, hit upon an import- 
ant theorem in the theory of numbers. His father was a brick- 
layer in very humble circumstances, who was anxious that his son 
should follow his own occupation ; but the extraordinary capacity 
of the boy, at that time attending the National School, had attracted 
the attention of Bartels, afterwards Professor at Dorpat and the 
father-in-law of the great Astronomer Struve ; and it was upon his 
recommendation that the reigning Duke, in spite of the opposition 
of the father, provided him with the means of a good classical edu- 
cation, by sending him to the Collegium Carolinum, and by many 
subsequent acts of kindness and patronage. The proposition which 
he had discovered, appeared to its author to be one of no ordinary 
beauty ; and as he conjectured that it was connected with others of 
still greater value and generality, he applied-^aa he himself assures 
us — all the powers of his mind to find out the principles upon which 
it rested and to establish its truth by a rigid demonstration. 
Having fully succeeded in this object, he felt himself so completely 
fascinated by this class of researches, that he found it impossible to 
abandon them, and he was thus conducted from one truth to another, 
until he had finished the greatest part of the first and most original, if 
not the greatest, of his works, before he had read the writings of any 
of his precursors in this department of science, n\pre especially those 
of Euler and La Grange. The subsequent study of the arithmetical 
researches of these great masters of analysis could hardly fail to expose 
him to the mortification which young men of premature and creative 
genius have so often experienced, of finding that they have been anti- 
cipated in some of their finest speculations. So far, however, from 
being repelled by this discovery, " I became,’* says he, animated with 
fresh ardour, and by treading in their footsteps, 1 felt fortified in my 
resolution to push forward the boundaries of this wide department of 
science." The crowning result of his labours was, as is well known, 
the complete solution of binomial equations, and a most unexpected 



590 


extension of the limits within which the geometrical division of the 
circle had hitherto been confined ; a discovery sufficiently memorable 
to form a great epoch in the history of the progress of geometry and 
analysis* and to place its author, in the estimation of the few persons 
who would appreciate its value, in the highest rank of the mathe- 
maticians of his age. 

In dedicating his ' Disquisitiones Arithmeticce* to the Duke of 
Brunswick, he acknowledges in very touching terms the wise and 
liberal patronage which had not only provided for the expenses of 
publishing his work, but also enabled him to exchange permanently 
the humble pursuits of trade for those of science, llie work itself, 
as its author assures us, assumed many changes of form in its pro- 
gress to maturity, as new views presented themselves from time to 
time to his mind ; but, as is well known, the course which is fol- 
lowed in the invention of new truths is rarely that which is most 
favourable to clearness in their exposition, more especially when it 
has been pursued in solitude, with little communication with other 
minds ; whilst the peculiar terminology which he has employed in 
the classification of numbers and their relations, and which is so 
completely embodied in the enunciation and demonstration of nearly 
every proposition that it can never be absent from the mind of the 
reader, renders the study of this work so laborious and embarrassing, 
that few persons have ever mastered its contents. Even Legendre, 
who had written so much and so successfully on the same subject, 
and who, in the second edition of his ' Thdorie des Nombres/ makes 
the great discovery which this work contains the occasion not merely 
of special investigation but of the most emphatic praise, complains of 
the great difficulty of adapting its forms of exposition to his own i 
whilst the writers of the * Biographie des Contemporains,' in a 
notice of the author at a much later period, when be had established 
many other and almost equally unquestionable claims to immortality, 
quote an extract from a Report of a Commission of the Institute of 
Prance, to whom it was referred in 1810 , in which it is said, that 
it was impossible for them to give an idea of this work, inasmuch as 
everything in it is new, and surpasses our comprehension even in its 
language/' The biographers then proceed to stigmatize the book 
as full of puerilities, and refer to the success which it had obtained, 
including its translation into two languages, as affording grounds 



691 


for the presumption that ** charlatanism sometimes extended even to 
the domain of the mathematics/* 

The first day of the present century was signalized by the discovery 
of the planet Ceres at Palermo, and before the first observations of 
the discoverer — only two in number — hid been made known to astro- 
nomers, the planet had cetised to be observable from her proximity 
to the sun. The planet Uranus had been discovered twenty years 
before, when near opposition ; this was a critical position, which at 
once gave a near approximation to the elements of his orbit : a sta- 
tionary elongation of Ceres, though less fertile in its results, was 
sufficient to assign her such a place between Mars and Jupiter as was 
required to satisfy Bode’s singular law, the recent announcement of 
which had already stimulated an enthusiastic band of German astro- 
nomers to commence a systematic search for the planet, which Kepler 
had found wanting for the fulfilmeixt of one of that series of cosmical 
speculations which had guided him to the discovery of his laws. The 
complete determination, however, of the elements of a planet’s orbit 
from three geocentric longitudes and latitudes — or from four of the 
first and two of the second in those cases where the latitudes are 
evanescent or small — was still therefore a new problem which had 
only been completely solved in the cose of comets moving in para- 
bolic orbits, and which Newton, to whom its first solution was due, 
bad pronounced to be problema omnium loupe dijicillimum. 

It was not until the month of October following the discovery of 
Ceres, that Gauss came into possession of the requisite observations, 
and in the course of a few weeks he had determined the elements of 
her orbit with an accuracy fully commensurate with the observations ; 
so much BO, indeed, that the Baron de Zach was enabled to rediscover 
the planet at the very first attempt which he made for that purpose 
on the 7th of December following. The elements of Pallas, Juno, 
and Vesta, the discovery of which followed that of Ceres at no great 
distance of time, were promptly determined by methods substantially 
the same, but materially improved by new artifices and adaptations 
of formulae which an enlarged study and application had enabled him 
to give them. 

The ** Theoria motuum corporum coelestium in conicis sectionibus 
circa solem ambientium/* which contains not only the exposition of 
these methods and their detailed exemplifications, but a moat elabo- 
' vot. vn. 8 F 



592 


rate discussion of the various problems ’which present themselves in 
the determination of the movements of planets and comets from ob- 
servations made on them under any circumstaiujes, was not published 
before 1809. Gauss was not usually very prompt in making public 
his researches, but retained fhem in his own hands until, by repeated 
correction and examination, they had assumed a form which satisfied 
his own judgment of what was equally due to the requirements of 
science and his own honour ; and the work of which we are now 
speaking exhibits, in n very remarkable degree, the effects of this 
severe system of revision, in the skilful adaptation and reduction of 
methods and formulae, and in the careful estiraflte of the circum- 
stances under which they may be most advantageously employed. 
We find in it no evasion of difficulties, and no resort to methods of 
approximation only, when the means of accurate determination are 
at hand. His aim was in every instance to obtain results of the 
same order of correctness with the observations upon which they were 
founded ; and with a view of securing the full benefit of observations 
which furnish, as is usual in astronomy, data more numerous than 
the unknown elements which they are required to determine, he has 
given in the work which we are now considering the first completely 
developed theory^* of the method of lea$t squares, more especially as 
ai)plicable to astronomy, and of the means of estimating the degree 
or measure of precision which its application affords ; and though he 
was anticipated in the publication of this method l)y Legendre, there 
is every retison to believe that it was -with him an original discovery j 
for he is said to have been in possession of it as early as 1795. No 
other work in later times has contributed so much as this to the 
complete and scientific discussion of astronomical observations ; and 
its infiuence is traceable in the form which those discussions have 
assumed in the writings of Bessel, Hansen, Struve, Encke, and other 
eminent astronomers, which have done so much honour to Germany. 

It would be impossible in the brief space allowed for this notice to 
pass in review Gauss's various essays on subjects of pure and applied 
mathematics — some of them of great importance^ which were gene- 
rally communicated to the Royal Society of Gottingen, though most 
of them were separately published : amongst them we find two de- 
monstrations of the resolvability of equations with rational terms 
into simple or quadfatio factors ; others on magic squares ; on qua- 



593 


dratic residuals ; on a new method of determining integrals by ap- 
proximation founded on Newton's method for that purpose ; on the 
theory of curve surfaces ; on the theory of capillary attraction, and 
on various subjects in dioptrics and astronomy : there is one memoir 
of more than common interest^ devoted to the demonstration of a 
very remarkable proposition in the planetary theory, which is, that 
the secular variations which the elements of the orbit of a planet 
would experience from another planet which disturbs it, are the 
same as if the mass of the disturbing planet were distributed into an 
elliptic ring coincident with its orbit, in such a manner that equal 
masses of the ring would correspond to portions of the orbit described 
in equal times. 

It was in the course of this last investigation that he arrived at 
some elliptic integrals, the evaluation of which he was enabled to 
effect by means of a transformation which is included in one of the 
series of transformations, the discovery of which will immortalize the 
name of Jacobi, It has been said — though we do not vouch for the 
truth of the anecdote— that this distinguished analyst was induced 
by his knowledge of this fact to seek — after his own discoveries 
were completed — an interview with the great mathematician who 
had thus intruded, prematurely as it were, into one of the deepest 
recesses of his own province ; Jacobi submitted his various theorems 
to his inspection, and was met. as they successively appeared, by 
others of corresponding character and import produced from his 
manuscript stores, concluding with an intimation that there were 
still many more in reserve. Such an anticipation of discoveries, 
which totally changed the aspect of this difficult department of 
analysis, even if it had been as complete as it is here represented to 
have been, would have been no derogation of the rights which 
Jacobi has undeniably secured by priority of publication ; but the 
wide circulation which has been given to this story, as well as our 
own knowledge of Gauss's habitual delay in the publication of his 
researches, have tended not a little to increase our anxiety to be put 
in possession of the various scientifio treasures which he is said to 
have left behind him. It is to Lejeune Dirichlet that this task lias 
been entrusted, and there are few living analysts so likely to perform 
it satisfactorily. 

We now enter upon the last, and perhaps the moat considerable 

3 F 2 



594 


of Gauss's researches, which are contained in his various essays, 
both theoretical and practical, dn the magnetism of the earth. 

Of the three magnetic elements, the declination, the dip, and the 
intensity, the two first were formerly the almost exclusive objects 
of observation, thongli tlie methods which were employed for that 
purpose were generally too rude for the requirements of accurate 
science; but the third, or magnetic intensity, of which no use had 
been made in the business of navigation, was entirely neglected. 

Humboldt first called the attention of j)hiloeopliers to the great 
theoretical importance of this element, and he omitted no oppor- 
tunity, in the course of his travels, of determining its value. 

It w'as during his Arctic voyages that the attention of Colonel 
Sabine had been forcibly called to the consideration of this subject 
by the remarkable magnetical phenomena v)b served when approach- 
ing the magnetic pole ; and it was principally due to his influence and 
example, and to the labours of Hansteen, Erman, and other eminent 
travellers and navigators, that observations of the intensity were 
rapidly multiplied in every part of the globe, and more especially 
in Siberia, which had been generally believed to be the site of a 
second northern magnetic pole. These observations, 753 in num* 
her, in 670 different localities, were collected, arranged, and dis- 
cussed in an admirable report which was made by Colonel Sabina 
to the British Association in 1837; and it is not one of the least 
of the many claims of its author upon the gratitude of men of 
science, more especially in connexion with magnetic researches, 
that it not only suggested to Gauss — as he himself declares^ — his bold 
attempt to grapple with the general theory of terrestrial magnetism, 
but furnished him with the materials for testing the applicability at 
least, if not for eetabliahing the truth, of the theory which he 
proposed. 

The observations of the terrestrial intensity which had hitherto 
been made were comparative only, and it was with a view of con- 
verting such comparative into absolute measures, with reference to 
determinate units, that Gauss undertook the scries of investigations 
which arc recorded in his memoir, entitled Intensitas vis magneticas 
terrestris ad mensuram absolutam revocata,'* which was published in 
1 832. He was assisted in these experiments, as in all others that he 
made, by Weber, a philosopher who is well known by his “ Wellen- 



595 


lehre,” written in conjunction with his brother, aa well as by many 
other works of his own, but who felt that he was honoured by the 
privilege of combining his labours with those of so great a master. 
The units of reference which were chosen by Gauss were the milli- 
metre in length, the milligramme in weight, and the second in 
time : and the liorizontal intensity at Gottingen, in terms of these 
units, was found to be 1'7625, which gives, assuming a dip of G8^ 
a total intensity represented by 4*7414* 

It followed, as another consequence of this inquiry, and which may 
serve to give us a conception of the vast forces with which we have 
to deal, that the magnetism of the earth might be replaced in exter- 
nal space by the combined action of 8464 trillions of magnet bars, 
with parallel axes of the weight of one pound each ; or, if we 
should assume the magnetism of the earth to he uniformly distri- 
buted throughout its substance, the magnetism contained in four cubic 
feet of its matter would be nearly equivalent to one such magnet. 

The publication of this memoir, a model of the union of experi- 
mental and theoretical research, produced no ordinary effect upon 
men of science, jiarticulurly in Germany. It was felt that the time 
had arrived when the same precision which had thus been found to be 
attainable in the absolute determination of one of the magnetic 
elements, would not only be equally so in the determination of the 
others, but also of the changes, whether periodical or occasional, 
which they were known or suspected to undergo. Were the dis- 
turbances of the needle, which had been observed to be produced at 
distant places by the aurora borealis, or other less manifest causes, 
absolutely simultaneous; or were they not so? A mognetical 
observatory, for the purpose of making the observations which 
these inquiries suggested, was established at Gdttingen, under the 
superintendence of Gauss and Weber, by whom also instruments 
were designed which were capable of giving results incomparably 
more accurate than any which had hitherto been attained. Obser- 
vatories on the same model were formed in various cities in Ger- 
many, and ultimately at Greenwich ; the members also of a widely- 
spread mognetical association engaged themselves to make simul- 
taneous observations on certain term-days and hours ; and the fine 
scries of magnetical observatories which were subsequently esta- 
blished ot the Cape of Good Hope, Hobarton, Toronto, and elsewhere, 



596 


and furnished in almost every instance with a numerous and well- 
organized staff of observers, was the final triumph of a system which 
had originated at Gottingen, and which has already sufficiently 
pointed out the general laws, as well as the anomalies of magnetic 
action, though unhajipily it has hitherto left the physical causes 
which give rise to them almost entirely untouched. 

We have already referred to the circumstances which suggested 
the celebrated Memoir “ On the Theory of the Earth's Magnetism," 
which was published in 1839. There is, properly speaking, only 
one known physical principle which can be assumed for its basis, 
which is the variation of the magnetic forces, according to the in^ 
verse square of their distances. It is this principle which brings 
into operatioti a function, named by later writers the potential func- 
tion, which had been already extensively used by La Place and 
Poisson in some of their most difficult investigations arising out 
of tlie theory of gravitation. The differential coefficients of tliis 
function would express the coordinate components which determine 
the direction and intensity of the earth's magnetism, and provided 
they were known, they would assign the three elements which we 
are in search of ; but inasmuch as the law of the distribution of 
magnetism within the earth is altogether unknown, so likewise is 
the form of its potential function, and the process of deduction of 
the conclusions which we are required to draw from it would thus 
appear to be stopped at its origin. Yet there are some general 
properties of the function itself, and some also which are dedu- 
cible from the known conditions which it is required to satisfy, 
which have enabled this great master of his art, with singular saga- 
city and skill, to make even the dumb to speak, and to give re- 
sponses which are of the highest philosophical import. 

* Such is the clear conception, which he educes from it, of thffe 
characteristic property of a magnetic pole, and the necessary con- 
sequence resulting from it, that there can be only one northern and 
one southern pole ; and the consequent effectual dissipation of the 
conclusion which so tnany eminent philosophers had drawn from their 
observations, that there were two northern, and by a natural in- 
ference, therefore, two southern magnetic poles. Such also was the 
remarkable proposition, that if the component of the horizontal 
magnetic force directed towards the north was given for the whole 



597 


surface of the earth, then the horizontal component directed 
tov^rds the east or west would follow of itself; and not less re- 
markable was the consequence deducible from this, that the know- 
ledge of the value of tlie potential function which the horizontal 
component, as above stated, would furnish for all points of the 
earth’s surface, would also give its value for all points of external 
space. But of all the conclusions which this memoir contained, 
those which excited the moat sanguine hopes of the ultimate and 
complete solution of the great problem of the earth’s magnetism, 
were the successive theorems in which he showed that the com- 
ponents of the magnetic force for any point of the earth’s surface 
may be represented by combining, with given functions of the lati- 
tude and longitude of that point, certain constant coefficients — of 
which not more than twenty -four were likely to be required — which 
were deducible from a sufficient number of the observed values of 
those components in different and assigned localities. 

Tlie calculation of these coefficients, a work of no ordinary 
labour, was effected by the author of this theory ; and the results 
which they afforded were compared with their values, as given by 
observation, at ninety -one stations. The discrepancies between 
observation and theory, which were shown by these results, were 
not more considerable than might have been expected from the 
inadequate extent to which the calculations had been carried, and 
from the necessarily imperfect character of the data which were 
made subservient to them. The calculation of the same coefficients 
was renewed, and greatly extended, by Petersen, under the direc- 
tion of the younger Ermon, at the request and expense of the 
British Association, and the results are published amongst their 
Reports for 1847. Some of these results would seem, however, 
» rather to indicate defects in the theory than errors of the obser- 
vations, and it seems highly desirable, with a view of further testing 
its correctness and applicability, that tlie calculations should be 
resumed with the aid of more accurate and multiplied observations. 

In a subsequent memoir Gauss enters upon a discussion, which is 
at once elementary and profound, of the general properties of the 
same potential function which plays so important a part in the 
AilgemeineTheorie des Erdmagnetismua/’ ending with a series of 
propositions on the relations of this function for a distribution of 



598 


magnetifim — whether entirely upon the surface of the earthi or 
within it, or in external space — which seem to be the ultimate con- 
clusions to which this theory has hitherto attained or is capable of 
attaining. This memoir presents a striking illustration of that happy 
union of analytical skill with philosophical power for which his later 
writings were so remarkable, and which puts them in striking con- 
trast with the obscurity and extreme compression of some of his 
earlier productions. 

Gauss was born on the 30th of April, 1777. After completing his 
education at the Collegium Garolinum, he proceeded to the Uni- 
versity of Gottingen in 1795; he graduated at Helmstadt in 1799, 
and after\vard8 resided as a private teacher in Brunsvrick until the 
year 1807, when be was appointed Professor in the University of 
Gottingen, and Director of the Observatory ; a situation which he 
continued to retain for the remainder of his life. He was twice 
married, and by his first wife, who died in 1809, he has left one sur- 
viving son, and by his second, two sons and a daughter, Theresa, to 
whom he was tenderly attached, who nursed him, when his health 
began to decline, with the greatest affection and care. 

During the last year of his life the decay of old age began to 
manifest itself in a disease of the heart, and the usual symptoms 
which accompany it; and he died in great tranquillity on the 
morning of the 23rd of February last. ** I assisted/’ writes the 
Baron von Waltershausen, one of the most distinguished of his 
pupils, in a letter communicating these facts, with others of his 
friends and pupils, in placing his body in his in binding a 

laurel crown around his head, and in discharging with filial love and 
reverence the last honours of the great man, whose name is destined 
to take its place with those of Archimedes and Newton in the history 
of the exacter sciences/' On the 26th of February, his body, which * 
had lain in state in the Rotunda of the Observatory, was followed 
to the grave by the whole University, and by a vast multitude of 
ftiends and admirers. 

Gkorok Simon Ohm was bom on the 16th of March, 1787, at 
Erlangen in Bavaria, where his ancestors had been known as pros- 
perous and skilful locksmiths for several generations. His father's 
intention was. that he, as well as his younger brother, Martin 



599 


OKm, should learn the family craft; but having himself acquired 
an amount of knowledge--eapecially of mathematics — unusual in 
his station of life* which he had found useful to him in his businejssi 
he resolved that his boys should have the advantage of a superior 
education before entering on their future calling, and accordingly, 
after they had passed through the Elementary School, he sent them 
to the Gymnasium. With such opportunities and the example of 
their father, it is not to be wondered at that the talents of the two 
brothers were rapidly developed. A new career opened to them in 
1804, when the celebrated mathematician Langsdorf having become 
acquainted with their extraordinary progress, pronounced the judg- 
ment that some day they would emulate the brothers BernouLUi. 
He prepared a certificate to this effect, which induced their fatlier to 
relinquish his intention of bringing them up to his business, and to 
allow them thenceforward to pursue a scientific career. 

George Simon Ohm entered the University of Erlangen when he 
had completed his sixteenth year, but he remained there only 
eighteen months, leaving it to give instructions in mathematics in 
Switzerland. In August 1806 he became a mathematical tutor in 
the Institute of Gottstadt near Nidau, in the Canton of Berne ; after 
remaining here two years and a half, he went to Neufchntel, where 
he spent the next two years and a half os a teacher of mathematics. 
Towards the end of 1811 he returned to Erlangen, and, after taking 
his degree, entered on an academical course of life as a PrivaU 
docent there. I'his position, however, was merely temporary, as 
well as a tutorship which he subsequently held at the “ Realschule ” 
of Bamberg, which was soon dissolved. 

Ohm attained in 1817, for the first time, a suitable and permanent 
position as teacher of mathematics in the Great (Jesuits') Gymna- 
sium at Cologne, where the peculiar faculty he iwesessed of repre- 
senting the theory of mathematics in a comprehensive and attractive 
manner to the youthful understanding was soon recognized. Ohm, 
however, had an ambition higher than that of remaining a mere 
mathematical teacher ; his genius led him on to travel into the less 
trodden regions of science, and to try his powers as an original 
inquirer. It was not long before he found a congenial sphere of 
action, and was led to discover the true explanation of the hitherto 
enigmatical phsenomena of the voltaic current. 



600 . 


Ill 1826 he obtained a long leave of absence in order to proceed 
to Berlin to perfect and publish his new theory, which appeared in 
1827 under the title “The Galvanic Circuit mathematically treated, 
by Dr. G. S, Ohm.'* When this work first appeared, it had not the 
fortune to attract notice from the leading scientific men of the day, 
nor did it gain for its author consideration or favour from the au- 
rities then at the head of the affairs of education and learning in 
Prussia, by whom, indeed, he was received in a manner which 
showed an entire misapprehension of his scientific activity and of his 
great merits. His susceptibilities thus wounded, he did not delay a 
moment to declare that, after such a reception, it was impossible for 
him to retain the appointment he held at Cologne. With the deepest 
feelings of mortification and grief, he left the place, thrown back 
into private life with most precarious means of existence, and de- 
prived of all the requisite resources for pursuing his investigations. ^ 
Seven of the best years of his life were in this way lost to science ; 
but from these adverse circumstances he was at last withdrawn in 
1833, when the Bavarian government appointed him Professor in the 
Polytechnic School at Nuremberg. 

Whilst Ohm was usefully employed in this new sphere, bis theory 
of the voltaic circuit began to be appreciated both at home and 
abroad, and in 1841 the Koyol Society of London awarded to him 
the Copley Medal, the highest honour in its power to bestow ; and 
to mark still more its high estimation of the eminent services he 
had rendered to science, he was elected, in 1842, a Foreign Member 
of the Society, This judgment, it is acknowledged by lus country- 
men, had the effect of entirely removing the obstacles which had 
hitherto impeded his way ; the conclusions of his theory became 
known as “ Ohm's laws " in all elementary works on physics, and 
throughout Europe hk position was recognised as among the most 
eminent philosophers of Germany. 

Amidst his active duties as Rector of the Polytechnic School at 
Nuremberg, and Professor of Physics, he found time to make 
advances in the scientific career which his theory of the voltaic 
circuit had opened to him. Physicists have long been convinced 
that the various forces to which we ascribe the phenomena of Light, 
Heat, Electricity and Magnetism, must all have a common origin ; 
transformations of one series of phenomena to another have even been 



601 


shown experimentally without the known facts having led to the 
discovery of their intimate connexion. To this important investi* 
gation Ohm determined to devote the remainder of his life. The 
peculiar views which he had adopted in his researches in electricity 
respecting the interior constitution of bodies and of the molecules of 
which they consist, appeared to him to throw a new light on the na- 
ture and co-relations of the forces referred to. Following out these 
ideas, he established the general properties, form, and arrangement 
of the molecules; be attributed to them simple and polar powers; he 
determined their relations to the various external actions, and thus 
gradually formed a complete system, from which he saw the pheno- 
mena of light, heat, electricity and magnetism evolve themselves. 

Of this projected work on ‘ Molecular Physics,' only one volume 
has appeared, w^hich was published in 1849 under the general title of 
** Contributions to Molecular Physics," vol. i„ and with the special 
title of ** Elements of Analytical Geometry of three dimensions 
according to the system of oblique-angled co-ordinates." This in- 
troduction he thought necessary, because the ordinary mathematical 
methods did not appear to him to apply themselves to his ideas with 
sufficient simplicity and conciseness. He dedicated this work to 
the Royal Society of London, “whose approbation," he says, 
“ tempered his courage, which had previously been softened by 
disheartening treatment, to renewed efforts in tlie field of science." 

Whilst Ohm was, with incessant industry, carrying out his great 
undertaking, he was, towards tlie end of the year 1849, unexpectedly 
called to fill the vacant place of Conservator of the Physical Collec- 
tion at Munich. Agreeable as this appointment must have been to 
him, and in accordance with the new scientific direction he had 
token, still the event is to be regretted, as the arrangement of the 
Museum and the construction of new instruments withdrew his 
attention from continuing and completing his great work. During 
this time he published a memoir of great interest on the phenomena 
of interference in uniaxal crystals. 

In 1852 changes occurred which induced Ohm to relinquish the 
official position he had gained in Munich and to become Professor 
of Experimental Hiysics in the High School of tiiat city. Not con- 
tented to restrict himself to the customary demonstrations and ex- 
planations, which would have cost him but little exertion, he pre- 



602 


pared for hi# lectures a text-book on Physics, in which many of the 
subjects were treated in a very original manner. This work was 
published in 1854. 

To complete, within the limited time he saw before him, the labours 
he had undertaken, required unusual exertions, which his feeble con- 
stitution did not enable him to support. His friends remarked with 
regret the gradual sinking of his forces from the beginning of 1854; 
he however continued his lectures until a renewed attack of apoplexy 
suddenly terminated his life on the 7th of July, 1854. “Thus 
ended,” says hia biographer, “ the noiseless life of a simple and 
easily contented, but highly gifted man, who lived solely for science, 
and who had neither sought nor found social advantages, honours, 
wealth, or what the world is accustomed to consider as chiefly 
contributing to happiness.” About a year before his death, how- 
ever, the Cross of the Order of Merit of St. Michael was conferred 
upon him, and he was also made a member of the newly-founded 
order of Maximilian. 

Ohm was a man of small stature. His countenance, although 
usually earnest, expressed his good nature and modesty. He was 
little inclined to conversation, but what he spoke was the expression 
of his soul, always full of matter, and frequently enlivened with wit 
and sprightly humour. In his life and habits he was extremely 
simple, contented and temperate. He was fond of solitude, and 
to this feeling, as well as to the unfavourable circumstances with 
which he was surrounded at the commencement of his career, was 
it perhaps owing that he never sought to establish his domestic 
happiness by marriage. • 

Besides the works alluded to in this notice, he contributed twelve 
papers to the Journals of Schweigger and Poggendorflf. Two of 
these relate to Acoustics, one to Physical Optics, and the remainder 
are on Electrical subjects. The latter consist principally of experi- 
mental verifications of his theory, some published before and some 
after the appearance of his mathematical treatise. 

The particulars above stated are derived almost entirely from a 
detailed memoir on the life and writings of this eminent philosopher 
communicated to Bie Royal Academy of Sciences of Munich by Dr. 
J. Lamont. 



603 


Rkar^Aomibal Sir William Edward Parky (Knight) was the 
fourth son of the late Dr. Caleb Hillier Parry, F.R.S,, an eminent 
physician of Bath, who married Miss Rigby, sister of the late Dr, 
Rigby of Norwich, and grand-daughter of Dr. Taylor, author of the 
Hebrew Concordance. He was born at Bath, Dec, 19tli, 1790, and 
received his education at the Grammar School of that city. At the 
age of twelve he entered the Royal Navy under the patronage of 
Admiral Lord Cornwallis, who commanded the Channel Fleet, and 
had hia flag flying in the * Ville de Paris.* 

Intelligent, active and ambitious, Parry soon introduced himself 
to notice, and we find the Admiral making this early mention of 
him in a letter to a friend, It is a pity,** he writes, " that Mr. 
Parry had not gone to sea sooner, for he will be fit for promotion 
long before his time is out.** In 1806 Mr, Parry joined the ‘Tri- 
bune,* Captain Thomas Baker, and subsequently the ‘ Vanguard * 
under the command of the same officer, with whom he served the 
remainder of his time as midshipman. On the 6th of January, 1810, 
he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and appointed to the 
' Alexandria,* Captain Quilliam, employed in protecting the Spitz- 
bergen Whale Fishery, and thus became first acquainted with that 
vast icy element with which in after years he was destined to con- 
tend, He subsequently served in the ‘ Hogue,* * Meudstone,* aud 
lastly the ‘Niger,* Captain Samuel Jackson, C.B. While in the 
‘ Hogue,' he accompanied a detachment of boats, and assisted in 
the destruction of twenty -seven of the enemy *s vessels, three of 
which were heavy privateers. This and some sharp skirmishes with 
the gunboats of Denmark, are the only actions with the enemy that 
fell to the lot of the subject of our memoir, as the peace of 1815 
happily put an end to all such exploits. 

In 1817 the dangerous state of his father's health obliged him to 
proceed to England on leave, an event of a momentous character in 
the career of Parry, for it was at this period that Sir John Barrow 
brought to the notice of the Admiralty the extraordinary changes 
which had been reported to have occurred in the state of the Polar 
ice, and the remarkable advance to a high northern latitude that 
had been made by Captain Scoresby in a whale-ship, and urged 
upon the Government the project of renewing the attempts which 
had been formerly made to reach Behring's Strait by way of the 



Polar tea. Hence the commencement of that series of northern 
voyages, which have so much redounded to the honour of this 
country, and which afforded to the subject of our memoir an oppor- 
tunity for the exercise of those high qualifications for the conduct 
of an arduous and difficult undertaking, which so conspicuously 
marked his character. 

I'he Admiralty having determined u])on sending out two expe- 
ditions to the Arctic seas, one in the direction of Spitzbergen and 
the other through Baffin's Bay, Lieutenant Parry was selected for 
this service, and on the 14th of January, 1818, he was appointed to 
the command of the ‘ Alexander,’ a hired vessel commissioned for the 
purpose of accompanying Captain, afterwards Sir John, Ross on a 
voyage for the discovery of a north-west passage by way of Davis’s 
Strait. 

The Expedition quitted England in April 1818, and although un- 
successful in the accomplishment of the great object of the under- 
taking, succeeded in circumnavigating Baffin’s Bay. and in restoring 
to that arm of the sea its outline — which had been erased from our 
charts — nearly as it had been dmwn by tlie early navigator whose 
honoured name it so deservedly commemorates. 

The examination, however, of the various sounds which broke 
the outline of that inland sea had not been made by the Expedition 
with that care which was necessary to satisfy the inquiring spirit of 
Parry, more especially with regard to a wide opening in the coast, 
to which Baffin had assigned the name of Sir John Lancaster’s 
Sound. This opening, which when discovered by our navigators 
had excited the brightest expectations, and from which Parry and 
his associates had been compelled to return with the utmost regret, 
Parry on his arrival in England found to his astonishment repre- 
sented as closed by a lofty range of mountains bearing the name of 
the first Secretary of the Admiralty, Mr. Croker, barring all pn^ess 
to further discovery In that direction. 

The indignation of Parry at this extraordinary misrepresentation 
may be imagined, and he did not fiineh from the responsibility of dis- 
dosing bis sentiments to the Admiralty, who immediately determined 
upon sending another expedition to the same quarter todeoide riie ques- 
tion. Accordingly in the spring of 1819 the • Hecla ' and ' Griper ’ 
were fitted for the purpose, and the command entrusted to Lieu- 



605 


tenant Parry. The Expedition quitted England in May 1819, and 
reached Davis’s Strait early in July. The progress of the ships 
being arrested by the ice, which at the early part of the summer 
was known to the whalers to occupy the upper part of Baffin’s Bay, 
the character of Parry at once showed itself, by a prompt deter- 
mination to attempt a passage through the opposing boundary. He 
accordingly dashed into the ice with both his ships with a boldness 
which deserved success, and accomplished a passage through this 
great barrier^ till then considered impenetrable. 

The Expedition reached Lancaster’s Sound on the 1st of August, 
and found it entirely free from ice. ** We were now,” says Parry, 
about to explore that great inlet which had obtained a celebrity 
beyond what it might otherwise have been considered entitled to 
possess, from the opposite opinions which had been held with regard 
to it, and it will be readily conceived how anxious we were to ad- 
vajice.” His suspense was not of long duration, for in a very few 
days he had the high gratidcation to be able to clear up all doubt, 
by the advance of the ships over that imaginary chain of mountains 
which had been drawn across the Sound as if purposely to disarm 
inquiry, and by the discovery of a wide and magnificent strait open- 
ing out into the Polar sea, to which was given the name of Barrow, 
as a well -deserved compliment to the second Secretary of the Admi- 
ralty as the strenuous promoter of Arctic discovery. » 

Hour after hour rolled away, and the ships continued their unin- 
terrupted progress upon a direct course for Behring’s Strait. Who 
but Parry himself could know the feelings which fi^ed his anxious 
mind at that time ! His associates, as they witnessed the clear 
open sea rise in the horizon mile after mile, might be elated at the 
brilliant prospect before them ; but with Parry the enjoyment was 
heightened by the full realization of his hopes in this port of his 
voyage, and by the reflection that the serious responsibility he had 
incurred before leaving England would now redound to his honour. 
Our limited space will not permit us to dwell upon the eventful 
progress of this, one of the most memorable of the Polar vo 3 rageSf 
Suffice it to observe, that it was upon this occasion our navigators 
discovered the great opening into the Polar sea on the west, Prince 
Regent's Met on the south, Wellington Chaonel on the north, cele- 
brated in altmr years as the supposed route of the gallant and 



606 


unfortunate Franklin, and farther west the islands, known as the 
Parry Group, beyond which no subsequent expedition, with all the 
modern impTovements and appliances of steam, has been able to 
proceed ; and lastly, they discovered Banks's Land in the south-west, 
memorable as the furthest point afterwards reached by M'Clure 
from the opposite direction ; an achievement which rendered certain 
the existence of the long- sought north-west passage. Between this 
land and the Parry Group there was stretched an impenetrable 
barrier of ice, which from that time to the present has baffled every 
effort of our ships, and is the only small tract remaining to be 
navigated to render evident the practicability of the passage. 

But although the endeavours of Parry were not crowned with 
success, as regarded the main object of the Expedition, yet it will 
always remain as a bright feature in his distinguished career, that 
he achieved the discovery of those two remarkable terminating 
points — the ** ultima Thule ** of .the navigation both from the eael 
and from the voeei^ which no ship from either quarter lias yet been 
able to pass. 

Parry in his route towards this terminating point of his disco- 
veries had passed the meridian of 110® west, and the Expedition be- 
came entitled to the reward of £5000, which had been offered by 
the Government as an encouragement to Arctic enterprize. 

After an anxious and unavailing suspense in the hope of a favour- 
able change in the ice, Parry put into port, to pass the first dreary 
winter ever encountered by a Government expedition in so high a 
latitude : and here the qualities of Parry, which among others so 
peculiarly fitted him for the conduct of such an undertakiug, were 
displayed in a remarkable manner, in the arrangements of the ship 
and the establishment of those wholesome regulations for the health 
and comfort of tike crew, and for the occupation of the mind, which 
he knew so well to be essential to the bodily vigour of the seaman, 
and to the prevention of that fatal disease the scurvy, which had 
aliSost invariably attended previous attempts to brave a winter in 
the Arctic regions. 

Aware of the influence of personal example, he took an active 
part in the theatrical entertainments which were got up for the di^ 
version of the crew, and being an excellent actor, he contributed in 
no small degree their success. On the other hand, he was inde- 



607 


ffttiguble in all astronomical observations, which wtere carried on 
nigiit after night upon the show, with the thermometer frequently 
30^ below zero, when it was necessary to keep the chronometer in hot 
Mnnd to prevent its stopping, and to case the telescope in soft leather 
to prevent its destroying the skin of the face of the observer. We 
mention these faefs once for all, as they serve to illustrate the zeal 
and determination which marked his character, and how by force of 
example he stimulated those who had the happiness to serve under 
his command. In this case the effect was the establishment of the 
geographical position of hia winter quarters with a degree of accu- 
racy probably never uttainnd by any Expedition in the same time, 
even in a milder latitude ; the lunar observations alone amounting 
to nearly 10,000, 

As the spring advanced he conducted an overland journey across 
Melville Island, and discovered the sea on the north and Liddon 
Gulf on the west, where he left his broken cart, which served to 
mark indisputably his position to M'Clintock, who visited the s])()t 
thirty years afterwards and found the precious relic. 

The summer of 1820 had well-nigh passed away before there was 
any possibility of liberating the ships from their winter quarters, 
and there being no prospect of a change in the great barrier of ice 
wiiieh covered the sea in every direction, and which indeed hud 
never varied, Parry determined upon returning to Englaiid, ^here 
he arrived in October 1820. 

As might be expected, his reception by his country was enthu- 
siastic and most gratifying to him. He was immediately promoted 
.to the rank of Commander. Bath, his native place, presented him 
with the freedom of its city ; the Bedfordean gold medal was una- 
nimously voted to him with a sum of 500 guineas ; and he was pre- 
sented witii a silver vase, bearing orriameutal devices emblematical 
of the Polar regions, 

in December of the same year it was determined to follow 
np Arctic discovery by another Expedition, the command of which 
was again given to Parry. The attempt on this occa^sion was 
to be made by way of Hudson’s Strait and Sir Thomas Rowe's 
Welcome. The Expedition left England in May 1821, and 
Succeeded in making important additions to the geography of the 
Arctic seas, in clearing up various doubts respecting the statements 
VOL, vn, 3 u 



608 


of early navigntors, and in the discovery of a strait leading from 
Sir Thomas Ilowe's Welcome into Prince Regent's Inlet. Hut the 
undertaking failed in its main object. The strait, which was named 
after the *Hecla' and *Fury/ and which proved to be the only outlet, 
was found to be impassable, and Parry, after passing two winters 
and encountering frequent and imminent perils from the rapid tides 
and whirling masses of ice which beset the ships and irresistibly 
carried them away from their positions, returned to England. 
Parry’s narrative of this Expedition is one of the most interesting of 
the Polar voyages, from the long and intimate intercourse which was 
held with the Esquimaux tribes, and the exquisite embellishments 
from the pencil of his colleague Captain Lyon, 

Immediately on the return of the Expedition, the Admiralty marked 
the high estimation in which they held the services of its commander 
by promoting him to the rank of Captain, and appointing him Acting 
Hydrographer, and the City of Winchester honoured him with its 
freedom . 

A year of repose had scarcely elapsed when Captain Parry was 
summoned to talce command of another Exiicdition destined to renew 
the attempt to reach Behring's Strait by way of Prince Regent'^ 
Inlet in connexion with an overland expedition under Captain 
Franklin. Parry left England in 1825 and succeeded only in reach- 
ing Port Bowen, where he passed his fourth dreary winter in the 
Arctic regions, and after experiencing great peril in the following 
summer from the ice and tides, which occasioned the loss of one of 
the ships and very nearly that of the other, he returned home. 

ITiis was the last of the Expeditions in a north-western direction, 
under Captain Parry. The great energy and perseverance which 
had been disjdayed by him on all these occasions left no doubt in 
the minds of the Admiralty that further efforts in the some direction 
were likely to be fruitless, and for a while Arctic exploration had a 
respite. In these memorable voyages, under the command of the 
subject of our mempir, large acquisitions had been made to the geo- 
graphy of the Polar seas, and science had been promoted’ by nume- 
rous observations of a highly interesting and important character, 
some of which formed the subject of papers in the Transactions 
of this Society, by Captain Parry and his distinguished associates. 
Colonel Sabine and Lieutenant H. Forster. 



It was seen, that, under able management and proper discipline, 
a winter in the Arctic regions could be passed, not only without 
those dreadful ravages which characterized the early voyages to 
those seas, but with as little if not less than the average mortality 
of mankind in civilized countries. 

Captain Parry was now confirmed in his office as Hydrographer, 
and he was honoured by the freedom of the Borough of Lynn. In 
the autumn of this year Parry determined, since no passage could 
be found in a north-western direction, to propose to the Admiralty 
to renew the attempt to reach a high northern latitude by travelling 
over the vast expanse of ice which occupied the Spitzbergeu seas. 
As early as 1818 a plan for efiecting this object by means of light 
boats drawn by dogs had been submitted to the Admiralty by the 
late Sir John Franklin and his associate in the ‘ Trent,* Lieutenant, 
now Admiral, Bcechey, and Parry now undertook to carry it into 
effect by means of rein-deer. He accordingly sailed in 1827 for 
Hammerfest, and taking on board a sufficient number of these ani- 
mals proceeded to Spitzbergen, where he quitted his ship and com- 
menced his perilous journey. 

Those persons only who have seen the Spitzbergen ice and are 
acquainted with its rugged surface and the deep pools of water in 
it* hollows, can judge of the enormous labour aud difficulty in tra- 
velling over it. Yet Parry overcame these difficulties, and had it 
not been that the ice at length was found to have a motion to the 
southward nearly as fast as his party could advance to the north- 
ward, he would certainly have accomplished his object. All his 
efforts, however, were frustrated by this unforeseen circumstance, 
and after travelling 660 miles, a distance more than sufficient to 
reach the Pole in a direct line from where he set out, he found him- 
self compelled to return. With what reluctance he submitted to 
this may be gathered from his journal, in which he observes, ** dreary 
and cheerless ae were the scenes we were about to leave, we never 
turned homewards with so little satisfaction as on this occasion/’ 
Hk furthest point reached on this journey was 82^ 45^ N., a paralleV 
which far exceeded any well-authenticated advance which had e’Vdr 
been made before. Had he been able to accomplish fifteen miles 
more he would have been entitled to the reward of one thousand 
pounds offisred by the Government so long back as the days of Phipps. 

3 a 2 



610 


On hifi return to England he resumed his duties as Hydrographer 
at the Admiralty, where he continued until 1829, when he accepted 
the office of Commissioner for the management of the affairs of the 
Australian Company. Before quitting England tlie King was 
pleased to mark his approbation of his services by conferring upon 
him the honour of Knighthood. The University of Oxford bestowed 
upon him the degree of D.C.L,, he was elected a Fellow of this 
Society, and made an Honorary Member of the St. Petersburg Aca- 
demy of Sciences, end also a Member of the Royal Irish Academy, 

On his arrival in Australia he took up his residence at Port 
Stephen, a beautiful little bay about sixty miles to the north of 
Sydney. The quiet repose of this delightful spot was quite in uni- 
son with the mind of Parry, and while zealously discharging his 
duties as Commissioner of the Colony, he managed to promote 
among the colonists by whom he was surrounded, a spirit of piety 
and devotion to which they had before been strangers. He built a 
church, in which, in the absence of any authorized clergyman, he 
officiated himself. 

After a residence of five years in Australia he returned to England, 
and accepted the office of Poor Law Commissioner in the county of 
Norfolk. The duties of this appointment were, however, by no 
means congenial to Parry. He was frequently called upon to adju- 
dicate in cases in which his judgment was at variance with his 
feelings, and in about a year he resigned his ap]x>intment. 

About this time he was selected to organize and conduct a newly- 
created department of the public service with the title of Comp- 
troller of Steam Machinery, and continued to discharge the duties 
of this office with zeal and ability for ten years. During that time 
he saw introduced into the Royal Navy the screw-propeller, now so 
justly regarded as indispensable in our fleets, and did much to extend 
and improve the steam power of this country. 

In 1847, finding his health begin to suffer from the onerous 
duties of his office, he accepted the appointment of Captain Super- 
intendent of Haslar Hospital, which he held until his promotion to 
his Flag. 

In 1853, the Lieutenant-Governorship of Greenwich Hospital 
falling vacant, it was o^ered to Sir Edward Parry, who accepted it, 
greatly to the satisfaction of his friends, who rejoiced in the expec- 



611 


tatioB that the quiet duties of that appointment would be beneficial 
to his general health, for they could not fail to notice the inroads 
which a life of so laborious and anxious a character had made upon 
his constitution. Scarcely, however, had six months elapsed before 
symptoms of a dangerous and painful disease became apparent. 
The probable fatal tendency of this complaint was well known to 
Parry, but he bore up against its painful effects with Christian forti- 
tude, cheerfulness and resignation. 

Towards 1 855 the approaching fatal termination of his complaint 
became but too evident, and at the recommendation of his medical 
advisers he determined to try the waters of Ems, but his bodily 
strength was unequal to the journey. He was detained for a time at 
Coblentz by exhaustion ; and reached Ems, only to end there his 
days, for on the 8th of duly, 1855, it pleased the Almighty disposer 
of events to bring to a close his long and varied life of usefulness. 
Perfectly resigned and full of humble hope he breathed his last, sur- 
rounded by his mourning family ; giving proof in the closing mo- 
ments of his existence of the blessed effects of that spirit of piety 
and devotion which he had so ardently cultivated throughout his life. 
His remains were conveyed to England and interred with honours in 
Greenwich Hospital. 

Thus terminated the career of one of the most distinguished offi- 
cers of the age in which he lived, a career as varied and eventful as 
it was honourable and prosperous : gifted with talents of a general 
character, he performed with credit whatever he undertook ; but in 
none of his appointments was he more successful than in that of 
commander of those expeditions of discovery which have so much 
contributed to his own fame and the honour of his country. 

As a member of society, no one stood higher in general estima- 
tion : kind, affectionate, of high moral and religious principles, 
charitable and humane, his memory will long be cherished in quarters 
where good men most desire to be remembered, more particularly 
in the wards of Hoslar Hoi^ital, and in those useful charitable in- 
stitutions known as the Sailor's Homes, asylums for the humble 
members of his profession, for whose temporal and spiritual im- 
provement he had always so strenuously laboured. 

Parry left several works behind him. Besides the narratives of 
voyages, we find his name associated with three papers in the 



612 


Transacdons of this Sotskty. A small volume on * Astronomy 
by Night/ published early in life ; a volume on the ' Parental Cha- 
racter of God/ now undergoing a fifth edition ; and on ‘ Address to 
the Sailor/ His correspondence with the Admiralty, who consulted 
him upon all matters connected with the Arctic seas and the search 
for Sir John Franklin, is voluminous, and with his journals and ob- 
servations have always been considered most valuable ; and his 
voyages will long keep their places by the side of those of Cook, 
Anson, Vancouver, and other great navigators. The high estima- 
tion in which Parry was held by the Admiralty is marked by these 
frequent appeals to his opinion, as well as by all his appointments, 
and by a good- service pension being bestowed upon him ; and lastly, 
by their reply to the Governor of Greenwich Hospital on being in- 
formed of his deatli, viz. that it was with deep regret they learnt 
that Her Majesty's Service had been deprived of so distinguished an 
ornament as Sir Edward Parry. 

Sir Edward Parry married in 1827 Isabella Louisa, the fourth 
daughter of the late Lord Stanley of Aldcrley, who died in May 
1839; and secondly, Catherine Edwards, daughter of the Rev. R. 
£. Hawkinson, and widow of Samuel Hoare, Esq., and left several 
children. 

Rich A an StiBSPSHAKas was born at Leeds, July 30, 1794, His 
father was engaged in the cloth manufacture, and destined his son 
to the same pursuit. Atihe age of fifteen, however, and after an 
ordinary school education, the son discovered his own preference 
for a learned profession, and the father accordingly placed him 
under the care of James Tate, head of the school at Richmond in 
Yorkshire, well known as one of the most successful teachers of his 
day. Here he remained until 1812, whem he was removed to 
Trhuty College, Cambridge, He took Ms degree with honours in 
1816, obtmned a fellowi^ip in the next year, and proceeded to 
study for the bar, to which he was called abemt 1822. A Weakness 
of sight, to which be was always subject, is supposed to have been 
the pmci|^ cause of bis not practising law ; but it must be added 
that his share of Ms Isllw’s property placed Mm in easy citoum- 
stances, independently of Ms feliowsMp^ and Ms taste for science 
had become yery decided, 1624/ and soon 



613 


began to devote himself entirely to astronomy. He became a Fel- 
low of the Astronomical Society in 1834, and of this Society in 
1830. Though often actively engaged in our behalf, and serving 
on the Council in 1832, his pursuits led him towards the Astrono- 
mical Society, of which he was always one of the most active of 
the executive body. His leisure, and his desire to help the young 
astronomer so long as he wanted advice and guidance, gave a 
peculiar value to his services, and a peculiar utility to his career. 

Mr, Sheepshanks resided in London till about 1842, when he 
removed to Reading, where he died of apoplexy, August 4, 1855. 
There is much reason to suppose that his life was shortened by his 
laborious exertions in the restoration of the standard scale. 

Though an ardent jxilitician of the school of opinion which had 
to struggle for existence during the first half of his life, but gradu- 
ally became victorious in the second, he never took any public port 
in a political question, except that of the Reform Bill. He was one 
of the Boundary Commissioners appointed in 1831 to fix the boun- 
daries of boroughs under the new' system of representatbn. His 
reading in politics and history was extensive, especially in military 
matters, with which he was very well acquainted ; both ancient and 
modern tactics, from the best sources, having formed a portion, and 
no inconsiderable portion, of his studies. To this must be added 
literature and poetry, to which he was much nttached : he never 
abandoned classical reading, and those who knew him best were 
often surprised at the extent to which he had cultivated modem 
literature. 

But his subject was astronomy, and his especial part of that sub- 
ject was the astronomica! imtrument. His reputation among astro- 
nomers on this point* and the articles which he contributed to the 
'Penny Cyclopoedia,' may allow us to regret that he did not draiw up 
a full treatise on a mutter whieh he had so completely lathomed. 

Mr, Sheepshanks Vras engaged in active efiPorto on several special 
oooasicms* to which we make hd^ alluskm. In li82d he joined 
Mr. Airy in the pmiultMh op^^ations in Coifnwidh and suggested 
some of the most important plana hi operariom In 1811$ and ^829 
he wSkS lOtWe in the e^blifhment of ^ the Cambridge Observatory. 
In he oonsulted on the partof the Adndralty,^^^ refer- 
enee to 1^ edition then 



614 


Catalogue ; the reeult was the appearance of that work in a much 
more efficient and more creditable form than it would otherwise 
have appeared in. In 1832 he also interfered in a matter to which, 
connected as it is with personal differences, we can only here allude, 
as eliciting much infonnation on the subject of equatorial instru- 
ments in general ; a result which is entirely due to the part taken 
by Mr. Sheepshanks. In 1838 be was engaged in the chrono- 
metric determination of the longitudes of Antwerp and Brussels : 
in 1844 in that of Valentia, Kingstown, and Liverpool, In 1843 
and 1844, the subject of the Liverpool Observatory led him into a 
controversy, his pamphlets on which will be useful study to those 
who are interested in astronomical instruments. He was always an 
active member of the Board of Visitors at the Royal Observatory at 
Greenwich. 

Mr, Sheepshanks was a member of both the Commissions (of 
1838 and 1843) for the restoration of the standards of measure and 
weight, destroyed by fire in 1834, The standard of measure was 
placed in the hands of Francis Bally, at whose death Mr. Sheep- 
shanks volunteered (Nov. 30, 1844) to continue the restoration. 
This matter occupied him closely during the last eleven years of 
his bfe. It would not be possible for us to give any detailed account 
of the operation, a full history of which is to come from the Astro- 
nomer Royal, We need only say, that after a thorough examina- 
tion of the process, beginning with the very construction of ther- 
mometers,— a point which gave no small trouble, — results were 
obtained which were embodied in a bill which received the royal 
assent on the day following that on which Mr, Sheepshanks was 
struck by the shock which ended his life. The number of recorded 
micrometer observations is just five hundred short of ninety thon- 
sand. 

Mr. Sheepshanks was especisilly distingaished by the integrity of 
his mmd, ^nnd by his utter renunciation el self in all hie pursuits. 
He did not court fame : it was enodgh for him that there wae a 
useful object 'Which bpuld be advanced by the help of jus time» his 
thoughti» and hue |mrse His consideratioa for others was im^e 
mahifesf by his active liindnese fo thole with whom he waS §^$aged, 
and no less by his ready appreciation^ the medts bf those against 
whom he had to contend in defonce of truth and justice^ as they 



616 


appeared to his mind. Nor must we omit to add, while usiikg' a 
qualifying expression to save the right of free opinion, and to avoid 
implying a decision which is not within our province, that in every 
one of his controversies, that which was truth and justice to the 
mind of Mr. Sheepshanks was nothing less to the minds of very 
many from whom no thinking man would differ without cautious 
examination. He was a devoted friend and a formidable opponent. 

On the motion of J. P Gassiot, Esq., seconded by the Rev. Dr. 
Booth, the ilmnks of the Society were given to the President for his 
excellent address, and his Lordship was requested to permit the same 
to be printed. 

Dr. Roget and William Spence. Esq. having, with the consent of 
the Society, been nominated Scrutators, the votes of the Fellows 
present .were collected. 


The following Noblemen and Gentleman were reported duly 
elected Officers and Council for the ensuing year ; — 


President — The Lord Wrottesley, M.A. 

Colonel Edward Sabine, R.A. 


Secretaries^ 


William Sharpey, M.D. 

George Gabriel Stokes, Esq., M.A. 


Foreign Secretary — Rear-Admiral W, H. Smyth, 

OUter Members of Me Council — The Duke of Aigyll ; Neil Amott, 
M.p , ; Rear-Admiral P. W. Beechey ; Sir Benjamin Brodie, Bart. ; 
William Benjamin Carpenter, M.D, ; Arthur Cayley, Esq, ; Rev, 
James Challis, M.A. ; Charles Darwin, Esq., M.A, ; Sir Philip de 
M. Grey Egerton, Bart. ; William Pairbeim, Esq. ; John 
Esq. i William Allen Miller, M.D.i WiBiam Hallows MiUer, Baq., 
M.A . ; James Paget, Esq* ; John Stenhouse, LL.D. ; Rev. Eobert 
Walker, 



616 


The following table shows the progress and present state of the Society 
with respect to the number of Fellows ; — 



Patron 
and ^ 
Honorary, j 

Foreign. ^ 

Having 

com- 

ponnded. 

Paying 
£2 12». 
Annually. 

Paying 

£4 

Annually. 

Total. 

December 1, 1854. . | 

10 

47 

403 

14 

271 

745 

Since elected. . , . . . 


+ 4 

+ 6 


•f 11 

4 21 

Re-admitted 



4-1 

4- 1 

Since compounded 



+1 


— 1 

Defaulters 




— 2 

... 2 

Withdrawn , , .... 





—i 

1 

Since deceased .... 

1 

-1 

! 

-25 

-1 

-6 

-^35 

November 30, 1855 ! 

9 

1 49 

385 

13 . 

273 

729 











of the Re^ipts and Payments of the Royal Society between December 1854 , and November 30 , 1855 . 


^ ^ wM «-4 1-4 *-4 

4*tQ0O*r>tfCf0(M»^«5*>*f04Art*«4»f9CM '-(•CO 

W <M<p-r^Q«r)e0t5'^CM»-(^aci(N'OC0(» 
wo w CO 04 #-4 eo f-4 




o 

Oi 

(O 


00 


«£> 

VO 

oo 









cO 

Ift 

to 


•o 

m 


R 

CO 

r-4 

o 

(30 

rH 

*n 

Ol 




1-4 






£4531 5 5 I £4531 




INDEX TO VOL. VII. 


A.CI.DS, sulphuretted, new series of, 37. 

Aerolite (supposed) found in trunk of 
willow-tree, 421. 

Air, observations of, 348, 351. 

Airy (G. B.) on the computation of the 
effect of the attraction of mountain 
masses, as disturbing the apparent 
astronomical latitude of stations in 
geodetic surveys, 240. 

, discussion of the observed devia- 
tions of the compass in several ships, 
wood-built and iron-built, &c., 4ul, 
527. 

Altitude, influence of, on tlie burning of 
shell-fuses, 316. 

Aluminum, its position in the voltaic 
senet» S69. 

Ammonia in the human body, oxidation 
of, 94. 

Amphibia, impregnation of ovum in, 
104. 

Amylaceous foods, micro-chemioal re- 
searches on tiie digestion of, 225. 

Andrews (T.) on the oonstitution and 
properties of ozone, 475. 

Aniline, contributions to the history of, 
444. 

Anniversary Moeting,.Nov. 30, 1854, 175, 
247 i Nov. 30. 1855,527, 559. 

Annual Meetings for election of Fellows, 
,82,411. 

438. 

Aqueous va{K>ur, observations of, 348. 

Are of meridian, eflTect of local attraction 
on plumb-line, 440. 

Aritbmetieal progressions, formation of 
powers from, 145. 

Aruott (N.), Rumford medal awarded to, 
263. 

Atd&hy (J. E.) on the metalUo and some 
other oxides, in relation to catalytic 
«|ih«^omena, 322. 

Atmosphere, effect of pressure of, on mean 
level of ocean, 123. 

Atmospheric fllG expcrhaeiitt cn move- 
ment of, in tabes, 

Attraction, effect of locaH, the plamb- 
hne of English arc of the meridian, 
440 , ^ 


Attraction of mountains in India on the 
plumb-line, 176. 

— a))parent astronomical latitudes 
disturbed by, 240. 

Aurora aud falling stars, observations of , 
.358. 

Axes of elasticity and crystalline forms, 
495. 

Ayres (P, H.), micro-chemical researches 
on the digestion of starch and amy- 
laceous foods, 225. 

Aeohenzole, contributions to the history 
of, 444. 

Baer (K. £. von) elected foreign mem* 
her, B3. 

Bakerian Lectures. — On osmotic force, 
83, — On the nature of the force by 
which bodies arc repelled from the 
poles of a maKnet, Ac., 214. 

Barlow (Rev. on the formation and 
some of the properties of cymidine, Ac., 
446. 

Barlow (W. F.), observations on the re- 
spiratory movements of insects, 167. 

Barlow (W. H.) on the existence of an 
element of strength in beams, Ac., 
.319. 

Barometer, observations of, 344. 

Barry (M.), obituary notice of, 577. 

Baxter (H. K.), experimental inquiry as 
to the force evolved during muscular 
contraction, &c., 378. 

Beale (L. S.) on the ultimate arrange- 
ment of the biliary ducts; and on some 
other points in the anatomy of the 
liver of vertebrate animals, 454. 

Beams, existence of an element Of strength 
in, 319. 

Benzidine, contributions to the history 
of, 444. 

BUiaiy ducts, ultimate arrangement of, 
454. 

Blood, changes produced in, by cod-Uver 
oil and cocoa-nut oil, 41. 

Booth (Rev. i.) on a property of num- 
bers, 42. 

BracMppodat i>ecuUar arrangment of the 
sanguiferous system in, 32. 



620 


INDEX 


Bruehiiipodat contributions to tbc ana* 
tomy of, 106, 241. 

Brodie (B. C.), note on the melting point 
and transformations of sulphur, 24. 

Brooke (C.) on the structure of certain 
microscopic test objects and their action 
on the transmitted rays of light, 139. 

Buckton (G, B.) on the action of sul- 
pliuric acid on the Nitriles and Amides, 
544. 

Calculating machine, report of a coni- 
mitieo on, 499. 

Calvert (F. C.) on chemical affinity and 
the solubility of the sulphate of baryta 
in acid liquors, 532. 

Canton (E.l, letter from, 361. 

Carpenter (W. il.) on a {lecuUar arrange- 
mc!it of the sanguiferous system in 
terehratvXa and certain other Urmhio- 
poda, 82. 

■ , researches on the foraminifera. — 

Ft. I. OrbitoHies^ 417. 

Cayley (A.), an introductory memoir on 
quantics, 58 ; second memoir on, 380 j 
researches on ilte partitirmof numbers, 
576 i further researches, 377. 

Cerebro*flpinal Oiiid, examination of, H9. 

Chasles (M.) elected foreign member, 83. 

CkektropU Htuvleyi^ anatomy of, 191, 
309. 

Chendcal affinity, circumstances modify- 
ing the action of, 298, 

, influence of mass on, 633. 

Chloroform, some new derivatives of, 
135. 

Chowne(W. I).), ex|>crlraental researches 
on the movement of atmoapheric air 
in tubes, 466, 

Circle, approximate quadrattire of, 379. 

Cocoa-nut oil, effect of, on the blood, 41. 

Cod-liver oil, effect of, on the blood, 41. 

Collins (M.), tbe attraction of ellipsoids 
considered generally, 103. 

Colour of fossil testacea, an indication of 
depth of pHimeval seas, 21 . 

Colours and changes of pictures produced 
on the retina, 117. 

Compass, observed deviations of, in 
several ships, 491 ; on the formation 
of tables of, 494, 

Cooper (E. J.) on the pcrihcUe and nodes 
of the planets, 295. 

Copley Medal awarded to J. MUUer, 259 ; 
L. Foucault, 572. 

Cranium, form of, in the^embryo, 437. 

Creosote (coal-tar), constitution (ff, 143, 

Croxier (Ctpt. F. tt. M.), obituary notice 
of, 275. 

Cymidine, formation and properties of, 
446. 


Cymol series, organic base of, 446. 
C^fticercua eelQwtea, structure and de- 
velopment of, 548. 

Datiaca canne5enn, 536. 

Datiaci}tine^ nature, properties, and ana- 
lysis of, 538 ; action of nitric acid 
on, 530 } of potash and chromic acid, 
540. 

DaiUtcim^ properties of, 537 ; action of 
sulphuric acid on, .538. 

Davy (J,), some observations on the ova 
of the salmon, in relation to the dis- 
tribution of species, 362. 

Decimal compass card, 381. 

Definite integrals, theory of, 174. 

De la Beebe (Sir H. T.), obituary notice 
of, 582 ; laimurs of, 584. 

Dew-point, determination of, by dr>’- and 
wet-bulh thennometers, 528 ; discre- 
pancies in observation of, 530, 
Diamagnetic force, further researches on 
polarity of, 5.55. ' 

Differential equations, on a class of» oc- 
curring in dynamical problems, >4, 
314. 

Diricblet (G. L.), elected foreign member, 
421. 

Discs, friction of, revolving in water, 
509, 

Dobell (H.) on tbe applicability of gela- 
tine pat)er as a medium for colouring 
light, 172. 

Donkin (W. F.) on a class of DiffereuUa) 
Equations, &c., 4 j Part IL, 314, 
Donkin (B,), obituary notice of, 586^ 

Egypt* geological history of alluvial land 
of, 233. 

Elastic Solid, integrals of the equations 
of the internal equilibrium of, 196. 
Electric discltarge, urinary calcun broken 
by, 101. 

Electric telegraph, expemnents made 
With the submarine cable ofi 328. 

, theory of, 382 ; rate of signals in, 

399. 

Electrical Currents, magnetism in Irdn 
bars developed by, 488. 

Electricity, vitreous and resinous, phie- 
nomena of, 52. 

— , Experimental Itesearcbes in, 624^ 
Ellipsoids, attraction of, 103. 

Embryo, early stages of developmeht^ofi 
104. . 

Embryology* yeaearelies »ih 37^« i 
Ethyl, new fdiOfpl^'oft > 

4phmm of, 166, 

Excrtnneinnv'^^^iate principles of, 153, 
iSrereflne, a organic tobstanoe, 135 . 
jSverefoli'c 4chf, 155* 



IN0SX. 


621 


Fftraday (M.)^ experimental reaearchet iiii 
electricity. Thirtieth Series, 524. 

Fa»cia «tjypr/?eia^w, 439. 

FItiids ill motion, thermal effects of, 127. 

Foramiuifera, researches on, 417. 

, British, notes on, 486. 

Forbes (K.), note on an indication of 
depth of primmval seas, afforded by 
the remains of colour in fbssil testacea, 
21 . 

“ — , oliituary notice of, 263. 

Forbes (J. D.Jf remarks on ibo Hev. H. 
Moseley’s tiieory of the descent of 
glaciers, 412, 

Force, nature of, by which bodies arc re- 
pelled from the poles of a magnet, 214. 

Forrester (J. J.) on the vine-disease in 
the port- wine districts of the AUo- 
Poiiro, 266. 

Fossil fniit, structure and affinities of, 28. 

Fossil testacea, colour of, indication of 
depth of seas, 21. 

Foucault (L.), Copley Medal awarded to, 
571 1 researches of, 672. 

Frankland (IS.), researches ou organo- 
mctolUc bodies: /^hacethyl, 303. 

Franklin (Sir J.), otiUuary notice of, 2 70. 

Fuses, burning H, influenced by local al- 
titude, SI 6. 

Gardmia /weirfa, gum of, 542. 

Gardeninet properties of, 643. 

Garcia (M.), observations on the human 
voice, 399. 

Oasterqpt^a^ new species suggested, 191, 
309 ; new genus of, 368. 

Gauss (C. F.), obituary notice of, 589. 

Gelatine paper, a medium for colouring 
light, 172. 

Oillett (W. S.) on a new and more cor- 
root mathoa of determiiiiDg the angle 
of aperture of microscopic object- 
glasses, 16. 

Gossft (1?. H.) on the structure, func- 
tions, and homology of the manduca- 
toiy organs in the class Kotifera, 246, 

. 292 * 

GhtaianH on the descent of, 333, 412. 

Gladifvme (Jv H.), on circumstances mo* 
d^ittg the action of chemical affinity, 

, Grant, report of appropria- 

Mon of, 512 ; divousston of, 565. 
on osmotic force, 83, 

Grayafi (W0 conc^nlntt the calculatlQg 

Griffith (J. 

gular aperture of the of 

' ^ microscopes to iMr pane* 
power and to oblique light, 60 ; 
note to the tame, 20a. 


Gyroscope, FesseFs, 43 ; Foucault's, 
574. 

Hastall (A. H.) on the frequent occur- 
rence of iud^o in human urine, &c., 
122 . 

Heat, action of, on magnecryetals, 525 ; 
effect of, on the absolute magnetic 
force of bodies, 526. 

Hempath (W. B.) on the compounds of 
iodine and strychnine, 447. 

Himalaya mountains, attraction of, on 
plumb-Unc, 176. 

Hind (.1. R.), Royal Medal awarded to, 
574 ; planets discovered by, 576. 

Hirst (T. A.) on the existence of a mag- 
netic medium, 448. 

Hofmann (A. W.), Royal Medal awarded 
to, 262. 

■■■■ ■ contributions to the history of 
Auiliue.Axohenzole, ami Ben/.idine,444, 
— — , on the action of sulphuric acid on 
the Mitriles and Aiuidi% 544. 

Ilimker (J. D.) on the structure and affi- 
nities of 7VqjPon»ca»7?on, 28. 

ou the structure and functions of 

the rostcllum in XB/w’a ovata, 152. 

— — ' on the structure of some Umesione 
nodules enclosed in seams of bitumi- 
nous coal, &c., 188. 

, Royal Medal awarded to, 261, 

Homer (L.), researches near Cairo for 
throwing light on the geological history 
of the alluml land of Kgypt, 233. 
Huxley (T. H.), contributions to the ana- 
tomy of the lirachiopodat 106 } note 
to the same, 241. 

Insects, respiratory movements of, 167. 
Iodine, compounds of, 447- 
Indigo, frequent occurrence of, in human 
urine, 122. 

Invariants, on the theory of, 204. 

Iron ships, magnetism of, 431 ; compass 
deviations in, 491. 

Isogonic curves, changes of, over the 
Atlantic, 75. 

Jago (J.), ocular spectres and structures 
os mutual exponents, 208, 225, 320. 
.Tameson (R.). obituary notice of, 276. 
dasmit/Of new genus of gasteropoda, 368. 
Jeffreys (J. G.), notes on British forami- 
nifera, 485. 

Jones (11. B.) on the oxidation of am- 
monia in the human body* 94* 

Joule (J. P.) on the thermal effheta of 
fluids in motion, Ft. 11., 127. 

— , preliminary researches on the m<^t» 
netism developed in iron bars by elec- 
trical currents, 498. 



622 


INOItX. 


Kekul^ (A.) on a new teries of sulfthu- 
retted acids, 37. 

Kirkman (Uev, T. P.) ou eunmera- 
tion of ar-adra having an (^-'l)«goniU 
face^ and all their autnuiHs triedral, 

m. 

— ^ on the Teniesentation of Polyhedra, 
543, 

Langberg (Prof.), letter from, on terres^ 
trial magnetisin, 434. 

liight;, action of test-objocts on traus- 
mitted rays of, 139. 

liimeatone noduleSt structure of, 1(48. 

ti$tere ovaia, structure and functions of 
therostellum of. 152. 

Liver, anatomy of, in vertebrate animals, 
454. 

Lowe (E. J.) on the growth of land 
shells, 8. 

Macdonald (J. 1).), remarks on the ana- 
tomy of the MacgHtivrayisL jpnUtpica 
and Chektr<^i» Uuxkyi^ &o., 191 ; 
further observations on, 309. 

ou the anatomy of iVmiftfus umhU 

licatm^ compared with that of Nautilm 
pumpiliui^ 311. 

observations on the anatomy and 
affinities of PhylHrrhoe buc^phala^ 
363. 

— anatomy of a new genus of pelagic 
Gasteropoda, named JutimilkLt 868. 

MaegilUtfrayia peiagicaf anatomy of, 191 , 
309. 

Magnecrystallic force, constancy of diflFe* 
rential, 524. 

Magnei^stols, action of heat on, 525. 

Magnetic declination at St. Helena, con- 
(Huaions from, 67 ; annual change of, 
72 \ monthly change of, 73. 

Magnetic medium, note on, 306 ; on the 
existence of, 448. 

Magnetic variations, analogies of, 79; 
observations of, 359. 

Magiietism of iron ships, experiments on, 
431. 

Mapetism developed in iron bars by { 
electrical currants, 488. 

Marcet (W.) on the Immediate principles 
of the excrotuents of man and animals 
in the healthy condition, 153, 

Marine meteorological observations, 342. 

Maury (Lieut. M. F.), letter concerning 
the discovery of Puphrotynef 165. 

Meteorite (supposed) foudd in trunk of 
willow-tree, 421. 

Methylo-tetm-sulphnric Acid, 546. 

Microscope, relation of angular apert^rfe 
of objecUgUsa to penetrating power of, 
60,203. 


Microscope test objects, on the structure 
of, &C., 139. 

Mitchell (J.) ou the influence of local 
altitude on tlte burning of the fuses of 
shells, 316. 

Molecular influences, experiments on, 
214. 

Moseley (Rev. IL) on the descent of gla- 
ciers, 333 ; remarks on, 412. 

MonntPn-masses, computation of effect 
of attraction of, 240. 

Muller (J.), Copley Medal awarded to, 
259. 

Mxirchison (Sir R.) on a supposed aero- 
lite or meteorite Ibund iu the trunk of 
an old willow-tree in the Battersea 
Fields, 421. 

Mnsoular contraction, physical theory of, 
183. 

force evolved during, wliether ana- 
logous to that of gymnotus, &c., 378. 

Muscular fibre, development of striaiad, 
194. 

Nauiiim umdilicotuif anatomy Ci^'3ti- 

Newport (U.), researches on the impreg- 
nation of the ovum in the Amphibia, 
Arc., 104. 

, obituary notice of, 278 ; writings 

of, 281. 

Nitro -glycerine, 130. 

Noble (W.) on the determination of the 
dew-point by means of the dry- and 
wet-bulb thermometers, 528. 

Numbers, on a property of, 42. 

Object-glasses (microscopic), method of 
determining angle of aperture of, 10. 

Ocean, mean level of, effect of atmo- 
spheric pressure on, 123. 

Ocular spf^rcs and structutes as Ihuuial 
exponents, 208, 225, 326. 

Ohm (G. 8.), obituary notice of, 598. 

Organo-me^ic bodies, resevches In, 
303. 

ChbitoUttt, monograph of the genua of, 
417. 

Osmose, experiments on, 84 ; in mem- 
brane and earthenware, 86 ; table of> 
in various substances, 88. 

Osmotic force, 83. 

Ovum, impregnation of, in the amphlliiAr 
104; in the stickleback, 168, 

Oxidation of ammonia in the httOMut 
body, 94. 

Oxidtt, mctflltic, in valoMlon in nhta* 
Ivric pliienmepa»4^, 

OaopOi; On the and conaUtu- 

ti6nof, 475. 

Papcr-ma1i.lug, machine for, 586, 



INPEX, 


623 


Firry (S'r W, E.)f obituary notteu of, 
603. 

Pary (F. W.), an experfmental inquiry 
into the nature of ihift metimtoranouii 
of saccharine matter, 660 ., 970, 371, 

Pendulum experiment, 673. 

Phenyl, on some new compounds of, tS. 

Phosphorus, petitaohloride of, decomposed 
by sulphuric acid, 11. 

Phi^tlirrhoU 6vie^^, anatomy of, 363. 

Pig, Cyttietrcm celMoHBj a parasite of, 
546. 

Planets, on the perihelia and nodes of, 
295. 

PlUoker (J.), elected foreign member, 
421. 

Polarity of diamagnetic force demon- 
strated, 557. 

Pollock (Sir F.J, proof of Permat^s first 
and second tneorems of the polygonal 
numbers, 1. 

Polygonal numbers, proof of FcrmaVi 
theorems of, 1. 

Fo]i)^edra, on the cUtsldcatiou of, 482 ; 
W the representation of, 543. 

Pratt (Yen. J. H.) ou the attraction of 
the Himalaya mountains, &o. upon the 
plumb-line in India, 176. 

" on the effect of local attraction upon 
the plUmb-Uue at stations on the Eng- 
lish arc of the meridian, between Dun- 
nose and Burleigh Moor, dec,, 440. 

PHnting-machine, 587. 

PtycAofis oU of, 541. 

Quantics, introductory memoir on, 58 j 
second memoir on, 380. 

BadcUdte (C. B.), the physical theory of 
muscular contraction, 183. 

Kaiiiey (0.) on the structure and deve- 
lopment of the Oy$Hc9reM9 ceUuh$af 
as found in the Pig, 548. 

Rankine (W. J* M.) on the general inte- 
grals of the equations of the internal 
equtUbrium of an elastic solid, 196. 

•— on axes of elasticity and crystalline 
fbrms, 495. 

Ransom (ly. H.) on the impregnation of 
the ovum In the stickleback, 168. 

JUtidbke (B.), elected foreign member, 
421. 

BeUna, production of pictures on, 117. 

Retaitts (A.), anatomical notices, 437. 

Bobinson (0.) on the disintegration of 
urinary calcuU by the UtwAl disniptive 
force of the electrical disoh^, 99. 

Boss (Capt. Sir J. 0.) on the eHM of the 
pressure of the atmosphere on the 
mean level of the.ocean, 123* 

Boise (Earl of)* arniiversary ad^iwss, 248. 


j structure, functions, and homo- 

logy of manducatory organs of, 292. 
Royal mdal awarded io J. D. Hooker, 
261 ; A.^4 Hofmann;262$ /. R. Hind, 

. 674 1 J. O. Westwood, 676. 

Rnt^n, action of alkalies and oxygen on, 
" WjjofehMdiim 
RumfM Medri awarded to N. Arnott, 
263. 

Riimker f C.) elected foreign member, 421 . 
Russell fW. H. L.) on the theory of dc- 
Aaitointegrats, 174. 

Sabine (Col. R.) on some conclusions de- 
rived from the observations of the 
magnetic declination at the observa- 
tory of St. Helena, 67. 

— , reply ... on the subject of marine 
meteorological observations, 342. 
Salmon, observations on the ova of, 362. 
Sangfuiferous system (^xiculiar) in 
and hrachiopoddf 32. 

Saccharine matter, experimental inquiry 
into the metamo^hosis of, as a normal 
process of the ammal ceconomy, 371. 
Savory (W. S.) on the development of 
striated muscular fibre In mammalia, 
194. 

Scheutz (M.), oommittee^s report on his 
calculating machine, 499. 
Schlagintweit (A. H. and R.) on the tem- 
perature and density of the seas be- 
tween Southampton and Bombay eid 
the Mediterranean and Red Seas, 242. 
Science, reUtioni of, to the State* 561. 
Schunck (E.) on rubian and Its products 
of decomposition, 477. 

Scoresby (Hcv. W.), an inquiry into some 
of the circumstances and principles 
which regulate the production of pic- 
tures on the retina of the human eye, 
117. 

— on the magnetism of iron sliipi, 6tc., 
481. 

Sea, between Southampton and Bombay, 
temperature and density of, 242^ 

, temperature and currents of, 354 \ 

storms at, 357. 

(primteval), deptli of, indicated by 

colour of fossil testacea, 21. 

SeriescB, diiforentUl transformatitm and 
reversion of, 219. 

Share (J. M.) on a decimal compass card, 
381. 

Shells (land), on the growth of, 8. 
Sheepshanks (Rev. R.), obituary notiee 
* of, 612. 

Spottiswoodb . (W.), researches on the 
, theory of invariants, 204, 

Starch, mlcro-ehemio^ researchet on the 
digestion of, 226. 

3 H 



624 . iND'Wb? , ■ ; ■ 

t4t»e of, in tbe dooompoiition cf Tyn<iill (h)* i0hm t«»e«fobe« on ilie 
;/ ^ poliurl^of 1^« 4i^l4^et&c ^>r^, 

fitmtUbote oi^' ' 

rottnlts of 

baf);^, ftOluW^y of, bd;5. 

ium« of, 24* < for ^b« ora&itlbA^ 

Solpburfl^tod ftiddo, nm lerioe .Voice, obsemtione on the humeo, W* 

Sulphuric aoid, deoompotitioti of, 

— acrioo of, OB ihe Khtilei Attd Ami* Watlicb (N,), obituaiy notice of, 285. 

dea, 544, VTeetBrpoa (1,0.), Boyid Medal awarded 

Sylveeter (J. J.) on diiferential tranaform* , to, 576. 
ation and the revereioa^ of aeriem, Wheatftto»e(C,)oBf'eaiel*igynBi^^ 
218. •— on fhe formation of powera from 

aifthBietioil piiogrewioiis, 145. 

Terebrai^, peculiar arrangement of the — — , an acoount of aomo en^erimenta 

sangoiferous sntem in, 52. ipadc with the submarine eable, &c., 

7>f^5rartf/idA, i^tdOhtary canal of, 106 1 82B, i. 

dt^ulatiag ^stem cf, 1 10< on jdie position of ehiminninih the 

I'errutrial magnetism, pbenoinena i^, at vbl|:dle;aerfo*;>69. 
the enioihkox, 436} Ganaa's researches WMUata4on <A%^.), hbte onihedeM 

00,^594. sitlon of aiilpburic acid by pentlml^* 

Thetml eObots of fluids in motion, 127* ride of phosphorus, 11. 
Thermo*eieetriclty, researches in, 49 } in on some new kinds of phenyl, 16, 

orystfllUue metiids, 56. note on nitro-glycerine, 130. 

Thompson (T.) on the changes produced — f- on a new phosphate of ethyl, 13). 

in the blood liy the administration of *— on some new derisativei of chloro- 

ood«liver oil and coooa>nut oil, 41. form, 135. 

Thomson (J.), report of exi^rimenti on on the oouriHution of coal*tar creo* 

the friction of discs revolving in water, sole, 145. 

609. , note on the magnetic medium, 306. 

Thomson (W.), aecoont of researches in Wilson (G.) on the value of steam in the 
ihermo-eteOtricity, 49. decomposition of neutral fidty bodiet, 

*— bn the thermal effects of fluids in 182. 
motion, Part 11., 127, WUIioh (C. M.) on a simple geometrical 

on the tlieoi^ of the eleotric tele- construedbn, giving a very appmxi- 

graph, 382. mate Quadrature of the circle, 379. 

Thunderstorms, 357. Wbbler (F.) riected foreign member, 83. 

TVtomocoryMW, on the structure aod affi- Wrottesley (liord), anniversary addrass, 
mties of. 28 } description of, 189. 560* 

Turner (W.), examination of tiie cerebro- 
spinal fluid, 89. Touttg (7.) M8S. letters addressed io, 

Tyndall (J.) on the nature of the force presented by Mrs. Young, 544. 
by which bodies are repelled from the 
poles of a tpagnet, Stc., 214. Zinoethyl, 303. 


TBK SEVKNTH VOLVMK. 


gfintciiiy Tsylrfr Sb 4 |J4e(S>l«i. 







